* 9703088
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  Parallel and Distributed     Computing: System and Application Development Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Guang Gao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/2003
* USD 682,513.00

CDA-9703088 Lori Pollock University of Delaware Parallel and Distributed
Computing: System and Application Development Infrastructure This award provides
support for research infrastructure based on a cluster of high-performance,
multiprocessor workstations connected via high-speed networks. It will enable
new research activities in parallel and distributed computing systems and
applications, more realistic and robust experimental studies, and increase the
synergy among the systems research and a number of different, but related,
application research projects. Key systems research areas which the
infrastructure will enable are cooperative optimization strategies,
interprocedural optimization for distributed address space architectures,
architectural support for multithreading on a cluster, load balancing and task
scheduling, dynamic techniques for providing quality of service guarantees, and
network management. Application areas include gesture recognition, multimodal
applications, real-time multi-agent systems, video/image processing and parallel
symbolic analysis. The infrastructure consists of 20 multiprocessor
workstations, connected by both Myrinet and ATM networks, and sufficient local
storage and multimedia equipment to support the parallel and distributed
applications. The infrastructure will be configured to provide both a dedicated
system for applications researchers and a crashable resource for experimental
parallel and distributed systems research.