* 9703309
* CAREER:  The Social Environment and Developmental Plasticityin Vasopressin Neurochemical Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Catherine Marler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 334,592.00

PI: Marler, C. IBN-973309 Behavior plays a crucial role in interactions between
an animal's internal and external environments. While significant progress has
been made in understanding how social interactions can influence adult hormone
levels, we know little about the impact of the early social environment on
behavior, particularly factors influencing aggression. The PI proposes to
investigate the plasticity in behavior in response to significant changes in
parental behavior, as well as the physiological mechanisms underlying such
plasticity. To examine the effects of both paternal and maternal effects she
proposes to work with Peromyscus mice because it is one of the few mammalian
model systems in which males make significant contributions to raising the young
and also because there is considerable variation among the different species of
Peromyscus. The PI will alter levels of parental care by allowing offspring of
one species to be raised by the parents of the other species. If this causes
changes in aggressive and parental behavior of the offspring once they have
matured, then she will examine physiological underpinnings for these changes in
behavior. The neuropeptide arginine vasopressin and the steroid hormone
testosterone will be studied because these are important biochemicals
influencing social interactions of adults, including aggressive interactions and
parental behavior. These studies will allow testing of the plasticity of
vasopressin both within and between species in response to changes in the social
and hormonal environments. A theme that runs through the PI's research is the
integration of several different scientific fields. This is an approach which
she employs in her teaching as well. The PI uses animal behavior to introduce
basic concepts of biology to psychology students and emphasize how animal
studies contribute to our understanding of physiological mechanisms influencing
human behavior. PROJECT SUMMARY 3