* 9703002
* CAREER:  Design and Synthesis of Boron-Containing Liquid    Crystals for Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Piotr Kaszynski, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9703002 Kaszynski This project will focus on the development of a new class of
nematic liquid crystals with large positive dielectric anisotropies for flat
panel discplay applications. The centerpiece of the synthetic design will be the
highly polar boron-heteroatom bond, with the following issues to be addressed:
how does the formation of highly polar bonds to the boron atom and the resulting
high coaxial dipole moments influence the mesogenic properties and
electrooptical performance of liquid crystal materials?; how does the geometry
of boron clusters influence the mesophase stability and the miscibility with
other liquid crystal materials?; how does the electronic structure of 3
dimensional aromatic boron clusters influence the optical properties of the
mesogens? %%% This well integrated research and education program combines in a
very unique way a theoretical and experimental exploration of the basic and
applied chemistry of boron and nitrogen, and investigates the practical
applications of these materials in electrooptics for areas such as flat panel
displays. Integrating these current high-priority materials research challenges
with the educational curriculum of this CAREER Program results in the training
of students in areas of growing relevancy thereby advancing science and
technology while improving job prospects for students. ***