* 9703665
* International Research Fellow Awards:  A Mid-Infrared       Investigation of Mass Loss from Evolved Stars at High       Spatial Resolution
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Gregory Sloan, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1998
* USD 56,900.00

9703665 Sloan The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support an eighteen-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Gregory C. Sloan to work with Dr. Craig Hamilton Smith at University College
at the University of New South Wales in Canberra, Australia. Twelve months of
this research will be supported by the International Research Fellow Awards
Program, and six months will be supported by the U.S.-Australia Program. Drs.
Sloan and Smith will study late stages of stellar evolution using a combination
of high-resolution imaging, long-slit spectroscopy, and polarimetry in the
thermal infrared. As stars die, they shed most of their mass back into the
interstellar medium as they evolve into planetary nebulae and supernovae. As
this material moves away, it cools, allowing dust grains to condense out. This
circumstellar dust represents the connection between one generation of stars and
the next. Increasing our knowledge of the life- cycle of circumstellar and
interstellar dust is critical to understanding how planets form around other
stars, and even how life itself might form. Sloan and Miller will observe
several evolved sources using direct imaging, long-slit spectroscopy,
polarimetric imaging and spectropolarimetry. Results of this research will be
high-quality images and spatially resolved spectra of the dust around several
extended and evolved stars, from which they will be able to determine the
geometry and chemistry of the mass-loss process. The polarimetric imaging and
spectropolarimetry will provide information about magnetic field strengths and
distributions which can be compared with theory to assess the importance of
magnetic fields in regulating the dust forma tion process. One of the
instruments they will use, Smith's NIMPOL Imaging Polarimeter is the only
instrument of its type in the world. ***