* 9703895
* Stochastic Control Problems and Numerical Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Harold Kushner, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9703895 Kushner A broad range of topics in stochastic systems will be treated.
The 1992 book of the P.I. (with P.Dupuis) is now the primary source of numerical
methods in continuous time stochastic control, as well as of algorithms and
convergence proofs. There are publicly available codes for some classes of
problems of great interest. The great potential of the theory and algorithms has
been well illustrated by examples from communications. A number of important
problems remain. The aim is the development of a highly usable theory and set of
techniques, so that numerical methods can take their place as a very practical
and efficient approach to both investigation and design. The methods will be
extended to cover stochastic differential games. Domain decomposition methods
will be developed with the aim of facilitating the solution of problems in high
dimensions. Owing to the presence of the controls, these involve issues quite
different from what has been done in the literature. Higher order algorithms
will be investigated. The main difficulty here is that the classical methods of
proof do not apply owing to the typical degeneracies and singularities in the
problem. Probabilistic methods need to be used, analogous to the weak
convergence methods used to deal with the main numerical algorithms. The work on
control problems in high speed communications will be continued. The recent work
has demonstrated the great value of the heavy traffic-diffusion approximation
methods, when combined with numerical exploration for the problems considered.
Due to the large number of independent users, heavy traffic approximations of
the control problem is feasible. The aim is to show that good (or nearly
optimal) policies for the simpler (limit/aggregated) system are also good (or
nearly optimal) for the actual physical system, thereby simplifying design and
analysis. One then develops convergent numerical methods to explore the problem
in many different ways, obtaining information on the trad eoffs in the various
losses as functions of the design parameters. Recent work along these lines has
obtained information of importance to design which could not have been obtained
by other current approaches.