* 9703877
* Problems in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Herbert Alexander, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2000
* USD 76,500.00

Abstract for DMS-97-03877 H. Alexander Alexander will study five problem areas
in several complex variables: 1. Boundaries of Analytic Varieties and Linking.
Given a smooth manifold M in complex space, when is M the boundary of a bounded
analytic variety? Our aim is to formulate a global geometric condition that M
bounds in terms of linking numbers. The main tool here is the Harvey and Lawson
theory. 2. Analytic disks and Gromov's method. The method of Gromov's well-known
1985 paper on Lagrangian manifolds and pseudo holomorphic curves was adapted and
applied in a paper of the proposer to study analytic disks with boundary in
totally real manifolds. This study will be continued. 3. Hulls of sets in the
torus. Well-known examples of Stolzenberg and Wermer give polynomial hulls
without analytic structure. The proposer is interested in the problem of finding
hulls, without analytic structure, of sets in the unit torus. 4. Fabre's
Theorem. 5. Integrals involving analytic functions. Possible quantitative
versions of Siu's recent lemma on the inheritance of non-integrability by
restriction will be explored. This project involves the study of problems in
complex analysis. The word "complex" here does not mean "complicated" but rather
makes reference to "complex numbers." Complex numbers are nowadays routinely
studied in high-school and a college course in "complex variables," because the
material is so useful, is part of the basic undergraduate curriculum for
engineers and scientists. The current project is directed toward better
understanding "multidimensional complex space." Recent research in this area of
mathematics continues to have applications; for example, in the engineering
field of control theory.