* 9703908
* SGER: Arabidopsis in Controlled Environments to Confront    Experimentally Models of Emergent Ecosystem Therodynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Timothy Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9703908 Allen There is an emerging paradigm of ecosystem thermodynamics that
recasts several of Odum's principles for ecosystem maturity as an increasing
capacity for heat dissipation. More mature ecosystems have more elaborate
structure and pathways, which dissipate the gradient from the warm planet
surface to cold outer space. Data from whole biomes to small experimental plots
suggest that more mature and structurally elaborate systems have a cooler upper
surface. The theory of non-equilibrium systems suggests that the emergence of
complex, dissipative systems is sudden and represents the emergence of higher
hierarchical levels. Each higher level appears as the system avails itself of
some new means of resisting being pushed up the temperature gradient. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research will experiment with Arabidopsis to investigate
these phenomena under controlled conditions. The first phase will achieve
replicable measurements of vegetation temperature that distinguish different
vegetation treatments, such as plants grown in different air movement regimes.
Arabidopsis allows such control as keeping all else equal but a single gene for
stature in tests of increasing structural complexity of contrived Arabidopsis
"vegetation." The goal is a protocol for distinguishing the temperate of
contrived vegetation. Then the second phase will look for the emergence of the
steps in cooling capacity earlier in the development of vegetation. Being able
to predict in the ability to dissipate the temperature gradient will tell
mechanists disjunctions were to look to explain emergent cooling phenomena. Such
explanations will allow others to move up scale from physiological mechanism to
phenomena of landscapes, ecosystems, and regions. It should also validate
phenomena of emergent cooling that have been explained only post hoc heretofore.