* 9703934
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Three-Dimensional    Laser Chemical Vapor Deposition of Superconducting          Microelectromechanical Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1998
* USD 31,518.00

9703934 Maxwell The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
James L. Maxwell of Louisiana Tech University to work with Dr. Mats Boman at
Uppsala University in Sweden. This project involves the study of laser-induced
chemical vapor deposition (LCVD) and, in particular, the use of LCVD to
manufacture three-dimensional micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS). Few
traditional micromachining processes are capable of producing highly-three-
dimensional MEMS devices. Three-dimensional LCVD (3D-LCVD) is a mode of
pyrolytic vapor deposition where high-aspect ratio microstructures can be
generated. Using 3D-LCVD, the researchers plan to fabricate a three-dimensional
micro- inductor, a superconducting micro-inductor, and coils which will be used
to test the feasibility of laser-deposited Ni- Ti shapememory actuators in MEMS
devices. Dr. Boman was the first to produce complex shapes and useful devices
via 3D- LCVD and Dr. Maxwell was the first to demonstrate feedback control of
growth rates during 3D-LCVD which allows precise, continual control of layered
and freeform growth. The University of Uppsala has the best equipped laboratory
for 3D-LCVD in the world. ***