* 9703326
* CAREER: Establishing the Efficacy of Cryomyolysis -         Cryosurgery of Uterine Fibroids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* John Bischof, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2002
* USD 324,582.00

9703326 Bischof Uterine fibroids are the most common organ disease in gynecology
and the most common reason for major surgery in women. Current treatments
include hysterectomy (surgical removal of the uterus), myomectomy (surgical
removal of the fibroid), and most recently myolysis (destruction of the fibroid
in the body). The proposed work will investigate the potential of cryosurgery of
the fibroid or cryomyolysis as a conservative alternative for women who suffer
from fibroids but do not wish to undergo a surgical operation to remove either
the fibroid or their uterus. The hypotheses are: 1. The effectiveness of
cryomyolysis is due primarily to vascular injury (damage to the vascular network
nourishing the fibroid) as opposed to direct cellular injury (damage to the
fibroid cells themselves), and 2. The extent of cellular destruction can be
predicted based on the thermal history imposed on the tissue during
cryomyolysis. By testing these hypothesis in the specific aims of the proposal,
we will be able to answer the following questions: How low a temperature held
for what length of time is necessary to destroy single fibroid cells and
tissues? Is there a difference in the ability of cryosurgery to destroy the
cells and tissues when they are in the body (in vivo) vs. when they are outside
of the body (in vitro)? If a difference exists, can it be attributed to a
vascular in injury mechanism inside the body (in vivo)? And finally, how does
the size of the ice ball that is formed during the surgery correlate to the
amount of tissue destroyed as a result of the technique? The answers to these
questions are critical to a thorough understanding of the mechanism of
cryosurgical destruction and, consequently, to the prudent and effective
application of this surgical technique in uterine fibroids. ***