* 9703684
* Pattern Formation in Two and Three Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Edgar Knobloch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 94,500.00

9703684 Knobloch This project will involve the study of bifurcations and pattern
formation in systems with symmetry. Such systems arise naturally in a variety of
applications. The proposal focuses on the study of the consequences of weak
system symmetry--breaking perturbations for pattern formation in two and three
dimensions. In doing so it seeks to identify those aspects of equivariant
dynamics that are robust under symmetry-breaking "imperfections". The approach
promises to extend the applicability of equivariant bifurcation theory to more
realistic situations and is an important step towards a theory of pattern
formation in two and three dimensions. Applications to a number of continuum
systems are envisaged, including pattern formation by the Faraday and Turing
instabilities, and acoustically driven shape oscillations of drops and bubbles.
This project will involve the study of the spontaneous formation of structure in
systems with symmetry. Such systems occur naturally in a variety of
applications, and may reflect the geometry of the system or a convenient
idealization. Symmetries are known to have a profound effect on the typical
behavior of the system. Near onset the process of structure or pattern formation
can be described by simplified equations called amplitude equations. The form of
these equations is dictated by the symmetries of the system. Often the
symmetries constrain these equations to such an extent that only one possibility
exists. The analysis of the resulting equations then provides a complete
understanding of the structure formation process, and can be used to predict the
type of structure that will form as the parameters of the system are varied.
Since in nature the assumed symmetries are usually an idealization the proposal
seeks to identify those aspects of the structure formation process that are
insensitive to small symmetry-breaking imperfections, i.e., it seeks to identify
those aspects that are robust. The a im of the proposal is thus to extend the
applicability of this type of theory to realistic problems in both two and three
dimensions. As examples of this approach we shall study pattern formation in
vibration-induced surface waves, structure formation in chemical and biological
systems via the Turing instability, and the patterns on the surface of an
acoustically excited drop or bubble. An understanding of these relatively simple
systems is a prerequisite for extending the techniques to more complex systems.