* 9703275
* CAREER: A Career Development Plan for Research and          Education in High Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Dipak Ghosal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 205,000.00

This proposal describes the PI's research and education plans for the next five
years and beyond. One part of the research plan focuses on the the design and
analysis of network control algorithms for detection and control of focused
overloads that are stimulated by media events. The goal is to design new network
control algorithms which can dissipate these focused overloads either by
limiting the rate at which event related requests are allowed into the network
or by dynamically creating resources to meet the demand. The other part of the
research plan focuses on the design of parallel and distributed server
technologies. The key aim is to design the software and hardware architectures
of the servers such that they are scalable, fault-tolerant, and robust under
network overloads and instabilities. The education plan focuses on developing
new curriculum, both at the undergraduate and the graduate levels with emphasis
on experimentation and prototyping. Furthermore, these courses will develop the
key areas of expertise that the industry needs to develop applications for the
next generation high-speed networks. The education plan involves active
participation in a few specific outreach programs both within the university and
the surrounding community. The goal of these outreach programs is to ensure that
the information is available to everybody and to demonstrate the opportunities
in a global information network. URL for this project is
http://networks.cs.ucdavis.edu/~ghosal/CAREER