* 9703367
* CAREER: The Productive Re-Use of Industrial ByProducts to   Solve Environmental Problems: A Paradigm Shift in the Way   Industrial ByProducts are Traditionally Viewed
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Dennis Grubb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/2001
* USD 285,000.00

Abstract Proposal: CMS 96-16854 PI: Dennis G. Grubb: Georgia Institute of
Technology "Career: The Productive Re-use of Industrial Byproducts to Solve
Environmental Problems: A Paradigm Shift in the Way Industrial Byproducts are
used " The overall objective of this Career development plan is to explore the
interface between geotechnology, geochemistry, environmental engineering and the
social sciences, the latter principally due to the stigma associated with
industrial byproducts. The research program will emphasize core skills in
fundamental science and engineering, and will have its nexus with the
educational program in these same areas, but also in creative thinking.
Specifically, this research will evaluate whether fly ash (pure or blended with
other industrial byproducts) can be used as a porous geochemical filter (PGF)
media to successfully mitigate or attenuate acid mine drainage (AMD). The
primary objective will be to identify a strategy for rapid deoxygenation of AMD
leachates while minimizing the negative impacts of iron precipitation, i.e.,
pore clogging in the PGF itself. The second objective is to identify and
quantify the governing redox chemistry, and precipitation and sorption phenomena
associated with the flow of AMD through the various PGF media, including the
redox reactions involving metals that are mediated by microorganisms under
anoxic conditions. The third objective is to identify which PGF media can best
immobilize metals and to correlate this performance with geochemical and
geotechnical index properties. The educational activities will be constructed to
promote mental and experiential breadth and conceptual versatility. Critical
thinking techniques will be introduced, and special facets will be developed to
attract and retain more students from all groups of engineering. Existing and
new coursework will be infused with information from history and philosophy of
science and engineering, and will highlight factors that can contribute to the
discovery and problem solving process. The study of productive use of industrial
byproducts will be introduced into coursework, as a means of initiating paradigm
shift in attitudes concerning industrial byproducts and their productive re-use.
***