* 9703149
* CAREER:  Intelligent Planning and Control of Robotic        Systems in a Perceptive Frame
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Ning Xi, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Howard Moraff
* 08/31/1998
* USD 68,040.00

The objective of this research is to develop and experimentally test new
methodologies for task scheduling, action planning and control of robotic and
manufacturing systems. The new methodologies will be a combination of heuristic
and analytical approaches and based on a direct algorithmic connection between
simple on-line perception of not fully predictable geometric, dynamic and time
events, and the desired actions of robotic or manufacturing systems. They will
provide a robust and reliable method for handling local geometric and dynamic
uncertainties as well as coping with unexpected events, so that the local
disturbances do not become global ones causing the need for re- planning the
operation. This development will help to eliminate or lessen some of the down-
time of automated robotic or manufacturing systems caused by inflexible
scheduling, planning, sensing and control methods. It will also help to
substantially reduce the fixturing or set-up requirements of robotic or
manufacturing systems. As an integral part of the research, the education
activities include developing a Robotics Collaboratory Environment (RCE) which
will provide a new instruction method and laboratory environment for teaching
robotics, manufacturing automation and intelligent systems. As a result, more
students from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in science
and engineering can be involved, and more opportunities for undergraduate
students to incorporate research activities into their course work will be
provided.