* 9703683
* Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential  and Integral Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Lars Wahlbin, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 06/30/2001
* USD 221,722.00

Lars Wahlbin Abstract It is proposed to work on several problems in the
numerical analysis of finite element methods for partial differential and
integral equations. A. Maximum-norm estimates for finite element methods in
second order hyperbolic problems: In contrast to the situation for elliptic and
parabolic problems, the theory in the case of hyperbolic problems is very
incomplete. B. Superconvergence in finite element methods: The main problem is
to ascertain when (and when not) superconvergence holds up to boundaries. C.
Finite element methods in problems with anisotropic diffusion: In the singularly
perturbed case, very little is known. D. Finite element methods in partial
integro-differential equations: The main problem lies with enormous memory and
work requirements in problems with an integral-type memory term. It has been
estimated that 2/3 of all computer runs involving approximation of scientific or
engineering models are useless: not because they are necessarily wrong but
because you do not know that they are right and so cannot trust them. This is
particularly annoying when you are formulating a new model and want to find its
predictions to test against reality. You do not know whether a peculiar
prediction is inherent in the model or crept in via a faulty computer simulation
of it. The present proposal is aimed at investigating how a selection of widely
used simulation methods behave on mathematical problems with various quirks. It
will thus give guidelines to people using numerical methods and help them in
judging whether a particular series of computer runs is reliable or not in
representing a scientific model.