* 9703918
* Importance Weighting in Dynamic and Static Monte Carlo
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Wing Hung Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9703918 Wong In this research, dynamic weighting is developed as a method for
dynamic Monte Carlo simulation that has the capability to efficiently sample
relevant parts of the configuration space in the presence of many steep energy
minima. This method relies on an additional dynamic variable, namely the
importance weight, to help the system overcome steep barriers. A new, non-
Metropolis theory is introduced to guide the construction of such weighted
samplers. The method is designed to work in combination with the complementary
idea of sampling a complexity ladder. A second topic studied in this research is
the use of rejection control in sequential importance sampling. This is
introduced in order to cope with difficulties of having highly skewed weights in
static importance sampling Monte Carlo. It will enhance the usefulness of static
Monte Carlo in the simulation of high dimensional systems. In statistics, Monte
Carlo is an essential computational tool in the evaluation and study of
likelihoods and posterior distributions. The importance of this technique in
practical Bayesian inference cannot be overstated. Furthermore, the advances in
Monte Carlo theory and method resulting from this investigation are of a general
nature and have significance to many other areas in modern science and
technology. In physical sciences, dynamic Monte Carlo has long been an
indispensible tool in the study of fluids, spin systems, phase transitions and
critical phenomena, material growth and defect, and the behavior of polymers. In
biology, Monte Carlo advances our understanding of protein conformations, and
plays an important role in genetic and evolutionary analysis. In engineering,
partly through its pivotal role in stochastic search methods, Monte Carlo is
useful in such diverse areas as expert system, network optimization, machine
learning and chip design. Therefore, the findings of this research are expected
to bring considerable benefit to many current areas of strategic importance rang
ing from material research to protein engineering.