* 9703898
* Characterization of Perfluorinated Liquid-Crystal Compounds and Two Dimensional Behavior of Liquid-Crystal Free-StandingFilms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Cheng-Cher Huang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 440,047.00

9703898 Huang This project on the Characterization of Perfluorinated Liquid-
Crystal Compounds and Two Dimensional Behavior of Liquid-Crystal Free-standing
Films will focus on the unique molecular arrangement in liquid-crystal free-
standing films that makes such films an ideal physical system in which to
investigate the effects attributed to the perfluorination of liquid crystal
compounds. The free standing liquid crystal films, as thin as two molecular
layers, is one of the best systems to investigate two-dimensional physical
phenomena without the complicating effects of a substrate. Furthermore,
designing a new calorimetric system that will improve by more than five-fold the
resolution of the heat capacity measurements while allowing for simultaneous
heat capacity and ellipsometry measurements will provide several critical tests
of theoretically predicted thermal properties. %%% The unique physical
properties of perfluoronated liquid crystals make them one of the best class of
host compounds for manufacturing surface stabilized ferroelectric liquid-crystal
cells for fast electro-optical switching applications. Determining the
properties of new liquid crystal systems are playing an increasingly important
role in advancing a number of applications areas that include new materials for
infrared and microwave liquid crystal modulators, and fast-switching liquid
crystal displays. ***