* 9703845
* Measure-Valued Processes:  Coagulation and Coalescence
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Steven Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/2001
* USD 118,500.00

9703845 Evans Two classes of measure-valued stochastic processes are considered
that possess the common feature of coalescence. Members of the first class of
processes describe the clustering as time passes of a collection of masses by a
random sequence of binary collisions. Known construction results are extended to
new collision mechanisms and more general initial mass configurations.
Asymptotic behavior is studied in various limiting regimes. Members of the
second class of processes are space-time rescaling limits of a variety of
spatial processes such as stepping-stone models and long range voter models, and
are defined to be "dual" to the labeled partition process induced by a system of
coalescing Markov processes. Several questions concerning the sample path
properties of such models are investigated. The Principal Investigator will
study two mathematical models involving coalescence of particles. Models in the
first class have been applied to chemical phenomena such as polymerisation and
physical phenomena of coagulation and condensation such as the evolution of
galactic clusters by gravitational attraction. There are also connections with
questions considered in the construction of data bases. The proposed research
deals particularly with understanding what happens when one considers systems
with extremely large numbers of coalescing objects, as is usually the case in
applications. Models in the second class have their origins in ecology and
population genetics when one wishes to describe the evolution of geographically
structured populations with large numbers of mobile individuals.