* 9703003
* CAREER: Adaptive Basis of Host-Parasite Cospeciation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Dale Clayton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 336,329.00

9703003 Clayton Dale Clayton of the University of Utah will carry out research
designed to elucidate factors responsible for differences in the specificity of
parasites to one or more kinds of hosts. Specifically, Clayton will first
reconstruct molecular genealogies of a group of New World doves and of two
groups of ectoparasitic feather lice. One of the louse groups is found on wings
and is not specific as to host species. Whereas the other group is found on the
abdomen and is host-specific. The genealogical analysis will permit
identification of instances where lice have switched from one host to another
and provide clues to macroevolutionary events involved in host-parasite
association. Microevolutionary events will be assessed via a series of
experiments in a "dove-dome" (Tracy Aviary in Salt Lake City, UT) where Clayton
will be able to carry out controlled experiments to examine factors such as (i)
lice dispersal capability, (ii) differential lice vulnerability to host
defenses, and (iii) different intensities of interspecific competition. The
project will be incorporated into courseware taught by the PI, and collaboration
has been established with Tracy Aviary for research and education. Interpretive
signs will be displayed and a public computer display will be established to
explain the research in progress. Both graduate and undergraduate students will
be involved extensively in the project.