* 9703818
* Japan JSPS Program:  A Search for the Cosmic Infrared       Background with the Near Infrared Spectrometer
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Mark Lim, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1998
* USD 3,000.00

Lim 9703818 This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Mark Lim at the Institute for
Space and Astronautical Study, Kanagawa, Japan. Dr. Lim will work with Dr.
Toshio Matsumoto, Professor of Galactic Evolution, Division of Astrophysics, on
a research project entitled, "A Search for the Cosmic Infrared Background with
the Near Infrared Spectrometer." The Cosmic Infrared Background (CIB) is a
diffuse space background composed of the light from unresolved primeval
galaxies. Current theoretical work addressing the CIB describes a picture of
starlight emitted from the first galaxies forming a near infrared (NIR)
component brightest at a wavelength of a few microns. Some of this starlight may
be absorbed and reemitted by dust and seen as a far infrared component. The
proposed research consists of a complete analysis of NIR data using the Near
Infrared Spectrometer (NIRS), which is mounted on the Infrared Telescope in
Space (IRTS) satellite. NIRS is a grating spectrometer with wavelength coverage
of 1.2 to 4.2 \micron~with a resolution of 0.12 \micron. The primary scientific
goal of the research would be to detect or constrain the amplitude of the CIB
using competing systems of analysis in an effort to obtain the most reliable
data. Results of the research will assist in the characterization of the CIB and
interstellar chemistry and will aid in the development of future U.S. and
Japanese space missions. ***