* 9703449
* CAREER: Computer Aided Analysis and Design of Power         Electronic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Dragan Maksimovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2002
* USD 215,000.00

ECS-9703449 Maksimovic The objective of this project is to develop numerical
techniques for computer aided analysis, modeling, syntheses and design of power
electronic systems, and to integrate the developed tools in the power-area
curriculum. In the first phase of the project, numerical techniques and a
simulation tool are developed for piecewise-smooth systems. Piecewise-smooth
(PWS) system modeling is proposed as the general approach that includes full
range of modeling options: from idealized piecewise-linear (PWL) models suitable
for fast transient simulation over many switching cycles, to detailed nonlinear
models for accurate predictions of waveforms within a switching cycle. As a
result, the developed PWS simulator is able to perform a complete range of
simulation tasks and to aid analysis and design of a wide range of power
electronic applications including power system and utility interfaces, motor
drives, renewable energy systems and switching power supplies. The PWS simulator
is based on new numerical techniques including: unified representation of PWL,
PWS and smooth nonlinear elements to obtain a constant system matrix, efficient
iteration over nonlinearity using numerical continuation methods, and a PWS
state determination algorithm to eliminate convergence problems around fast
switching transitions. The second phase of the project concentrates on
applications and extensions of the PWS .simulator: (1) comprehensive computer-
aided steady-state analysis of switching power converters, including general,
efficient and robust algorithms for finding periodic steady-state solution,
tracing steady-state characteristics over a range of parameters, and tracing
operating-mode boundaries in the parameter space; (2) automated small-signal and
large-signal dynamic modeling of power electronic systems; (3) a framework for
higher-level CAD tools such as synthesis, tolerance analysis and design
optimization tools. The developed techniques are implemented in software
suitable for use in power electronics and power systems research, development
and education. The tools are integrated into two undergraduate power-area
courses - an Energy Conversion lecture course and a new, hands-on Power
Electronics laboratory. A set of interactive WEB pages is developed to combine
on-line simulation tools with supporting laboratory and course materials.