* 9703737
* Interfacial Chemistry of Organic Molecules and Self-        Assembled Organic Layers on Si(001) Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 03/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

The reaction of the Si(001) surface with unsaturated organic molecules via a
2+2 cycloaddition is studied in this research project supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Professor Hamers and his students at
the University of Wisconsin will study ordered organic films formed by this
route using scanning probe microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy,
Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. These organic films
can be derivatized, and functional strategies developed to form overlayers with
specific electronic and optical properties. The chemical and structural
properties of these films are correlated with the possibility of interesting
electrical and optical properties. The spatially dependent probes used to
characterize these overlayers allow the determination of the spatial anisotropy
which is expected to arise. The adsorption of unsaturated organic molecules on
the silicon surface forms the focus of the research supported in this project.
The ability to develop a flexible synthetic chemistry for organic films on
silicon promises to allow the connection of silicon process technology for
electronic devices with the broad range of properties possible with organic
overlayers. A range of spatially dependent methods will be used to characterize
the structure and properties of these synthesized overlayers.