* 9703711
* Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Solutions to Certain    Equations in the Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Yuxi Zheng, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/2000
* USD 70,857.00

Zheng 9703711 Yuxi Zheng proposes to study some nonlinear partial differential
equations from fluid dynamics (Euler equations), plasma physics (Vlasov-Poisson
system), and liquid crystal physics. These equations are the laws of motion of
their respective physics. The turbulent nature and/or defects in the materials
show up in the form of singularities and instabilities in the solutions of the
equations. Yuxi Zheng plans to use advanced analytical tools to study the
structures of the singular solutions. In the case of compressible Euler
equations in two space dimensions, for example, Yuxi Zheng plans to isolate
typical singularities (hurricanes, tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate
their individual structures. The result of the investigation will be a clear
understanding of the worst possible solutions, and thereby quantify our
knowledge of the physics and offer guidance in high-performance numerical
computations of general solutions. Yuxi Zheng proposes to study some applied
mathematical problems in the fields of fluid dynamics (which includes motion of
the air and water), plasma physics (which includes motion of the material that
makes up the Sun, and also more than 90% of the universe), and liquid crystal
physics in material science. Scientists and engineers have used mathematical
equations, called partial differential equations, to model the motions. The
turbulent nature and/or defects in the materials show up in the form of
singularities and instabilities in the solutions of the equations. It is these
singularities and instabilities that often spoil accurate numerical computations
of the solutions. Yuxi Zheng plans to use the state of the art analytical tools
to study the structures of the singular solutions. In the case of a compressible
gas such as air, for example, Yuxi Zheng plans to isolate typical singularities
(hurricanes, tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate their individual
structures. The result of the investigation will be a clear understanding of the
worst possible solutions, and thereby quantify our knowledge of the physics and
offer guidance in high-performance numerical computations of general solutions.