* 9703377
* CAREER: Intersymbol/Interchannel Interference Cancellation  Using Multirate Filterbanks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Xiang-Gen Xia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2003
* USD 212,665.00

This project is developing new InterSymbol Interference (ISI) and InterChannel
Interference (ICI) cancellation methods in communication systems by using
pre/post coding via nonmaximally decimated multirate filterbanks. It will also
provide up to date information in ancillary areas via several undergraduate and
graduate courses. These include digital communication systems, error control
coding, information theory and data compression, wireless digital
communications, and multirate filterbanks and wavelets. It is of utmost
importance that students are well trained in the rapidly growing multimedia
communications area. It has been shown that any finite tap ISI that may have
spectral-nulls (or frequency-selective fading) characteristics can be eliminated
completely by using nonmaximally decimated finite impulse response multirate
filterbanks in pre/post coding. Moreover it has been shown that the precoding
may be independent of the ISI channels and therefore feedback may not be
necessary. In this research, not only the ISI but also random channel noise in
communication systems is being considered as a whole. In particular, the
multirate filterbank pre/post coding for eliminating ISI, and the traditional
error protection coding for correcting random errors, are being combined to
achieve better performance that existing techniques. This pre/post coding
technique will also be applied to mitigate ICI in multiple-user communication
systems, such as wireless mobile communication systems.