* 9703163
* CAREER: Theory, Software Tools, and Applications for        Algorithmic Visual Information Representation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Alexandros Eleftheriadis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2001
* USD 205,000.00

The investigation and development of a new algorithmic framework for media
representation is proposed, with emphasis on digital images and video. In
particular, a new architecture for visual information representation is detailed
based on the notion of programmable terminals, essentially considering the
decoder as a Turing machine. In such a framework, the algorithm becomes itself
the content, rather than just being used to process content. The benefits of
such an approach are numerous, and can be appreciated by considering the
revolutionary benefits derived from the transition of computer usage from the
days of simple text terminals for number-crunching mainframes to today's
powerful graphical user interfaces that host Web browsers. Computers were
initially considered as calculation devices, but are not mostly used to generate
elementary forms of algorithmic content, such as windows, menus, icons, fonts,
etc., that empower users to perform advanced text document creation,
distribution, access, etc. The proposed framework generalizes this paradigm to
the case of digital images and video, and allows its use in a wide range of
applications. The shift towards algorithmic representations requires both
theoretical and applied innovations. From a theoretical standpoint, it is shown
that a new mathematical theory can be developed (called Complexity Distortion
Theory), providing a universal mathematical framework in which all coding
techniques (from traditional entropy coding to model-based video coding) can be
appropriately analyzed. This theory builds on the notion of a programmable
terminal and promises significant results for real systems that operate under
time and space constraints, or when compression is only one of the
representation requirements. From a practical, applications-oriented standpoint,
this new approach allows the elimination of decades of lag of audio-visual
information representation with respect to modern software design. A software-
based archi tecture is described, centered around a new programming language
paradigm (FLAVOR - Formal Language for Audio-Visual Object Representation), and
developed to provide the basis for real, functioning systems. Several
applications and application domains are discussed in which the proposed
approach can have a fundamental impact, empowering users with seamless creation,
manipulation, and access to visual information.