* 9703489
* Workshop on Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/1998
* USD 4,916.00

Wollkind 9703489 The investigator and his colleagues organize a three day
Workshop on mathematical biology at Washington State University. The workshop is
interdisciplinary and should be a focal point for the meeting of theoretical and
experimental scientists of numerous backgrounds, especially from the Pacific
Northwest region. An important emphasis is attracting young scientists to attend
the workshop, and providing them a fertile ground for open communication with
senior scientists on topics at the cutting edge of theoretical and mathematical
biology. Because of the geographical location, young scientists from eastern
Washington, Idaho, and Montana very rarely get such opportunities for open
discussions with experienced researchers. Similar workshops have been held
regularly since 1991. In these workshops, topics have ranged from developmental
biology and medicine to ecology and epidemiology. In many instances, the
informal contacts made at these workshops proved valuable in forming new
research collaborations. There has been a recent surge of interest in the use of
quantitative mathematical approaches to understand better the exceedingly
complex phenomena exhibited by living organisms. To further this goal, the
investigator and colleagues organize a workshop in mathematical biology. The
workshop is interdisciplinary, attracting researchers with both theoretical
(mathematicians, geneticists , physicists, physical chemists) and experimental
(biologists, biochemists, epidemiologists, ecologists) backgrounds. Contributed
papers and discussion focus on ways in which quantitative, theoretical, and
experimental methods can be combined to augment each other in an effort to
explain more fully specific problems arising from areas such as developmental
biology, medicine, ecology, and epidemiology. An important emphasis is
attracting young scientists (recent Ph.D.'s and graduate students) to attend the
workshop, and in providing them a fertile ground for direct communication with
senior scientists on topics at the cutting edge of theoretical and mathematical
biology. Given their geographical location, young scientists from eastern
Washington, Idaho, and Montana very rarely get such opportunities for open
discussions with experienced researchers. Similar workshops have been held
regularly since 1991. In many instances, the informal contacts made at these
workshops have proved valuable in forming new research collaborations.