* 9703220
* CISE Research Infrastructure: Asymmetric Bandwidth Channels:  Applications to Real-Time Computing and Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Jonathan Smith, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/2002
* USD 834,000.00

CDA-9703220 Bajcsy, Ruzena University of Pennsylvania Asymmetric Bandwidth
Channels: Applications to Real-Time Computing and Robotics This award is for the
acquisition of infrastructure to support research which is to investigate a
cost-effective and broadly deployed communication model, Asymmetric Bandwidth
Channels, for which few abstractions in computer science are available. Research
into the application of systems characterized by low-bandwidth interactive
channels between clients and server, and a high-bandwidth broadcast from server
to clients will be conducted. The proposed work will develop communications
abstractions that applications can effectively use for such an infrastructure,
and computational models for these abstractions. Model performance will then be
evaluated on a testbed of multiple semi-autonomous robotic agents. The
challenging problems to be addressed in this project include: (1) selecting
which path to take from server to client; (2) determining the degree of
broadcast channel sharing possible in a computer communications environment; and
(3) scheduling transmissions from the shared broadcast terminal. The research
will also target three fundamental problems underlying coordination of robotic
agents: (1) development of world models based on observations of individual
agents and exploration of an unknown or a partially known environment to build a
complete model; (2) task planning based on the world model while accounting for
possible uncertainties and latencies; and (3) control of robotic agents based on
visual and other sensory information.