* 9703453
* CAREER: Coulomb-induced Dynamics in the Nonlinear Optical   Spectra of Low-dimensional Systems: Beyond Mean Field Theory
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Ilias Perakis, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2002
* USD 225,000.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9703453 Principal Investigator: Ilias Perakis Title:
CAREER: Coulomb-induced Dynamics in the Nonlinear Optical Spectra of Low-
Dimensional Systems: Beyond Mean Field Theory The fundamental principles of how
many-body Coulomb interactions influence sub-picosecond nonlinear optical
dynamics in semiconductors and metals will be investigated using a
theoretical/computational approach: the coupled cluster approach. The extension
of formal field theoretic techniques to the ultrafast regime has never been done
in a complete or systematic manner. Many-body charge interactions are of
importance in describing charge generation and recombination on ultrafast time
scales. Experiments also indicate that Coulomb interactions among optically
excited carriers could provide the mechanism that would allow optical switching
devices to operate in the THz regime. Strong experimental collaborations will
also be pursued. Switching is presently one of the most serious limiting factors
in optical/optoelectronic communications, computing and other applications. The
educational plan involves development of a new multidisciplinary computational
science major at Vanderbilt, with the strong endorsement from the department
chair and university. Multidisciplinary computational science is growing in
importance and is currently underrepresented in most university curricula. A new
class for freshman based on problem formulating approaches is also being
developed, as is a general science course, which has basic electronic and
computational aspects of the Internet as its theme.