* 9703783
* RUI:  Linear and Nonlinear Excitations in Layered           Antiferromagnets and Nanostructured Magnets
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Robert Stamps, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2000
* USD 64,000.00

9703783 Stamps This grant supports the work of a young theorist at a
predominantly undergraduate institution. The research projects in this grant are
a continuation of seminal work by this PI on dynamical properties of magnetic
moments in magnetic thin films and epitaxially grown magnetic superlattices.
Here the PI is proposing work on a possible new way of determining the exchange
coupling between thin magnetic films by examining the properties of domain wall
resonance. Other projects consist of: (1) Role of structural defects on the
magnetic order and magnetic phase transition in thin films and (2) study of
dynamic nonlinear effects in arrays of quantum dots. %%% This young PI, at a
predominantly undergraduate institution, is being supported to work on the
theory of magnetism in thin films and very small grains. Some of the research
focuses on finite frequency behavior. The PI suggests that one can gather
information about the magnetic interactions by studying the motion of domain
walls with respect to each other, in adjacent thin films. He is planning to
develop a theoretical formalism to describe the high power absorption in arrays
of very small grains. Finally he is also planning to study the relationship
between structural defects and the magnetic order and magnetic phase transitions
in thin films. ***