* 9703197
* AMP:  Alliance for Minority Participation Project
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1997,03/31/2005
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 03/31/2005
* USD 5,079,462.00

HRD-9703197 Padmore Florida A&amp;M University in collaboration with Albany
State College, Bethune-Cookman College, Clark-Atlanta University, Florida State
University, Florida International University, the University of Florida, the
University of South Florida, the University of Central Florida, the University
of Miami and Florida Memorial College and three affiliated community colleges
(Florida Community College at Jacksonville, Miami-Dade and Tallahassee) has
formulated a program designed to influence more underrepresented students to
select carers in science, engineering and mathematics. The Alliance will
emphasize a focused effort to increase directly the recruitment, retention,
graduation and graduate school placement of Blacks, Hispanics, and Native
Americans who are enrolled in the undergraduate SEM degree programs at the
participation institutions. Indirectly, enhancement elements of the project will
influence the persistence of students at all Alliance member institutions. The
Alliance's influence will span from the pre- freshman level to the enrollment of
scholars in SEM graduate programs. Participants will be selected from biology,
chemistry, mathematics, physic and all engineering disciplines. The FGAMP
Project has been a major coalescing force at the institutions involved in Phase
I of the venture. Visibility has increased for the institutions. Student
performance in their respective areas has improved significantly. A significant
level of support has been received from the Florida Legislature for support of
the Florida institutions. Phase Ii of the FGAMP operation will build on the
successes of Phase I and will include greater involvement of community colleges.
FGAMP institutional and industry partners are expected to continue their support
of the project through summer internships. The success of this project will be
shared with other state and regional institutions.