* 9703642
* Biogeochemical Consequences of Metal Partitioning in        Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* David Hutchins, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David C. Kadko
* 02/28/2001
* USD 134,659.00

ABSTRACT OCE-9617675 OCE- 9706342 The biogeochemical cycling of many trace
elements in ocean surface waters is strongly influenced by biological process.
Despite this fact, relatively little is known about what controls the fate of
elements once they are incorporated into biomass. For example, metals can be
assimilated into the food web, or regenerated to the dissolved phase or exported
on sinking particles. Given our lack of understanding in this area, it is
difficult at present to predict the fate and relative importance of different
pathways in metal cycling throughout the wide range of oceanic settings. The
principal investigators propose here to advance our understanding of trace metal
cycling by quantifying for the first time the effects of subcellular
partitioning and metal stoichiometires on metal biogeochemistry in natural
systems. There are two main approaches, consisting of laboratory and field work.
The lab studies use controlled measurements and labeled metal radionuclides to
examine carbon:metal ratios and the partitioning and the fate of metals
incorporated into biomass. A novel dual labeling technique allows the principle
investigators to separate between intercellular and cell surface pools of
metals. In the field, natural assemblages of phytoplankton will be examined for
the cellular partitioning of the various metals, and ship board incubation
experiments will be conducted to examine the rates of metal turnover. The
results of this study will significantly increase our understanding of the role
of biological processes in chemical cycling and transport in the oceans.