* 9703681
* Japan JSPS Program:  Direct Determination of the Metabolic  Costs of Activity, Including Migration, in Adult Masu       and Sockeye Salmon
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Jill B. Leonard, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 8,300.00

Leonard 9703681 This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Jill B.K. Leonard at the
University of Hokkaido, Abuta, Japan. Dr. Leonard will work with Dr. Hiroshi
Ueda, Director of the Toya Lake Station, on a research project entitled, "Direct
Determination of the Metabolic Costs of Activity, Including Migration, in Adult
Masu and Sockeye Salmon." The proposed research will evaluate the relative
metabolic cost of migration in individual adult Masu and Sockeye salmon in a
lacustrine model system. The migration process is a common, energetically
expensive life-history strategy among animals, and the evolution of migration is
linked to their ability to physiologically adapt to a heterogeneous environment.
Migratory fish are ecologically and commercially important species that are
dependent upon successful migration for survival, but the energetic cost of
migration - integral to the evolutionary development of life- history strategies
- in adult salmonids relative to oceanic life has not been studied in detail.
During the research, animals will be radio-tagged with electromyographic
transmitters and the activity levels between non-migratory and migratory periods
will be compared. Additionally, biochemical metabolic and hormonal parameters
will be measured in order to describe any direct effects of the shift from non-
migrant to migrant and the relationship between biochemical changes and changes
in activity will be determined. Results of the proposed research will provide
the first comprehensive evaluation in a field situation of the energy required
for migration relative to non-migratory activity costs on an individual basis in
adult salmonids. ***