* 9703020
* Faculty Early Development (CAREER) Program-Optimal Output   Feedback Control at Discrete Locations for Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,10/31/2003
* Makola Abdullah, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 10/31/2003
* USD 389,310.00

9703020 Abdullah The dynamic responses of structures can produce situations
that can range from uncomfortable to unsafe for the building occupants. In
recent years, control theories and technologies have been used to reduce the
dynamic responses of tall civil structures. Most optimal control algorithms
involve full state feedback control. This type of control requires good
estimates of the velocity and displacement throughout the structure. However,
there are several important advantages of output feedback control: it requires
less computational effort and has the robustness of a passive system. In the
research conducted under this CAREER award, control algorithms will be
formulated for the optimization of feedback gains and controller placement for
flexible continuous and discrete structures, such as tall buildings. Tall
buildings are of particular interest because the control devices must be placed
at floor level. The fundamental basis for these algorithms is the calculation of
the gradients of the performance function with respect to the gain and placement
matrices. For the optimal placement of controllers at discrete locations in
flexible continuous structures, a mixed-integer method will be used to optimize
the placement and gains simultaneously. The effectiveness of the algorithm will
be demonstrated for stochastic wind loads in the frequency domain and for
deterministic earthquake loads in the time domain. The educational component of
this CAREER award will involve creating Web-based modules for use in graduate
and undergraduate courses to demonstrate the concepts of structural dynamics and
civil engineering control devices. ***