* 9703703
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Hoff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 95,150.00

9703703 Hoff This is a proposal to continue the investigation of various
questions relating to the existence, stability, regularity, large-time behavior,
and numerical approximation of solutions of systems of certain partial
differential equations arising in various areas of continuum mechanics.
Discontinuous solutions are of particular interest, and will play a unifying
role in the project. A fairly well-developed theory has been attained for flows
in the whole space which are not subject to external forces and which are small.
These results will be extended to regions with boundaries and to flows with
large initial data and with forcing terms. A continuous-dependence theory will
be developed, sufficient to provide a framework in which numerical procedures
for approximating these solutions can be studied. The entire analysis will be
extended to systems of differential equations arising in related physical
problems, such as magnetohydrodynamics and viscoelasticity. Finally, recent work
concerning the pointwise behavior of Navier-Stokes diffusion waves will be
continued: the derivation and pointwise analysis of diffusion waves will be
carried out for related systems of physical interest, and a stability analysis
of planar viscous shock waves with respect to multidimensional perturbations
will be given. The proposer will study various mathematical questions concerning
important models of compressible fluids and materials. These models arise in a
broad range of applications, including supersonic flight, dynamic meteorology,
semiconductor theory, and the design and use of viscoelastic materials. While
the main goal in constructing these models is to achieve a predictive
capability, they are far too complicated to be "solved" in any explicit sense.
On the other hand, adequate approximate solutions can frequently be generated by
computer methods. The intelligent design of such methods depends crucially,
however, on a rigorous understanding of why solutions do e xist, in what sense,
and in what ways they are sensitive to noise in the data. The primary goal of
this project is therefore to provide such a rigorous mathematical analysis for
these models; a secondary objective is to apply these mathematical insights to
the intelligent design and analysis of algorithms for generating approximate
solutions.