* 9703372
* CAREER:Reaction Dynamics of Polymerization and a Computer-  Enhanced Dialectic in the Physical Chemistry Curriculum
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Rigoberto Hernandez, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2002
* USD 320,400.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Professor
Rigoberto Hernandez at the Georgia Institute of Technology as part of the CAREER
program for young scientists. The objective of this research is to characterize
the time-dependent behavior of the polymerization process. A bond percolation
model on a novel lattice has been combined with an Ising-like Polymer Growth
Hamiltonian (PGH) to provide non-uniform and correlated bond formation/breaking
probabilities. It includes the pertinent reaction dynamics, but is simple enough
to accommodate the Monte Carlo treatment of high (long-length) polymers. A new
stochastic Hamiltonian has been built around the potential of mean force for the
effective polymer `contour` length. The change of the macroscopic properties of
the polymer as its length increases is included through an effective friction
which explicitly depends on this length. Further study of the dynamics of this
Hamiltonian, as well as its connection to the polymer-growth lattice
Hamiltonian, should provide increased understanding of the connection between
the monomer properties and reaction conditions, and of the resulting material
properties of the polymer as a function of time. Hard plastics, chewing gum,
glues, proteins and coatings are but a few examples of the diverse range of
polymeric materials which have driven the polymer industry. Surprisingly, these
materials are often obtained from the same base monomers, varying only reaction
conditions and relative composition. What existing theories often leave out in
their characterization of the final product is an understanding of the reaction
dynamics when viscous effects affect the reaction process. This is important in
thermoset polymers used in the encapsulation of microchips; the polymerization
ends not because the reactants have been depleted, but because of diffusional
quenching due to the dramatic change in viscosity as a function of the extent of
reaction. The goal in this research is to understand the competition between the
reactivity of the polymer and changes in the material's viscosity as a function
of temperature and reaction profile. The educational component of this proposal
comprises the development of a new physical chemistry course and a companion
web-based textbook, both of which emphasize the connection between theoretical
understanding and physical intuition. The course will also use various
electronic forms of communication. It is hoped that this computer-enhanced
dialectic (CED) will provide ample opportunity for the student to learn not only
how to answer questions, but also how to ask the right ones.