* 9703574
* Water Configuration and Transport in Wet "Unsaturated"      Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Tomlinson Fort, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2000
* USD 174,518.00

Abstract CTS -9703574 Water Configuration and Transport in Wet "Unsaturated"
Porous Media This project is an investigation of the location, surface area, and
movement caused by surface tension gradients, of water held in wet "unsaturated"
porous media. By "unsaturated" is meant a condition where only part of the
available pore space is filled with water, the remainder being filled with air
or a second fluid. Examples of the condition are soil above the water table and
any other porous solid or particulate material which has been exposed to but is
not saturated with moisture. The necessary surface tension gradients are
established by applying surfactants with very specific properties to part of a
wet unsaturated system. In optimum cases, 80-90% of the water moves. Previous
work has established criteria for surfactant effectiveness and the mechanism
through which water movement is effected. It has led to the first direct
experimental means of determining the area of the air-water interface in wet
"unsaturated" porous media. The goals of this research are to better understand
these systems and to apply this understanding to solution of important
technological problems which involve them. Specific objectives of this
accomplishment-based renewal (ABR) proposal are to: (a) complete development of
a model to calculate the air-water interfacial area, (b) determine the kinetics
of surfactant spreading and water movement as a function of system saturation,
(c) scout for surfactants capable of effecting two phase oil-water transport and
(d) investigate water and dissolved solute transport in practical systems. The
model is based on the first application of simulated annealing to determination
of surface areas in wet "unsaturated" porous media. The kinetics of surfactant
spreading will be followed by radiotracer methods. The kinetics of water
movement will be followed by a new gravimetric technique based on the changes in
the center of gravity which occur when water moves withi n a standard column.
Systems to be studied include glass spheres and sand, clay minerals and model
soils. Comparison will be made of the movement of water with and without
dissolved electrolytes, and in the presence and absence of an insoluble
nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL). Attempts will be made to relate the kinetics of
surfactant spreading and water movement to the abnormally high viscosity which
has been reported for water near capillary walls. This study has great potential
technological impact. Results may lead to more efficient drying/de-watering
processes in industries where these operations are now conducted with a steam
dryer. The ability to move water in soils by means of a cheap nontoxic and
biodegradable "chemical pump" has important applications in environmental
remediation and in agriculture. Knowledge of the area of the air-water interface
is fundamental to modeling interfacial mass transfer processes, and for
understanding oxygen transport in soils. The surface area model should be
applicable to non-aqueous petroleum systems, and to water-oil as well as to the
water-air interface, in wet "unsaturated" porous media.