* 9703916
* Elucidation of Polymer Conformation, Phase Structure, and   Dynamics by Multidimensional Solid-State NMR
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Klaus Schmidt-Rohr, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 04/30/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9703916 Schmidt-Rohr In this research program, multidimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) techniques are developed and applied to elucidate the
conformations and motions of functional groups in solid polymers and relate them
to macroscopic materials properties. The proposed NMR techniques for
characterizing segmental conformations in unoriented polymers, such as amorphous
polymers and polypeptides, are based on measuring the relative orientations of
adjacent segments by correlating anisotropic NMR couplings (dipolar and
chemical-shift anisotropies). The torsion-angle informatiol is extracted from
characteristic intensity patterns in the resulting 2D or 3D spectra. Eventually,
in a 3D spectrum, 2D chemical-shift correlation patterns will be separated by
dipolar couplings. The torsion-angle distributions in various PET samples,
polystyrenes, and other polymers will be characterized. Double-quantum NMR
techniques for measuring the torsion angles and in peptides have been
demonstrated and will be applied to solid polypeptide materials. Structure and
mobility on a larger scale, e.g. in phase-separating polymer blends or at the
crystalline-amorphous interface, will be investigated by spin-diffusion NMR. In
the area of molecular dynamics of solid polymers, multidimensional exchange NMR
methods that were introduced in part by this PI have elucidated relaxations in
polymers, which influence many macroscopic materials properties. New exchange
NMR techniques will be developed, aiming, for instance, at detecting small-
amplitude or localized motions. Motional processes, such as helical jumps, will
be exploited for obtaining structural information, e.g. to characterize polymer
chain folds. The length scale of motional heterogeneities in polymers above the
glass transition will be determined based on spatial information from spin
diffusion. %%%% In this research program, solid polymers such as engineering
plastics and advanced biomaterials are investigated on a mole cular level by
novel nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques. The insight into molecular
structures and motions, which are related to mechanical properties such as
toughness or creep, will ultimately help industry in the development of improved
polymer materials. Students from three departments will be instructed about
modern NMR in theory and practice, while several graduate students will be
trained to use the latest multidimensional NMR techniques in polymer research.
***