* 9703844
* Near-Maximum-Likelihood Decoding Techniques with Reduced    Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Ilya Dumer, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 322,275.00

New coding applications are often limited by the huge decoding complexity
required by the best possible maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. Recently
designed sub-optimal algorithms reduce the complexity exponent of ML decoding
two times along with an arbitrarily small increase in decoding error
probability. The project addresses the problem of designing more advanced
algorithms that can further reduce the complexity exponent of ML decoding five
to seven times. We are going to investigate the following topics. General study
of sub-optimal algorithms. The goals are: (a) to obtain the explicit trade-offs
between complexity and performance of near-ML decoding, (b) to generalize near-
ML decoding for practically important channels, (c) to combine new near-ML
decoding techniques with conventional trellis decoding. Design of new algorithms
for near-ML decoding. The goals are: (a) to develop new presorting procedures
which reduce the complexity exponent of ML decoding up to three times, (b) to
design new random-search algorithms which reduce the latter exponent up to five
times. Design of cascaded NML decoding algorithms. The goals are: (a) to develop
cascaded near-ML decoding for concatenated codes, and to reduce the complexity
exponent of ML decoding up to seven times, (b) to apply cascaded design for
bursty and fading channels. Real-time software implementation of designed
algorithms. The goal is to develop fast software algorithms for codes of lengths
50 to 100 used over the channels with a signal-to-noise ratio of about 1 dB.