* 9703142
* CAREER:  Applications In Capillary Electrophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2002
* Frank Gomez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2002
* USD 258,500.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to develop capillary
electrophoresis as a method for characterizing noncovalent interactions such as
host-guest complexation reactions. Professor Gomez and his undergraduate and
master's level students at California State University at Los Angeles will
develop metal ion affinity chromatographic supports, immobilize beta-
cyclodextrin dimers and small ligands on the surfaces of capillary
electrophoresis columns, and prepare capillary coatings with terminal ligands on
their surfaces. Nonaqueous and mixed solvent capillary electrophoresis will be
examined to determine the analytical utility of such systems. This CAREER
project will introduce students to a number of important contemporary areas
including surface chemistry, capillary electrophoresis, host- guest complexation
reactions, and protein and peptide separations. A further educational aim will
be to raise the awareness of minority students at the middle and high school
levels regarding career opportunities in science. Capillary electrophoresis is
being developed as a method to characterize important noncovalent intermolecular
interactions with the support of this CAREER research project. Professor Gomez
is introducing this emerging area of separation science to undergraduate and
master's level graduate students with emphasis on practical problem solving
applications. Considerable effort will be invested in the synthesis of molecular
structures that exhibit intermolecular interactions of interest when used in
conjunction with capillary electrophoresis. New laboratory and course experience
will be provided to these students in this area. Efforts will be made to involve
middle and high school minority students in activities that encourage their
interest in science.