* 9704745
* Subanalytic Sets, Pfaffian Functions, and Complexity of     Quantifier Simplification
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Andrei Gabrielov, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 77,000.00

A. Gabrielov proposes to continue research in two closely related areas: the
theory of subanalytic sets, with applications to quantifier elimination and
simplification problems, and the theory of Pfaffian functions (analytic
functions satisfying systems of Pfaffian differential equations with polynomial
coefficients), with applications to o-minimality and computational complexity.
The goal of this research is to find an effective estimate of complexity of the
``quantifier simplification'' for expressions with Pfaffian functions, i.e.,
replacing an expression with existential and universal quantifiers by an
equivalent expression without universal quantifiers. This includes estimates of
the complexity of different operations with semi- and sub-Pfaffian sets, such as
the frontier, closure, stratification, and resolution of singularities. Modern
computer algebra qystems allow one to perform on a computer many operations with
algebraic equations and inequalities previously considered the domain of
abstract algebraic geometry. The results can be applied to such practical
problems as visualisation, robotics, and coding theory. The complexity of
computer codes performing these operations becomes a practically important
problem. This complexity usually grows quickly with the degree of polynomials. A
new approach to reduce computational complexity lies in the Pfaffian theory
studying a class of non-algebraic functions with global finiteness properties
similar to the properties of algebraic functions. The complexity of a polynomial
considered as a Pfaffian function depends only on the number of its non-zero
monomials (or, more generally, on the complexity of a formula representing this
polynomial) independent of its degree. Exponential and trigonometric functions,
and many special functions, are Pfaffian, too. Thus Pfaffian methods, when
applicable, allow one to produce fast computer codes for computations with
simple algebraic, exponential and trigonometric formulas, possibly of a high
degree.