* 9704523
* Dynamics of Polynomial Diffeomorphisms
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* John Smillie, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 82,338.00

Abstract: This project involves developing analogs of some of the important
concepts in the theory of one dimensional complex dynamics in the context of
diffeomorphisms in two complex dimensions. One powerful tool in dynamics is
hyperbolicity. In one complex dimension this property is easily characterized in
terms of the behavior of the critical point. The first part of this project
involves characterizations of hyperbolicity and related properties for
diffeomorphisms in two complex variables with the expectation that this work
will shed light both on the hyperbolic and the non-hyperbolic cases. The
proposed characterizations involve the regularity of unstable manifolds, the
geometry of the intersection of unstable manifolds with the set of bounded
orbits and growth conditions on Green functions in unstable manifolds. A second
set of questions involve symbolic dynamics. There are situations in which
external rays can be used to parametrize ``Julia sets''. This gives a new way of
symbolically describing Julia sets in many cases. We raise questions about which
symbolic descriptions can occur. A third set of questions involve the property
of ``connectivity of the Julia set'' and the properties of the connectivity
locus. Dynamical systems is an area of pure mathematics which deals with
theoretical questions that arise in studying long term behavior of mathematical
models of physical systems. We restrict ourselves to models whose state at any
time can be described by a finite number of variables. Even though these systems
can display complicated chaotic behavior, there are some powerful theoretical
tools that can be applied to study them in some cases. On the other hand there
are many cases where these tools do not apply. Recently new techniques have been
developed which use complex analysis but these techniques have so far been
limited to one variable whereas typical dynamical systems involve many
variables. The proposed research aims to establish a link between dynamics of
one complex v ariable and the more typical dynamical systems which involve many
variables.