* 9704763
* Periodic Orbits, Magnetic Fields, and Other Topics in       Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Richard Montgomery, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2001
* USD 154,596.00

The bulk of the proposed work concerns the existence and number of periodic
orbits for Hamiltonian systems. In addition, the investigators will research the
possible validity of an infinite-dimensional version of Sard's theorem arising
in subRiemannian geometry and control theory. Finally, the investigators propose
to compute certain equivariant symplectic cobordism rings relevant to non-
Abelian versions of the Duistermaat-Heckman formula and to geometric
quantization. The motivating example for the periodic orbit investigations is
the dynamics of a particle in magnetic fields, henceforth referred to as
magnetodynamics. The horocycle flow on a Riemann surface is an example of such a
dynamics. This flow is crucial to the work since it is the basic building block
for constructing Hamiltonian systems which have no periodic orbits on bounded
energy surfaces. The smallest number of degrees of freedom for which this non-
existence phenomenon is known to hold is four. The investigators will construct
examples where this number is equal to three. Magnetodynamics was also one of
the examples motivating Arnol'd's conjectures concerning lower bounds for the
number of periodic orbits. A number of instances of the conjecture are still
open in the magnetodynamic case. The investigators plan to answer some of these.
The planar three-body equations, after symplectic reduction, becomes an instance
of magnetodynamics. The (fictitious) ``reduced'' particle moves on a three-
manifold (with a singularity corresponding to triple collisions) whose points
represent congruence classes of planar triangles. The general investigations
into magnetodynamics should be of help in understanding some of the open
problems remaining in ``the three-body problem''. The main goal in this regard
is to prove the existence of a closed trajectory representing any given free
homotopy class for the reduced space (three-manifold) minus collisions. The
investigators will be studying what motions are possible for various systems.
They will be concentrating primarily on two types of systems, a type involving
charges moving in magnetic fields, closely related to the problem of controlling
fusion, and a type involving planets or satellites moving according to Newton's
laws. Our main interest is in the periodic orbits for these systems. A periodic
orbit is a motion which infinitely repeats itself, coming back to its starting
point after some fixed period of time. A familiar example is the rising of the
sun every morning. The periodic orbits are thought to be the key to
understanding the behavior of systems, especially complicated chaotic systems.
One of the most surprising recent developments has been the discovery of
complicated systems with no periodic orbits. The investigators plan to find more
systems with no periodic orbits and to simultaneously look for simple conditions
which would guarantee the existence of a certain number of periodic orbits. This
would be a significant step towards a general understanding and control of
motions of physical systems.