* 9704119
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Program:  ICFA International      School/Workshop on Instrumentation in High Energy Physics,  July 7-19, 1997, Guanajuato, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,250.00

9704119 Sheaff This U.S.-Mexico award will partially support the 1997 School on
Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics, to take place at the Instituto
de Fisica of the Universidad de Guanajuato, Mexico. The funds requested are to
provide travel support for students from the U.S. to attend this
school/workshop, which will assemble students and researchers from the U.S. and
from developing countries in Latin America. Co-organizers of the meeting are Dr.
Marleigh Sheaff of the University of Wisconsin and Dr. Gerardo Herrera of the
Centro de Investigacion y Estudios Avanzados (CINVESTAV) or the Instituto
Tecnico Nacional (IPA) in Mexico City. The School will consist of lecture
courses in various state of-the-art instrumentation techniques in current use in
experimental particle physics, augmented by laboratory courses designed to
demonstrate the material presented. The goal is to encourage increased
participation by young physicists from developing countries in elementary
particle physics experiments and to encourage future collaborations in
experimental elementary particle physics. While the instrumentation techniques
to be presented are those currently in use in particle physics, many have wide-
ranging applications to medical imaging or to the non-destructive evaluation of
materials. ***