* 9704131
* SBIR PHASE II:  The Development of a 600 MHz Wide Bore      (89 mm) High Resolution NMR Magnet with Internal Tin Wires
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Weijun Shen, Cryomagnetics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2000
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9704131 Wu This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to
develop a prototype 600MHz wide bore (89mm) high resolution NMR magnet with
internal tin superconducting wires. The feasibility of this approach has been
fully proven in Phase I. Through replacement of bronze-processed wire by
internal tin wire, high field NMR system cost will be reduced significantly. The
Phase II research objective is to build, test and evaluate the proposed full
scale prototype NMR magnet. To achieve the objectives, Cryomagnetics, Inc.
proposes a technical approach consisting of testing stability of each NbTi and
Nb3Sn coil separately under persistent mode operation to insure each coil's
performance, and then assembling coils and testing the magnet. At the end of
Phase II research, a full scale prototype 600 MHz wide bore high resolution NMR
magnet will be developed and fully tested. This prototype magnet will be the
selling point for the Phase III program--the commercialization of 600 MHz wide
bore high resolution NMR magnets. The new technologies developed in Phase I and
II will generate great commercial impact by reducing NMR system cost. The
proposed wide bore NMR magnet system will be ideal for micro-imaging and in vivo
spectroscopy as well as biological solid state NMR spectroscopy. The successful
completion of Phase II of this project will make inexpensive, wide bore, high
field NMR magnets available in the market. ***