* 9704621
* Mathematical Models of Phase Transitions in Quartz
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Tao Lin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 135,000.00

DMS-9704621 Rogers This grant funds a program of mathematical investigations of
the alpha-beta phase transition in quartz. In unstressed quartz this transition
occurs at about 574 degrees Centigrade, at which point a quartz crystal
undergoes a change in shape, volume, and symmetry. The high temperature beta-
phase has larger volume and higher symmetry than the low-temperature alpha-
phase. The alpha-beta transition can be accompanied by an interesting triangular
microstructure that is quite different from the layered microstructures that are
usually found in shape memory alloys and ferromagnetic materials. An interesting
mathematical feature of the problem is that the microstructure is describe by
the oscillation of a scalar order parameter. Order parameters have been used in
many other studies of phase transitions, but they are usually hard to measure
and are defined in fairly fuzzy physical terms. On the other hand, the order
parameter in quartz is well defined physically and there are good techniques for
measuring it. Thus, it provides an excellent test case for mathematical models
using order parameters. The proposers plan to use techniques of differential
equations, the calculus of variations, scientific computation, and bifurcation
theory to study both standard models for quartz and models that they will
propose. %%% When a material undergoes a drastic change in its fundamental
properties we say it has undergone a "phase transition." The obvious examples
are freezing and melting, evaporation and condensation, but more subtle atomic
rearrangements are covered by the term as well. Despite the technological
importance of such material changes, the mathematical theory describing them is
nowhere near as well developed as theory describing the motion, deformation, and
thermal properties of materials. This grant funds a program of mathematical
investigations of a phase transition in quartz. The transition is caused by
changing temperature and occurs at about 574 degrees Centigrade. At this
temperature, a quartz crystal undergoes a change in shape, volume, and symmetry.
The transition can be accompanied by an interesting microscopic triangular
pattern that is quite different from the layered patterns that are usually found
in shape memory alloys and ferromagnetic materials. An understanding of these
microscopic patterns (called "microstructures") is widely believed to be a key
to the understanding of the phase transitions that they accompany. There are a
number of reasons for focusing on this particular phase transition. Quartz has a
number of important industrial applications such as oscillators and optical
waveguides. In addition, the transition in quartz is usually described
mathematically by a quantity called an "order parameter." Order parameters have
been used in many other types of phase transitions, but they are usually hard to
measure and are defined in fairly fuzzy physical terms. On the other hand, the
order parameter in quartz is well defined physically and there are good
techniques for measuring it. Thus, quartz provides an excellent test case for
mathematical models using order parameters. ***