* 9704512
* Scalable Collective Communication Support for Heterogenous  Networks of Workstations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 12/31/2000
* USD 225,959.00

Networks of workstations (NOWs) are becoming increasingly popular for providing
cost-effective and affordable parallel computing. However, the LAN environments
are gradually becoming heterogeneous due to the commodity nature of workstations
and networking equipment. Such heterogeneity gets reflected in terms of
communication capabilities of nodes (processor speed, memory speed, network
interface support) and network architectures (different interconnects with
varying topology and connectivity). This is forcing NOW environments to be
gradually redefined as `Heterogeneous Networks of Workstations' (HNOWs). This
research is targeted towards providing fast and scaleable collective
communication support for such emerging HNOWs. The following problems are being
addressed by this project: 1) quantitatively specifying the heterogeneous
characteristics of a HNOW environment and studying their impact on the
performance of current implementations of collective communication operations;
2) designing and developing optimal algorithms for collective communication
operations by considering major heterogeneous characteristics; and 3) studying
the performance gains achieved by the optimal algorithms for different suites
and HNOW environments. An experimental HNOW testbed consisting of a set of
workstations with different speeds and different interconnect types (Fast
Ethernet, ATM, and Myrinet) is planned to be used together with theoretical,
analytical, and simulation approaches to develop and validate the new research
results.