* 9704616
* International Research Fellow Awards:  A Benthic Index of   Coral Reef Integrity (BICRI) for use in Southest Asian Reef Management Programs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Mark Erdmann, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1999
* USD 88,480.00

9704616 Erdmann The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twenty-four-month postdoctoral research visit
by Dr. Mark V. Erdmann to work with Dr. Mohammad Kasim Moosa at the Indonesian
Institute of Sciences (LIPI OSEANOLOGI) in Jakarta, Indonesia. The goal of this
project is to develop a method to quickly and effectively assess coral reef
health using a multimeric, benthic invertebrate-based index of coral reef
integrity. The PI will use benthic reef invertebrates with proven bioindicator
potential and which are easily monitored using a consistent, quantitative
sampling protocol. An initial sampling period in the Spermonde Archipelago
(Sulawesi), an area with well-characterized pollution and environmental
gradients, will facilitate calibration of these various bioindicators with known
pollution impacts and comparison with the bioindicator response of stomatopod
communities, which have been very well-studied in this area. Using this data as
a baseline, the monitoring program will be expanded to include four additional
reef-rich regions of Indonesia, selected with regard to the varying nature and
extent of anthropogenic impacts, estimated biodiversity value, and future
development and management plans in the regions. The final results will be
analyzed and refined into an Indonesian benthic index of coral reef integrity
(BICRI) which can be adapted for use in reef management programs throughout
Southeast Asia. Coral reef degradation is a problem world-wide, thus the results
of this project will benefit other countries (including the U.S.) as well. ***