* 9704946
* Localized Electronic States in Amorphous Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* P. Craig Taylor, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9704946 Taylor This is a renewal project for the study of the electronic and
structural properties of disordered semiconductors. This research will answer
questions concerning the structure, defects and doping mechanisms in Group IV
chalcogenide glasses at low chalcogen concentrations and in metal chalcogenide
glasses at high metal concentrations. A second important component of the
research will answer questions concerning the microscopic origins of optically-
induced paramagnetism and of photodarkening in chalcogenide glasses, especially
those in the two model systems mentioned above. The scientific approach involves
a broadly based program that utilizes several growth techniques, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, optical spectroscopies, various combinations of optical
and magnetic resonance techniques, and electrical measurements. The specific
objectives are (1) to understand details of the local order, (2) to study the
intrinsic defects, and their associated metastabilities, as a function of
average coordination number, and (4) to identify the defects that contribute to
photodarkening. %%% This is a renewal proposal for a continuing study of
amorphous semiconductors. Amorphous semiconductors provide inexpensive
alternatives to crystalline semiconductors for many electronic applications. One
important example is the use of amorphous silicon for the switches (thin-film
transistors) in flat-panel displays for personal computers and flat television
screens. The use of these materials is hindered by changes that occur with time
in the various electronic or optical devices that are currently manufactured.
The information gained in this research will greatly increase our understanding
of the behavior of electrons which are the carriers of electrical current. This
information will confirm or refute specific models that have been developed to
apply generally to all amorphous semiconductors. For example, the most important
property of semiconductors that mak es them useful as switches of electricity is
the ability to change the electrical conductivity dramatically via a process
known as doping. This research will result in a more general understanding of
doping mechanisms in amorphous semiconductors - an understanding that can
eventually be used to manufacture more reliable devices. ***