* 9704509
* Efficient Algorithms for Large-Scale Linear and Nonlinear   Finite Element Computations with Applications to Thin Shell Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Thomas Coleman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 441,000.00

Coleman 9704509 The investigator and his colleagues focus on the efficient
numerical computation of global solutions of problems of nonlinear elastostatics
in a high-performance computational environment. Particular attention is paid to
the global post-critical behavior of symmetric imperfection-free elastic shell
structures --- the analysis of which has great significance in understanding the
large deformation response and ultimate collapse scenario of realistic
engineering structures. A major theme of the work is to exploit the natural
parallelism, via group theoretic techniques, in an important class of
engineering problems characterized by underlying symmetries. They also
investigate the use of automatic differentiation software in the context of
those problems. Finally, they study the effectiveness of symmetry-motivated
preconditioners, within the context of Krylov iterative subspace methods, for a
class of ``almost-symmetric'' problems in structural mechanics. Due to their
high strength-to-weight ratios, thin shell structures have been used extensively
in aerospace, civil, mechanical and nuclear engineering applications, e.g., dome
roofs, aerospace vehicles, pressure vessels, containment vessels, etc. Yet the
ability of engineers to predict the ultimate failure of such systems has
heretofore been more of an art than a science (relying heavily upon costly
experimental verification -- see "Computerized Buckling Analysis of Shells", by
D. Bushnell, Martinus Nijhoff 1985). The investigators combine new mathematical
ideas of symmeytry and nonlinear analysis with high-performance computing
methodology to analyze such systems efficiently and systematically. A long-term
goal is to provide engineers with useful tools for the sytematic analysis (and
ultimately better design) for this important class of structures. Funding for
the project is provided by the Computational Mathematics program and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and b y the New Technologies program in
CISE.