* 9704386
* Study of Point Defects in Semiconductors using Optical      Detection of Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* George Watkins, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2001
* USD 284,500.00

9704386 Watkins This experimental research project centers on the atomic scale
defects present in technologically relevant semiconductors as probed by optical
detection of magnetic resonance and by optically detected electron-nuclear
double resonance. The defects of interest include intrinsic defects such as
vacancies, interstitials and anti-sites, as well as important chemical
impurities and simple complexes resulting from interactions between them. The
purpose of the research is to understand the electronic and vibronic structure
of the ground, metastable, and excited states of such defects, and to determine
on a microscopic scale the role they play in the electronic and optical
properties of this class of materials. The emphasis in the renewed research is
toward the wide bandgap semiconductors, including II-VI compounds, III-V
nitrides, diamond, and SiC. The rationale is that relatively little is known
about the defects in these materials and there is good reason to anticipate
surprises and new important physics in their properties. This is because of
competition between the increased recombination energy available from the
bandgap on the one hand, and the increased role of many- electron effects due to
the greater electronic localization on the other. Theory is pressed in dealing
with deep defects, and high quality experimental information will be useful to
guide and test new theory. In addition, these materials are of technological
interest for their potential as visible and uv light emitting and high
temperature electronic devices. Such applications will require an understanding
of point defects greatly in excess of what little is now known. A major
experimental approach will be to produce intrinsic defects by 2.5MeV electron
irradiation for study by the ODMR and ODENDOR techniques. In some cases
irradiation in situ at 4.2K in a special ODMR facility will allow study of
pristine Frenkel pair defects (vacancy-interstitial close pairs) at low temper
ature and as they are slowly warmed. %%% This experimental project focuses on
important atomic scale defect structures that occur in crystalline samples of
semiconductors. Such defects, which include vacant lattice sites, additional
atoms located interstitially, and chemical substitutions (as for example As as
an impurity in Si) are well known to have important consequences on the
electronic properties of semiconductors. Such point defects as As in Si
introduce an extra electron for electrical conduction (these are called donor
impurities); others introduce holes, and all point defects have a "scattering"
effect on the motion of electrons and holes when an accelerating field is
applied, tending to reduce the current for a given voltage. The present project
makes use of an advanced optically detected magnetic resonance method for study
of various point defects. The work will focus on those "wide bandgap"
semiconductors which are now being considered for unique applications for which
silicon and gallium arsenide are not suitable. Possible applications of the wide
bandgap semiconductors are for visible and ultraviolet light emitting diodes and
for high temperature electronic devices. The semiconductors of interest include,
for example, SiC and GaN. A special aspect of the experimental work will be
deliberate introduction of point defects by electron irradiation. This work
involves a postdoctoral fellow who will be excellently trained in the course of
this research for a position in industry, government, or academia. ***