* 9704215
* Mechanical Engineering Senior Design Projects for the       Disabled
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Alan Eberhardt, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 06/30/2002
* USD 107,311.00

9704215 Eberhardt This grant will support senior design projects to aid persons
with disabilities, for Mechanical Engineering (ME) students, at the University
of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). Projects are geared toward providing
alternative, low cost, custom designed devices and software that will directly
aid specific disabled individuals or groups of individuals. They include devices
to assist in environmental control, communication augmentation, motorized
devices for lifting or grabbing and alarm systems which combine visual and
auditory warnings, just to name a few. Project ideas have been provided by
United Cerebral Palsy (UCP) of Birmingham and the Alabama Department of
Rehabilitation Services (ADRS). In addition, a cross-UAB-campus collaboration
has been established including Occupational Therapy, Spain Rehabilitation,
Orthopedic Surgery and the Injury Control and Research Center, who have provided
project ideas which combine depth in both engineering and life sciences. A
three-member advisement committee will ensure adequate student supervision and
quality development of the project device. This committee will include the PI,
one ME faculty with expertise in the project area, and a collaborating
investieator from UCP, ADRS or UAB. The fact that the designs will be
constructed, tested and used by the disabled individuals will provide meaningful
design experience for the engineering student while serving the disabled
community. This form of highly visible, funded senior design projects will serve
as an exceptional recruiting tool to attract better students to the UAB School
of Engineering. It will further strengthen the collaborative link between
Engineering and the UAB Hospital and promote a planned industrial track in
Rehabilitation Engineering through the UAB Department of Biomedical Engineering.
Links with local industry will improve regional visibility of UAB, will increase
cooperation with the local community to the benefit of both, and will increase
employment opportunities for graduating ME seniors. These same links will serve
to leverage funding at greater levels from industry, government agencies and
foundations to support this worthwhile effort. ***