* 9704127
* Acquisition of a Visible/Near-IR Raman System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,10/31/1998
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1998
* USD 106,650.00

9704127 Rabolt This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a new
Raman system for the departments of Materials Science, Chemical Engineering and
Chemistry at the University of Delaware. The Raman instrument utilizes a high
sensitivity Charge Coupled Device (CCD) for detection of the laser light
scattered from the materials under investigation. In order to be able to
investigate a large collection of materials ranging from catalysts to polymers,
the input laser excitation must be varied from the visible to the near infrared
region (532.-950. nm.). Hence this Raman system will include a frequency-doubled
diode pumped Nd:YAG laser which will be used to pump a tunable solid state
Ti:Sapphire laser together which will provide the large range of wavelengths
needed to study the problems of interest in all three departments. The proposed
instrument will be used by researchers in a number of different areas of
advanced materials design and characterization. These include high surface area
materials used for chemical separations, transition metal oxygen-anion
catalysts, organic self-assembled monolayers on metallic substrates,
microemulsions, high temperature superconductors, polymers and ionomers. This
Raman system will serve as a focal point for materials research, bringing
together a multidisciplinary group of researchers who have a common goal-to
understand the structure/property relationships in advanced materials. The
presence of such an instrument in the Materials Science Department at the
University of Delaware will serve to facilitate interaction and collaboration
between the different research groups on campus but, just as importantly, it
will also promote industrial interaction/collaboration in the more global
materials community in Delaware. A number of small companies have expressed
interest in exploring the use of Raman spectroscopy in the characterization of
materials in a process-monitoring mode, a capability which could be acc
omplished with fiber-optic probes. Limited feasibility studies could be
conducted at the university with the proposed Raman instrument. This instrument
will also be utilized as part of a larger course in materials characterization
which is required for all graduate students pursuing an advanced degree in
materials science. In addition it will be used to train students in chemical
engineering, physics and chemistry because of the large amount of materials-
intensive work that is currently being carried out in those departments. ***