* 9704813
* Topology Optimization and Effective Properties of           Composites
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Yury Grabovsky, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 79,997.00

9704813 Grabovsky This proposal aims to investigate three problems related to
homogenization, composite materials and their effective properties. The first
problem will combine homogenization theory, bounds on the effective moduli of
composites and Young measure techniques in order to study the relaxation of the
ill-posed optimization problems with weakly discontinuous objective functionals.
The method yields an answer for a class of quadratic functionals. The second
project will seek out the exact relations for the effective behavior of
polycrystalline composites using a new technique that combines PDE theory and
variational principles. The method is successful in at least one such problem.
The third project will study the critical behavior of high contrast composites
near the percolation threshold by utilizing the analogy between the phase
transitions in Ising ferromagnets and the random resistor networks near the
percolation threshold on the one hand, and recent results on the high contrast
continuum composites away from the critical point on the other. Composite
materials are media that look homogeneous but in fact have complex structure
when viewed under a microscope. These materials are finding their way into our
everyday lives in objects such as skis, golf clubs, automobiles, aircraft,
computers, cement, construction components of buildings and bridges, sensors and
many many more. The idea of composite materials is to combine beneficial
properties of its simple but imperfect constituents. The difficulty here is that
the properties of composites (called effective properties) depend not only on
what you mix but on how you mix it. In other words, they depend on the geometry
of what you see under a microscope (called microgeometry). Therefore the goal is
to specify which microgeometries produce the best composites provided you use
the same materials in prescribed proportions. In general this is an ill-posed
problem. That is, it may not be solved in its raw form by the most powerful
computers. The first part of this proposal aims to reformulate the problem into
a form suitable for solution on a computer (into a well-posed problem). The
second part of this proposal will seek out and investigate the very special
cases when some effective properties of polycrystalline composites do not depend
on the microgeometry. This work may have applications for the design of
underwater sensors based on piezoelectric polycrystals. The last part of this
proposal constitutes a long term project on studying "nature's composites" like
porous rocks or sea ice (consisting of ice with brine inclusions). The problem
here is that the two constituents comprising the composite have extremely
different properties (like air and rock, or brine and ice). Modeling the
properties of such composites presents a formidable mathematical problem. The
progress here would enhance our understanding and give us more control of a
diverse array of problems ranging from extraction of oil from porous rocks to
global climate change (that depends to a great extent on what is happening to
Arctic and Antarctic sea ice).