* 9704765
* Surgery L-Groups, Algebraic K-Groups and Rigidity of        Classical Aspherical Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Lowell Jones, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 126,300.00

9704765 Jones The Borel Conjecture states that any aspherical closed manifold
should be topologically determined by its fundamental group. This research
project will provide a new geometric tool that will enable the investigator to
verify this conjecture for any aspherical closed manifold whose fundamental
group is isomorphic to the fundamental group of a non-positively curved
Riemannian manifold. The geometric tool consists of a generalization of the
geometric collapsing theory developed by the geometers Cheeger-Fukaya-Gromov and
others. In this project L. E. Jones (in collaboration with F. T. Farrell) will
develop a collapsing theory for foliated Riemannian manifolds. A "two-
dimensional manifold" is a "space" that looks exactly like the Euclidean plane
to an observer near any point in the space, but which when observed as a whole
may not be Euclidean space at all. For example the earth's surface looks like a
flat plane if we are actually on its surface, but when observed from space, it
is seen to be a sphere. Two-dimensional manifolds were already well understood
by mathematicians of the 19th century. There are also 3-dimensional manifolds,
4-dimensional manifolds, etc., manifolds that are less well understood; in fact,
the mathematician's quest to understand higher dimensional manifolds has
motivated much of the topological research of the 20th century. One way to
investigate the nature of a manifold is to focus on an associated algebraic
object (that is much easier to understand) called its "fundamental group." A
famous mathematical conjecture states that for a special class of higher
dimensional manifolds (called "aspherical manifolds"), the fundamental group
should act like a genetic code for the manifold, revealing all of its inner
topological secrets. The aim of this project is to verify this conjecture. ***