* 9704199
* Optimal Control of PDEs, ODEs, and Variational Inequalities and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Suzanne Lenhart, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2001
* USD 57,510.00

9704199 Lenhart Optimal control of partial differential equations, ordinary
differential equations, and variational inequalities will be investigated. The
first area of research is the control of hybrid systems of partial differential
equations and ordinary differential equations, with applications in
bioremediation and population modeling. The second area is optimal control of
the obstacle in variational inequalities, with elliptic or fourth order
operators (involving biharmonic operators). The third area is the investigation
of optimal chemotherapy strategies in HIV models. First, the existence of an
optimal control must be shown for the models and objective functionals
appropriate to each application area. Secondly, this optimal control must be
characterized through necessary conditions from the derivation of an optimality
system, which is the state system coupled with an adjoint system. Due to the
variety of systems treated, existence, uniqueness, and characterization of the
optimal control requires new and different a priori estimates and convergence
arguments. For some of the applications, numerical simulations will be
completed. This research involves theory and applications of optimal control of
partial differential equations, ordinary differential equations, and variational
inequalities. The first application area is control of a bioremediation model
for encouraging the remediation of contaminants by metabolism of bacteria. The
level of the nutrient inputs is controlled to optimally run a bioreactor. The
approach will be lab tested on a gas phase bioreactor with pseudomonas putida
bacteria degrading paraxylene. Other population models will be investigated. The
second application area is the control of variational inequalities, which model
the designing of the shape of the membrane by controlling an obstacle put under
the membrane. These models arise in flow through porous media, hydrodynamic
lubrication, elasto-plastic analysis, continuous casting, and electrochemical
machining. The third application area is the design of optimal chemotherapies
for the treatment of HIV infection. The effect of a "cocktail of various drugs"
can be simulated for an immunology model involving CD4+T white blood cells and
the HIV virus. Also a model involving the time elapsed since the cells became
infected with HIV will be studied. Numerical simulations for the optimal control
and resulting controlled quantities (like CD4+T cells), will be completed using
realistic data.