* 9704495
* Statistical Integration and Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Art Owen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 180,000.00

Owen 9704495 This research investigates the use of statistical sampling ideas
in high dimensional numerical problems, particularly numerical integration and
approximation. Statistical thinking enters the picture because in high
dimensional problems one can get at most a sparse sample of the input space.
Surprising benefits can accrue: for example it is known that randomizing a low
discrepancy sequence can increase it's accuracy. For the case of numerical
integration, this project looks at adaptive importance sampling techniques in
which the function values themselves are used to adapt the sampling towards the
most relevant region of the input space, while maintaining a data based estimate
of integral accuracy. In the case of numerical approximation, this project will
apply recent progress in hybrid numerical integration methods to finding ways of
building sample based approximations of functions with data determined error
estimates. Numerical integration is a fundamental computational task with
applications in physics, chemistry, finance, statistics, and numerical
approximation. Numerical approximation is also fundamental, and the advent of
powerful and flexible computer simulators of scientific and engineering
phenomena can only increase the demand for computer experiment techniques based
on approximation. At present these computer models are widely used in the design
of computer chips, automobile parts, airplanes, and in global climate modeling.
These functions may take hours or even days of computer time and so finding fast
approximations (and estimating their accuracy) is important. Better exploration
of these functions, call it function mining, can lead to faster introduction and
greater reliability for new products. It can also be used to thoroughly explore
the predictions of models for environmental change and storage of nuclear
wastes.