* 9704935
* Mathematical Modeling of Sulfide Corrosion of Concrete      in Wastewater Collection Systems - Analysis, Experimental   Validation, Parameter Estimation and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Florian Mansfeld, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Rosen 9704935 Sulfide corrosion of concrete in wastewater collection systems
occurs when microorganisms in anaerobic films below the water surface produce
hydrogen sulfide. The sulfide evaporates into the atmosphere and redissolves in
moisture that has condensed on the portions of the pipe above the wastewater.
Microorganisms in this environment convert the sulfide to sulfuric acid. The
acid reacts with calcium hydroxide and calcium carbonate in the cement,
producing sulfate minerals and causing the concrete to corrode. The
investigators develop a mathematical model of the corrosion process that is
tuned, tested, identified and validated via field data and laboratory
experiment. The effort includes the analysis of the model equations (which take
the form of a system of coupled partial differential equations with moving or
free boundaries) from the point of view of well-posedness (existence,
uniqueness, regularity of weak, strong, local, global solutions, etc.) and the
sensitivity of solutions with respect to parameters. It also includes the
development, analysis and testing of efficient, convergent and robust numerical
integration schemes for numerical simulation, parameter estimation and control.
In addition to using available field data to verify the model, a laboratory
test-bed to provide additional data for model verification and parameter
estimation is designed and fabricated. Electrochemical techniques applied to
instrumented concrete samples are used to (i) characterize the concrete
structures using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and (ii) sense
the diffusion profiles of corrosive species. Correlation of the results of these
two studies allows investigation of relationships between concrete
microstructure and diffusion processes. Computational schemes are developed to
use the field and laboratory data to identify unmeasurable parameters that
appear in the model, and to test corrosion slowing control schemes based upon
the model. Sulfide corrosion causes millions of dollars in damage in the U.S.
each year. Attempts have been made to control sulfide corrosion in sewers. Most
try to prevent the release of hydrogen sulfide into the pipe atmosphere. Strong
base has been used to kill the biofilm, and cleaning has been used to remove it.
The addition of trace metals precipitates the sulfide, preventing its release to
the atmosphere. However, the biofilms are tenacious, and grow back rapidly,
requiring additional treatment. Any anti-biofilm treatment is constrained
because it must not damage the similar microorganisms that are the basis of the
wastewater treatment system. Chemical precipitation requires continuous
treatment. Any effort involving chemical addition must contend with the very
large volumes of water flowing through wastewater collection systems: no matter
how cheap the chemical, the colossal amounts that must be purchased and fed into
the system are expensive. Thus an effort to first understand and to then
interrupt (i.e. control) the corrosion process is needed, and may provide the
only possible remedy for some cases. The results of the study should yield a
deeper understanding of the corrosion process, and provide a powerful tool for
engineers to use in the design of concrete wastewater systems and in the
formulation, testing, tuning and evaluation of corrosion abatement procedures.
The model and results should guide improvements in protection techniques where
sulfide corrosion is a problem, and provide insight into the corrosion processes
of other concrete structures and the substantial damage caused. They could also
potentially reduce maintenance costs. The modeling ideas developed as a part of
this project should be transferable to other corrosion problems, and the
analytical and computational techniques that result should be of use in the area
of moving boundary problems, their analysis, numerical solution, identification
and control.