* 9704825
* Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Dusa McDuff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 319,200.00

9704825 McDuff One of the main tools that has recently revolutionized the study
of symplectic geometry is the use of analytic methods (non-linear versions of
the Cauchy-Riemann equations). In the past year, a serious technical problem in
this theory has been overcome, so that it now applies to all manifolds. In
collaboration with Lalonde and Polterovich, McDuff is applying this improved
theory to study properties of the group of diffeomorphisms of a manifold that
preserve its symplectic structure. This group has a subgroup of finite
codimension that is generated by Hamiltonian functions, but it is not known in
general whether this group is always closed in the full group. If it were, one
might be able to formulate a topological reason for a symplectomorphism to be
generated by a function (rather than a one-form). Another question that McDuff
is working on (in collaboration with Abreu) is the extent to which the
topological structure of the group of symplectomorphisms changes as the
underlying symplectic structure changes. A particularly simple version of this
problem appears when the underlying manifold is the product of two two-
dimensional spheres and one changes the relative size of the spheres. They have
shown that there is an even-dimensional cohomology class whose dimension jumps
up by four each time the size of the larger sphere increases by another unit.
They are working on understanding the mechanism that produces this behavior. A
symplectic structure is a very basic kind of geometric structure that underlies
almost all the equations of classical and quantum physics. In the last fifteen
years, new tools have been developed that allow mathematicians for the first
time to gain some understanding of the global meaning of this kind of structure.
The most significant developments of the past few years concern, on the one
hand, the elucidation of the structure of four-dimensional symplectic spaces
and, on the other, new understanding of the wa ys that one can move around in a
symplectic space. Together with Lalonde, McDuff completed the classification of
a specially simple kind of symplectic 4-manifold called a ruled surface and is
in the process of studying the structure of more complicated examples. She is
also investigating the question of how much energy it takes to achieve a
particular movement of space, and to find ways of estimating this energy on
curved manifolds. ***