* 9704694
* PostDoc: Parallel Search Algorithms for Automating the      Animation of Human Motion
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Jessica Hodgins, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 05/31/2001
* USD 46,200.00

9704694 Hodgins, Jessica K. Georgia Institute of Technology CISE Postdoctoral
Research Associates in Experimental CS: Parallel Search Algorithms for
Automating the Animation of Human Motion (This award supports CES associate
Nancy Pollard.) Realistic simulation of human motion remains an elusive goal.
Although recent systems have demonstrated dynamic tasks such as running,
cycling, diving, and vaulting, one specific flaw in most current systems is that
they cannot automatically adapt to changes in the simulated scenario. The goal
of this work is to develop efficient parallel algorithms for adapting
biomechanical simulations of human motion to changes in task conditions and to
changes in the size and proportions of a moving character. This research will
develop scaling laws and search procedures to automate adaptation of simulations
to a range of situations. The search techniques will be computationally
intensive due to the complexity of modeling and simulating human motion. As one
means of addressing this complexity, parallel search algorithms will be
implemented and tested on different hardware configurations to gain insight into
the effectiveness of various architectures for creating realistic simulations.
This research should contribute necessary data for the development of low-cost
parallel architectures that will make sophisticated human simulation
capabilities widely available to animators and researchers in fields ranging
from biomechanics and ergonomics to education and entertainment.