* 9704210
* Acquisition of an Advanced X-ray Diffractometer System,     Equipped with an Area Detector
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Angus Kingon, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9704210 Streiffer This award provides partial support through the Division of
Materials Research and the office of Multidisciplinary Activities for the
acquisition of a multiuser, four-circle x-ray diffractometer equipped with
parabolic condensing mirrors and an x-ray area detector. Such an instrument
presents the opportunity to perform significant novel, nontraditional
characterization of a wide variety of materials because of its configuration.
This instrument will benefit faculty and students in Materials Research, Nuclear
Engineering, Physics, and Chemical Engineering, and will provide training for
students. First, four rotation axes allow a sample to be arbitrarily positioned
in real space using three axes, while the diffracted radiation distribution is
scanned with the fourth axis. The ability to orient a sample in three dimensions
has become crucial as increasing physical anisotropy is routinely engineered
into bulk specimens and thin films, and as more single-crystal-like materials
are used in a wide range of applications. Second, parabolic, graded multilayer
x-ray optical elements allow collection of Cu, Ka radiation from a wide
acceptance angle followed by conversion into a parallel beam. The concomitant
increase in intensity relative to flat crystal optics along with a beam
divergence intermediate between that of parafocusing or slit optics and that of
multi-bounce monochromators yields a collimated, parallel beam that is ideally
suited for experiments performed on highly-oriented, but not epitaxial,
materials, and for experiments utilizing very low incident beam angles, namely
glancing incidence x-ray scattering and small angle x- ray scattering. Third,
area detection of the scattered radiation facilitates examination of large areas
of reciprocal space in an extremely time-efficient manner. This is of paramount
utility for any case in which there is complicated reciprocal space structure.
As examples, area detection great ly simplifies the collection of pole figures
from textured materials and the determination of diffraction peak shapes for
complex microstructures. This equipment is required to fulfill the general need
for advanced characterization in materials science and engineering. Current
materials research programs will be significantly impacted by the proposed
instrumentation. These include: (i) structural characterization of
multicomponent oxide thin films and heterostructures; (ii) investigation of
complex morphologies in block copolymers; (iii) characterization of
semiconductor thin film heterostructures; (iv) investigation of the effects of
texture on creep, deformation, fracture, and degradation of metals and alloys
targeted for use in aggressive environments, and (v) phase identification,
microstructure determination, and investigation of transformations in nanosized
powders and powder composites. There is great scientific and commercial interest
in each of these areas, and the capabilities provided by new diffraction
instrumentation will significantly extend the scientific contribution obtained
from existing funding sources. Finally, the importance of access to state-of-
the-art methodologies, as will be provided by such a diffractometer, is
emphasized for both graduate and undergraduate training. ***