* 9704471
* A Markov-Chain Model for Intergranular Stress Corrosion     Cracking
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Tamara Olson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 39,772.00

Olson 9704471 The proposed research develops a new model of intergranular stress
corrosion cracking of metals, based on measurable features of the
polycrystalline microstructure. In the model, the crack is viewed as proceeding
through a network of grain boundaries, causing failure when the crack percolates
through the material. The first phase of this project will be to compare various
models for interface energy. This analysis will largely be a statistical
analysis of data obtained from cracked samples, followed by a comparison and
modification of the existing interfacial energy models. Next, the model will be
used to compare the resistance to cracking of various microstructures. The
microstructures to be tested will include random textures, textures simulated
through numerical models of annealing, and textures from actual materials
measured by Brent Adams' experimental group at Carnegie Mellon University. The
results for textures from simulated processing models will predict the net
effect of material processing on material performance. The lifetime of many
engineering materials (for example, metals and metal alloys) is seriously
limited by their susceptibility to the phenomenon called stress corrosion
cracking. This type of failure occurs when the material is subject to a
combination of tensile stress and a corrosive element, leading to a crack which
propagates through the material and causes it to break. The main objective of
the proposed research is to develop and analyze a new model of intergranular
stress corrosion cracking. This model is used to predict the growth of cracks in
metals and metal alloys, and it is unique in that it incorporates measurable
microstructural information from the material. Because stress corrosion cracking
is a common and catastrophic phenomenon in certain materials, it would be
invaluable for engineers to be able to estimate a material's susceptibility to
cracking by measuring microstructure and u sing the model. In addition, if one
can correlate given processing techniques with the resulting microstructures,
one could then use this model to prescribe processes which would enhance
resistance to stress corrosion cracking.