* 9704225
* Development of a Variable Temperature, High Frequencey NMR  System for Materials Research
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Mark Meisel, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* None
* 06/30/2000
* USD 337,000.00

9704225 Meisel This award provides support to develop a new variable
temperature, high-frequency Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) instrument that
will be housed in the new physics building that is being constructed on the
Gainesville campus at the University of Florida. The device will have the
capability of providing a wide range of magnetic field (up to 8.5 T with 10-6
homogeneity) in a 50 mm clear bore at room temperature. A broadband high
frequency (5 to 350 MHz) spectrometer will be an integral part of the
instrument. A variety of probes will be developed to allow NMR to span
temperatures from 25 mK to 400 K. %%% This new instrument will serve as a tool
to probe the microscopic electromagnetic interactions that are fundamental to
our understanding of new low dimensional magnets (e.g. Haldane gap and spin-
ladder materials) and novel magnetic systems (e.g. Kondo insulators and
magnetic/nonmagnetic multilayers). In particular, the data provided by this
instrument may not be obtainable by any other known experimental probe. In
addition, when new extremes of magnetic field, temperature, and pressure seem to
be natural extensions of the research, the experiments may be continued at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). The system (especially the
spectrometer) is being designed in a manner which will make it compatible with
the instrumentation used at the NHMFL at higher frequencies and magnetic fields.
An important component of the proposed program is the education and training of
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students. Members of
the researcher team are trained in a variety of modern cross-disciplinary
fields, including (but not limited to) cryogenics, electronics, ultra-high
vacuum technology, NMR, macroscopic and microscopic surface science techniques,
and new chemical synthesis protocols. When the junior researchers leave the
group, they are prepared to tackle the heretofore unknown technic al and
scientific questions of the future. ***