* 9704746
* Mathematical Sciences: Surfactant Effects in Viscous        Fingering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9704746 Siegel The goal of the proposed project is to study the effects of
surfactant on free surface flows in their highly nonlinear regime. This includes
the time-dependent evolution of an interface that is severely deformed and
contains many excited wavelengths. Attention will be focused on a simple model
system, namely the displacement of a viscous fluid by a less viscous fluid in a
Hele-Shaw cell (a cell consisting of two closely spaced glass plates). The
interface between the fluids is subject to the Saffman-Taylor instability and
develops a finger-like pattern. This system serves as a model for flow through
porous media. Moreover, since the Saffman-Taylor instability is an undesirable
phenomena in crude oil recovery, the problem is industrially important. The main
emphasis will be on examining the effects of surfactants on steady and time-
dependent finger patterns, and their role in enhancing or suppressing finger-tip
splitting and side-branching instabilities. This differs from studies of
surfactant effects in most other systems, since typically the free surfaces are
assumed to be fixed in space or only slightly deformed, or close to a steady
state configuration. Methods employed will include asymptotic analysis and
numerical simulation. The practical goal of such studies is to control the size
and shape of fingers, in the hopes of enhancing oil recovery. Free surface
motions, such as waves on water or bubbles rising in a liquid, are important in
many areas of science and engineering. A number of modern technological
processes involve free surface flows. Examples include coating processes, ink
jet printing processes, and oil recovery. The presence of surfactant on a free
surface can significantly affect the properties of the surface. Common
surfactants include detergents, fatty acids, and alcohols. Even very small
amounts of surfactant can cause significant variation in the value of surface
tension at a fluid-fluid interface. Thi s can have a dramatic influence on the
evolution of the free surface. Such effects are particularly important during
materials processing in the microgravity environment of space. Understanding the
role of surface tension variations in interfacial evolution will hopefully lead
to better control of free surface motion in engineering applications.