* 9704852
* The Numerical Solution of Elliptic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Seymour Parter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2000
* USD 17,280.00

9704852 Parter These investigations will focus on three specific projects: (1)
First Order Systems Least Square (FOSLS) methods with a special emphasis on
problems in elasticity, (2) the general over-lapping grid problem, and (3)
preconditioning strategies for Spectral Collocation Methods. At this time
computational methods for problems in elasticity are primarily based on mixed
methods which lead to indefinite problems which have proven difficult to solve.
The FOSLS approach leads to large systems which are generally much easier to
solve. However, despite the efforts of several independent groups, a useful
FOSLS formulation of the elasticity problems for general boundary conditions is
still a major problem. The overlapping grid method has proven itself an
effective tool for problems set in regions with complicated geometry. Further,
the analysis of these methods has been lacking until a recent breakthrough for
difference equations of positive type. Since there are limitations on the order
of accuracy of such difference methods there is a need for further analysis.
Spectral Collocation methods are extremely accurate and very badly conditioned.
Hence preconditioning strategies are essential. There are over twenty-five years
of experience and study of preconditioning methods. And, still, there is a need
for better approaches. Moreover, the mathematical justification for some of
these methods is incomplete. The basic theme of this research can be stated
simply "Find effective numerical methods to solve the important boundary-value
problems of mechanics and material science, and provide mathematical proofs of
their validity." In the problems of elasticity most of the methods now in use
are expensive to implement. Hence, a new formulation is sought which will
provide accurate approximations which can be computed at a reasonable cost. In
the other two cases one is dealing with established methods which are either
difficult to impleme nt or whose mathematical basis is incomplete. This research
is aimed at a more complete mathematical understanding which will both clarify
the existing methods and provide a basis for the development of new, more
effective methods.