* 9704101
* Design of Mobile Computing and Communication Systems with   Mobile Base Stations
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Ravi Prakash, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1999
* USD 112,548.00

Most existing models of mobile computing systems assume the presence of
stationary base stations connected by a high bandwidth wireline network
backbone. Such systems are not suitable for digital battlefield situations and
emergency response operations. Hence, there is a need for mobile computing
systems with mobile base stations. The flexibility and robustness of such
systems is at the cost of increased complexity. Some of the problems that arise
are: (i) Difficulty in providing cellular coverage to the entire service area
all the time. (ii) Changing configuration of cells complicates wireless channel
allocation. Also, some wireless channels are needed for communication links
between the mobile base stations. (iii) Mobile base stations and the backbone
links between them are resource poor compared to their static counterparts. (iv)
Changing cellular configuration makes location management and communication
handoffs between cells more complicated. In order to solve some of the problems
mentioned above, a five step approach will be adopted: (i) Formalization of a
taxonomy of mobile computing systems based on the mobility pattern of base
stations. (ii) Development of stochastic models with different base station
mobility characteristics. (iii) Employment of analytical results in the
development ofdistributed algorithms for cell planning, channel allocation,
location management, and handoff management. (iv) Simulation experiments to
measure the performance of these algorithms. (v) Software implementations of the
algorithms. Time and resource permitting, the software solutions will be ported
to off-the-shelf computation and wireless communication devices.***