* 9704714
* Applied Mathematics, Modeling, and Experimental and  Computational Analysis of Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Simon Tavener, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 229,133.00

Calderer 9704714 This project being jointly funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and by the Division of Mathematical Sciences of the
Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences and also by the Division of
Civil and Mechanical Systems of the Directorate for Engineering. The proposed
research addresses and combines mathematical and computational issues in the
study of "liquid crystals" and "ferroic materials", both solids and fluids,
within the context of industrial applications. One underlying theme of this
proposal is to develop an understanding of static and flow patterns observed in
liquid crystals and ferroic materials in the presence of external fields. (For
instance, in dealing with ferroic solids, a goal is to achieve lower critical
values of coercive fields in order to curb dissipation; in ferroelectric liquid
crystals one also seeks to increase device switching speed.) While the
occurrence of "texture" and "defects" tends to hinder the outcome of structural
manufacturing processes, it may also bring out desirable features in optic
applications, such as improvement of the accuracy and display memory of the
devices. Within this framework, one can formulate a relevant common problem in
terms of the control of texture and defects in solid and liquid crystal systems,
with either the intent to enhance such structures or to eliminate them. It is
the goal of this research team to contribute towards the understanding of such
questions by exploring a broad spectrum of methods and techniques: modeling,
mathematical, computational and experimental in liquid crystal and ferroic
systems as a whole. It is planned to revise and, perhaps, unify some of the
available descriptions so that the ferroelectric nature can be understood in a
more universal manner. Such a study could ultimately suggest a way of designing
new and better ferroelectric materials (solids and/or liquid crystals) with
"large polarization" and "small coerci ve fields". This proposal also addresses
aspects of (non-Newtonian) liquid crystal flow such as defects and instabilities
of various regimes. Special attention will be devoted to the analysis of
processing flows of thin films as well as to the study of free-boundary
problems. Results from singularity and bifurcation theory, and an appreciation
of the role played by symmetry, have been integrated within the finite-element
technique to establish the fundamental instability mechanisms of a number of
classical Newtonian flows. These numerical techniques are now mature enough to
apply to the study of more technologically important flows with more complex
physics and multiple parameters. The proposed research deals with mathematical
and computational modeling of "liquid crystals" and "ferroic materials" (both,
solids and liquids), within the context of their industrial applications. In
dealing with liquid crystals we intend to construct and analyze mathematical
models of "smart display devices", involving ferroelectric systems as well as
composites. The main goal is to preserve good optical resolution with increasing
display sizes, and achieve low switching values of electricor magnetic fields.
As part of our research plan, we intend to draw already existing mathematical
and physical information from the field of ferroic solids, in order to help us
in the studies of ferroelectric liquid crystals. In turn, the ordering
properties and larger degrees of freedom of liquid molecules may provide good
feedback for improving the modeling and design of ferroelectric "sensors" and
"transducers", with the special aim towards miniaturization of such devices. One
of the main issues of our research is to study how to use polymeric liquid
crystal materials to design typically solid devices. (The former materials are
often cheaper to manufacture and to activate). From a different point of view,
mathematical problems in flow modeling of ferroelectric liquids arise in the
manufacturing processes of such materials, and bring a whole new class of
mathematical questions that relate to those that traditionally arise in studies
of Newtonian fluid flow. Overall, we intend to bring together independent fields
of research and carry out a transfer of mathematical and computational methods
among them based on exploiting physical and phenomenological analogies.