* 9704126
* SBIR PHASE II:  New Architectures and Applications of       Multiwavelength Optical Networks using Waveguide Grating    Routers
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/09/1998
* Kelvin Chau, Optivision Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/09/1998
* USD 251,891.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Optivision,
Incorporated will demonstrate the advantages of wavelength routing in
telecommunication networks through the prototyping of an integrated optical
add/drop multiplexing (OADM) system which combines waveguide grating routers
(WGRS) with network management and control functionality. The prototype OADM
system, including an electronic control board, will serve as the basic platform
to experiment and evaluate solutions to system issues, especially on network
management and control. The continued investigation of network architectures
that incorporate wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) network system elements
will explore opportunities for interconnecting the prototype OADM with other
network systems for commercial/testbed deployment. The Phase I effort of this
SBIR identified the optical crossconnect (OXC) and the optical add/drop
multiplexer (OADM) as two important system elements in multiwavelength
telecommunication transport networks. Different system architectures were
designed utilizing the unique wavelength routing capability of the waveguide
grating router (WGR) device. Optivision also identified a set of system issues
that are critical to the successful commercial applications of WDM systems,
including network control and management, network restoration strategy, and
network architectures that interwork with existing equipment. Solutions to these
issues are currently open research topics and are expected to comprise a
significant part of the proposed Phase II research effort. The project will
produce a prototype 4-wavelength optical add/drop multiplexer, the optical
performance measurement results, the specification for network management and
control functions, algorithms and analytical results for wave-length assignment,
and a set of recommendations on network interconnection architectures and
automatic fault-recovery mechanisms. The proposed optical add/drop multiplexer
(OADM) has enormous potential applications in telecommunication infrastructure.
By integrating the unique feature of waveguide grating router (WGR) devices with
management and control functions, results from this research effort can be
utilized in (WDM) network testbeds as well as commercial networking
environments. The proposed wavelength routing technology, if successful, will
benefit the nation in the cost-effective realization and management of
wavelength routing in the next generation multiwavelength telecommunication
transport networks.