* 9704070
* Acquisition of a High Temperature Thermogravimetric/Differential Analyzer (TGA/DTA) for Fundamental Materials           Synthesis Kinetic Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1999
* USD 61,058.00

9704070 Weimer This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a
thermogravimetric/ differential analyzer to be used for fundamental materials
synthesis reaction kinetic studies of nitrides at high temperatures. The basic
kinetic studies will be on the synthesis of nitrides, carbides, borides, and
other bulk powders as well as nitride films deposited on substrates. The system
will be capable of measuring powder, granular and solid materials in alumina,
graphite, and platinum crucibles. Synthesis studies will include carbothermal
reduction, direct nitridation, and gas phase reactions. The combination of high
temperature synthesis studies to be carried out on large samples to allow for
sufficient sampling of the materials for analysis. This capability is important
for advancing our knowledge of nitrides, which have higher thermal capacities
than silicon based materials, and have optical-photonic importance for
communications. %%% This equipment award will support the research program for
the investigation of the mechanism and kinetics for the synthesis of nitride,
carbide, boride, and other non-oxide materials using high temperature
thermogravimetric/differential analyzer. The instrument will provide a
combination of high temperature with large loading capacity which is unique
compared with conventional equipment, and will allow fundamental high
temperature synthesis studies to be carried out on large samples, allowing for
sufficient sampling of the material for analysis. The production of nitride
powders is currently limited. There is considerable technological interest in
producing structures with nitrides, and some recent examples of success. This
capability is important for advancing our knowledge of nitrides, which have
higher thermal capacities than silicon based materials, and have optical-
photonic importance for communications. ***