* 9704407
* Dissertation Research:  Constructing Palmarino Identity:    The Archaeology and History of Palmares, a 17th-century     Brazilian Quilombo
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Shepard Krech III, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Shepard Krech III, Mr. Scott Allen will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
Macaco, the seventeenth century 'capital' of the Palmares which is located on
the Serra da Barriga, a mountain in Alagoas, Brazil. The Palmares were fugitive
slaves who fled colonial plantations and established their own society which
developed and survived for approximately 100 years. The Palmares successfully
repelled repeated attacks by the Dutch, before finally falling to the
Portuguese. Although the Palmares left no written record, they are described in
several colonial documents which provide (a likely biased) insight into their
political and social organization. It appears that over a century of independent
existence the group melded original African elements with knowledge acquired on
plantations and contact with indigenous native Americans to forge a new culture.
Through his excavations at Palmares Mr. Allen will examine the material
byproducts of this process. He will focus on changes in pottery manufacture and
use, housing construction and spatial patterning in terms of village layout and
activity areas. Archaeologists have come to realize that cultural entities are
often short-lived phenomena and that humans can redefine social boundaries with
surprising rapidity. This contrasts to older models which recognized that
groups, although they change over time, have considerable long-term integrity in
terms of both boundaries and membership. `Ethnogenesis` refers to the process of
ethnic group emergence and the Palmares provide an excellent case study for this
since their history is known in broad outline. It is not understood however how
the Palmares were able to develop a distinct identity over a short period of
time, how they melded together elements from different cultural traditions and
how this identity was expressed in material terms. Mr. Allen's research should
shed significant light on this process. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide new insight into a little understood aspect of New
World history and provide information of interest to both archaeologists and
historians. It will also increase the understanding of a basic process which
took place many times in different parts of the world and, through a study of
material culture, provide archaeologists with new analytic techniques. The work
will also assist in training a promising young scientist.