* 9704325
* Research on Applied Nonlinear Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Victor Roytburd, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 110,000.00

9704325 Roytburd The proposed investigations address two areas of applied
mathematics that are both related to nonlinear wave propagation. One topic
concerns the study of a class of free boundary (free interface) problems which
arise naturally as simplified conceptual models of gasless combustion and fast
solidification. These free boundary problems demonstrate an amazing variety of
dynamical patterns that are essentially low-dimensional. The qualitative
behavior of these model problems will be investigated both analytically and
numerically. The principal focus will be on propagation in two spatial
dimensions. Another topic is drawn from the field of nonlinear optics. It
concerns the model laser dynamics which is described by the Maxwell-Bloch system
of partial differential equations. The main thrust of the proposed research will
be at establishing well-posedness for the Maxwell-Bloch equations with detuning
and broadening, evaluation of the attractor dimension, and the rigorous study of
the homoclinic chaos. A numerical investigation of laser turbulence is also
planned. The proposed research is motivated by technological applications. One
immediately related technological process is the self-propagating high
temperature synthesis (SHS). The SHS process is currently being investigated as
a new method of manufacturing certain ceramic and metallic alloys. The idea of
the process is to combine the powdered ingredients and bake them into the
desired product by sending a flame wave through the sample. The SHS process has
a number of advantages over the traditional manufacturing methods in which the
mixture is baked in a furnace: more uniform and pure products, shorter synthesis
times, use of simpler and cheaper equipment etc. The source of the second
proposed research topic lies in laser optics, namely basic dynamics of gaseous
lasers that find a wide variety of applications. The goal of the proposed
mathematical investigations is twofold. On one hand, through the study of
special extreme regimes which are undesirable in technological applications, we
propose to develop simplified diagnostic tools that will allow to predict and
avoid these undesirable (chaotic) regimes. On the other hand, the study of the
extreme regimes will further the better understanding of basic mechanisms that
govern the technological regimes and therefore will promote their better control
and utilization. The research will be conducted through a combination of
analytical methods and computer simulations. The analysis will help to delineate
crucial regimes and their logical structure, while the simulations will uncover
details which are not amenable to analytical methods and, in their own turn, can
lead to important mathematical developments.