* 9704934
* Bayesian Preposterior Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Peter Mueller, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 146,326.00

DMS-9704934 BAYESIAN PREPOSTERIOR SIMULATION Peter Mueller Duke Univiversity We
expand the ambit of methods and programs developed for posterior simulation to
expected utility maximization. The main tool is simulation in an augmented
probability model. For expected utility maximization the original probability
model on parameters and data is augmented to an artificial probability model on
decision variables, model parameters and data. The augmented probability model
is chosen such that the marginal distribution on the decision parameters is
proportional to expected utility, and thus the mode of this marginal
distribution corresponds to the optimal design. We develop novel Markov chain
Monte Carlo techniques amenable to simulation from this auxiliary probability
model and investigate algorithms for mode estimation in a possibly high
dimensional distribution based on a simulated Monte Carlo sample. The Bayesian
framework provides coherent support for decision making through an iterative
cycle of problem structuring, uncertainty modeling, preference modeling,
expected utility maximization and sensitivity analysis. Recent computational
developments in statistics (the Gibbs sampler, stochastic substitution sampling)
have significantly widened the range of models used for uncertainty modeling. We
study the use of these methods in other parts of the decision making cycle, in
particular expected utility maximization and preference modeling. The
investigated methods are simulation based and highly computational intensive and
require state of the art computer simulation, relating to the Federal Strategic
Area of high performance computing. The impact of the research is to widen the
class of problems where expected utility maximization, i.e., formal solution of
decision problems, is practically feasible in a way similar to how Gibbs
sampling and related techniques have made complex probability models accessible
for uncertainty model ing.