* 9704072
* SBIR PHASE II: Low Energy X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometry   Using a Polycapillary X-Ray Focusing Optic
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Qi-Fan Xiao, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 299,281.00

Xiao 9704072 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a surface-sensitive low-energy-X-ray-fluorescence (LEXRF) instrument to
meet the thin film metrology needs prioritized in the National Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors. The continued increase of device densities in
silicon-based integrated circuits requires more deposition steps of thinner
films, which in turn demands better metrology for process development and
quality control. During the Phase II program, a LEXRF instrument will be
constructed which includes a polycapillary optic designed in Phase I to collect
a large solid angle of X-rays and focus them onto a sample to increase the X-ray
intensity by two orders of magnitude. The focused beam provides submillimeter
spatial resolution in measuring various thin films important to the
semiconductor industry. The last phase of the program will demonstrate the
capabilities of the LEXRF system at a major semiconductor tool company. The
commercial potential of the proposed LEXRF instrument lies in its ability to
provide elemental and thickness analysis to identify defective thin film
deposition processes at the earliest opportunity, thus avoiding the considerable
financial loss associated with rejections at the end of the production line. The
proposed LEXRF system will also provide feedback to fine-tune the deposition
process on a continual basis to increase the production yield.
p:/sbir/yhashimi/abstracts/9704072.doc