* 9704951
* Cooperative Games
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* T.E.S. Raghavan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2001
* USD 126,000.00

Raghavan DMS 9704951 Cooperative Games NSF Abstract The proposal addresses
algorithmic problems of cooperative and noncooperative dynamic games.
Cooperative Games: How should the common costs be allocated fairly among the
benefeciaries of a joint enterprise is a basic problem widespread in both
private firms and in public enterprises. While cost accountants and
practitioners have stuck to a few cost allocation practises , these procedures
are being questioned by researchers especially by game theorists who would like
the procedures to be fair, equitable and reflective of the decision makers power
and influence in steering the course of actions. Cooperative game theory
addresses precisely these issues. Till recently game theorists have been
proposing many solutions without any efficient solution technique to solve for
them. Often many practical cost allocation problems and profit sharing problems
can be modeled as games whose essential coalitions grow only polynomially with
he size of the player set. The project is aimed at developing efficient
algorithms that will solve for the nucleolus and the Shapley value for many
models. Stochastic games: In the area of stochastic games the aim is to study
non-zero sum games in limiting average payoffs for finite and arbitrary state
spaces and to look for correlated and Nash equilibria. Unlike zero-sum games,
non-zero sum structured stochastic games may not possess even epsilon
-stationary Nash equilibria in limiting average payoff. Even more important is
to develop allgorithms to locate Nash equilibria, at least for structured
stochastic games. Increasingly industries and organizations and even federal
funding agencies want to measure the contributions of joint efforts. In
environmental problems accurately allocating costs or fines for industrial
pollutions will be possible with cooperative game theoretic solutions. In civil
law suits and in divorce law suits, the ad hoc but intuitively appealing
decisions by judges based on the individual cases can be backed up by
quantifiable approaches using cooperative game theoretic solutions. The
strategic behavior of price wars by airlines, the tax evasion and auditing by
tax offices, auto manufacturing competitions can all be analyzed using
stochastic game theoretic methods and models. The solutions backed up by
efficient algorithms for computation is essential for the applicability of Game
Theory to real life problems.