* 9704228
* Development of a Novel 67ZN Mossbauer Spectrometer for      Basic Materials Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/2001
* USD 307,350.00

9704228 Boolchand This award provides partial support for implementing a new
concept of a 67Zn M ssbauer spectrometer which will yield significantly larger
(at least a factor of 20) signal to noise ratios than hitherto possible using
standard velocity drives in transmission measurements of materials. The novel
features of the present concept includes (a) use of a phase modulation drive
which avoids any relative motion between source and absorber matrix, and (b)
time-filter the re-emitted radiation to discriminate the short lived (10-12s)
non-resonant radiation from the long-lived (10-5s) resonant one to enhance the
signal to noise ratio. Feature (a) will be implemented by using a rotating wheel
consisting of Al wedges which interrupt the -beam from a source to modulate the
energy with respect to a stationary absorber. Feature (a) will also permit
region of interest velocity scans, an option that will permit a more efficient
collection of information with the short-lived M ssbauer parents (67Ga and
67Cu). Feature (b) will be implemented by using a shutter wheel with narrow
slits, that will block the -beam from the source while a scintillation detector
registers the re- emitted -rays and conversion electrons from the absorber.
Implementation of these features at 4.2K will be done by supporting the wheels
in an exchange gas column of a liquid Helium dewar. The project will demonstrate
the enormous cost advantage of obtaining Zn spectra using the new spectrometer
and should make possible obtaining spectra of Zn compounds of normal enrichment.
Such an experimental facility will have important consequences in the field of
basic materials research. High resolution studies of Zn based inorganic
compounds in absorption and Cu- and Ga-based compounds in emission spectroscopy
will permit addressing outstanding materials science issues in a wide variety of
materials including II-VI, III-V and II-IV-V2 semiconductors, cuprate
superconductors, galvanization of steels, Zn-ferrites, Zn-spinels and zinc based
enzymes.