* 9704643
* Bridging The Gap Between Heuristic and Exact Approaches     in Process Systems Engineering via Analytical Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Nikolaos Sahinidis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2001
* USD 152,905.00

Abstract - Sahinidis - 9704643 There are two approaches to process synthesis and
optimization - heuristic and analytical. Heuristics offer fast solutions but do
not guarantee optimality. Analytical integer programming approaches offer rigor
but suffer combinatorial explosion of computational requirements (i.e. as the
problems become larger, the solutions become computationally too large for most
systems). This project will pursue analytical investigations as a theoretical
means to characterize the behavior of heuristics and optimization algorithms and
produce a framework that combines the strengths of the two approaches while
eliminating their weaknesses. Preliminary results demonstrate the proposed
paradigm in the context of the multi-period capacity expansion problem for
chemical process networks. The multi-period aspects of it makes this problem
similar to discrete-time scheduling. The same problem requires optimizing a
superstructure as in synthesis problems. Analytical investigations for this
problem lead to the development of a heuristic which is proved to be
asymptotically optimal under standard assumptions about the problem parameters.
In the more general scope of process synthesis and operations, analytical
investigations present a large array of opportunities. The work planned will
deal explicitly with problems in (I) multi-period process operations, (ii)
synthesis of heat exchanger networks, and (iii) synthesis of separation
networks. The PI's efforts will be directed towards (1) determining the
computational complexity of these problems, (2) analyzing the worst case and
expected behavior of existing heuristics, and (3) developing new, mathematical
programming-based, polynomial time heuristics that are optimal in a statistical
sense.