* 9704372
* Algebraic Aspects of Dimension
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Jerzy Dydak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 09/30/2000
* USD 31,623.00

One of the most intuitive geometric concepts is that of dimension. While it is
very easy for a non-mathematician to guess the dimension of a particular
geometric object, it is fairly difficult to define the dimension in a formal,
rigorous way. The first mathematical definition of dimension arises in linear
algebra. From that definition one easily understands that the dimensions of the
line, the plane, and the 3-space are respectively 1,2, and 3. Ever since the
formation of topology as an offshoot of analysis, mathematicians attempted to
define dimension in a non-algebraic way. The most intuitive such definition is
the so-called small inductive dimension ind(X) of a space X. Essentially, ind(X)
at most n means that open sets U with boundary of dimension at most (n-1) form a
basis of X. Extension dimension theory is a general theory of dimension in which
spaces are not parametrized by natural numbers. Instead, they are parametrized
by CW complexes. In this theory dim(X) being at most K means that K is an
absolute extensor of X. In particular, dim(X) is at most the n-dimensional
sphere S(n) if and only if the covering dimension of X is at most n. dim(X)=K
means that K is minimal with respect to all L such that dim(X) is at most L. It
turns out that extension dimension encompasses both the covering dimension and
the cohomological dimension. It is rich in interplay between geometry and
algebra which, to the Principal Investigator, is the cornerstone of all
mathematics. In the case of finite-dimensional compacta one has an associated
algebraic object called the Bockstein algebra. There is a dual theory to
extension dimension which deals with CW complexes and in the case of countable
CW complexes there is an associated algebraic object called the dual Bockstein
algebra. This project involves the study of 'dimension.' The need to study
objects of various dimensions is not unique to mathematics alone. The perception
of the dimension of the basic object we live in, the Universe, has undergone
signi ficant changes over time. In Newtonian mechanics, the Universe is assumed
to be 3-dimensional; Einstein added one more dimension (time). Currently
theoretical physicists ponder various models of the Universe aimed at unifying
gravity and quantum mechanics; in some models the Universe is of dimension 10
while in others its dimension is 26.