* 9704290
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Understanding of the Behavior of Pyroclastic Flow Through Experiment and Model
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,01/31/1999
* James Vallance, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1999
* USD 38,300.00

9704290 Vallance The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty - four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit
by Dr. James W. Vallance to work with Dr. Stuart B. Savage at McGill University
in Montreal, Canada. Dr. Vallance will be studying the behavior of pyroclastic
flows focusing on simulation and modelling. Pyroclastic flows are hot, dry flows
of particles and gas with a high concentration of particles. This project will
encompass all parts of a flow, including a hot, non- to partly fluidized, dense,
basal avalanche having a concentration of particles similar to that of the
original deposit, an overriding turbulent ash cloud surge with a very low
particle concentration, and a convecting ash cloud. The study focuses, however,
on the granular basal avalanche. These flows destroy property and kill hundreds
of people yearly. This project will combine the talents of a field oriented
geologist, experienced in volcanic hazard assessment and mechanics, with a
professor of civil engineering, internationally respected in grain-flow
mechanics and modelling, at McGill. ***