* 9704033
* Japan JSPS Program:  Post-Fordist Manufacturing and its     Exploitation by Architects
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Dana Buntrock, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 3,000.00

Buntrock 9704033 This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Dana Buntrock at the Center
for Collaborative Research of the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Professor
Buntrock will work with Dr. Terunobu Fujimori, Professor of the Center for
Collaborative Research and of the Institute of Industrial Science at the
University of Tokyo, on a research project entitled, "Studying Post-Fordist
Manufacturing and its Exploitation by Architects." Post-Fordism - identified by
increased flexibility, adaptability, and efficiency in the manufacturing process
that allows for variable control in production output - has evolved by and large
outside North America, and as such its implications for architectural practice
are not presently understood by North American architectural professionals. As
systems of flexible production developed in Japan much earlier than they did in
North America, it is possible to project opportunities for North American
architects to exploit Post-Fordist techniques by studying the manner in which
architects, contractors, and manufacturers work in tandem in Japan. The proposed
research will explore the process of innovation in Japan that occurs between
architects, contractors, and manufacturers and will compare the relative
effectiveness of this interaction with that which is now occurring in the United
States. The goal of the research is to obtain insights into the Post-Fordist
manufacturing process that will provide immediate and useful advantages to the
United States. ***