* 9704939
* Boundaries of Nonpositively Curved Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Kim Ruane, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9704939 Ruane An important class of groups for which geometric ideas have proven
useful is the class of word hyperbolic groups proposed by M. Gromov. These are
groups which discretely approximate a geometry more like that of the hyperbolic
plane than the Euclidean plane. It is currently of interest to extend this well-
developed theory of word hyperbolic groups to the ``nonpositively curved''
setting. Just as word hyperbolic groups are a generalization of the classical
hyperbolic groups, finitely generated free groups, and certain small
cancellation groups, there should be a general class of nonpositively curved
groups that includes finitely generated free abelian groups, more general small
cancellation groups, and fundamental groups of Riemannian manifolds of
nonpositive curvature. Recently, there have been several proposed classes of
nonpositively curved groups. One such class consists of groups that arise via
geometric actions on ``CAT(0)'' spaces. These are spaces which enjoy many of the
same geometric properties of universal covers of Riemannian manifolds of
nonpositive curvature. Both the Euclidean and hyperbolic planes are examples of
CAT(0) spaces. The boundary of a CAT(0) space which admits a geometric group
action is an object of great interest in the area. Recently, several important
problems in group theory have been solved with the use of geometric methods. For
word hyperbolic groups, the boundary has proven a useful tool. Many of the
theorems which hold in that setting should have generalizations to the
nonpositively curved setting, and that is the point of view taken here. It is
already known that replacing the phrase ``word hyperbolic'' with ``CAT(0)'' in
many of these theorems is not going to work, but finding the right theorems is
an important step in unifying the theory of nonpositively curved groups, much
like the theory of nonpositively curved manifolds. The basic idea of Geometric
Group Theory is to study the structure of an infinite group G by studying
``geometric'' actions of G on different geometries. In this way, any such group
is viewed as a set of rigid motions of a geometry. An example to keep in mind is
that of the Euclidean plane. This is a geometry whose boundary can be identified
with the unit circle, where each point of the circle represents a direction in
the plane which heads out to infinity. A rigid motion in a straight line is
known as a translation. This space (the plane) may be acted upon by translations
in any direction, but translations in two independent directions will suffice to
give all of them. Thus two (commuting) copies of the group of integers can be
thought of as acting on the plane by translation. In fact, this geometric setup
determines this group almost uniquely. In general, when a group acts
geometrically on a geometry, there is a ``picture'' of the group inside the
space created by following the image of one point under all of the group
elements. Then the group, which started out as an abstract mathematical object,
can be studied by studying the geometry of the space, where the problems are now
geometric instead of algebraic. In the example above, the group consists of
moves from one square to another on an infinite chess board. The collection of
moves may then be given a concrete geometric picture by indentifying each square
with its center, the totality of moves becoming a lattice that discretely
approximates the plane. ***