* 9704703
* Postdoc: Data-Flow Testing for Difficult-To-Find Bugs
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Barbara Ryder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 33,168.00

9704703 Ryder, Barbara G. Rutgers University CISE Postdoctoral Research
Associates in Experimental CS :Data-Flow Testing for Difficult-to-Find Bugs
Data-flow coverage criteria are heuristics for judging the quality of software
test suites and determining when enough testing has been done. The analysis
required for data-flow testing of programs in languages such as C is currently
impractical on large programs. Achieving near 100% satisfaction of the coverage
requirements constitutes the real expense of data-flow testing. However, this is
not necessarily related to the real expense of testing, which is looking for the
difficult-to-find bugs. With the hypothesis that difficult-to-find bugs are
correlated with statement hazard level, statement hazard is introduced to
measure the unexpected effects of executing a program statement. Preliminary
experiments indicate that a small proportion of program statements are highly
hazardous. Hazard of a side-effect is defined as the degree to which its side-
effects are unexpected by the programmer. Thus, experiments to determine the
relation between hazardous statements and bug detection are described. These
experiments build on other successful experiments in analyzing data-flow testing
effectiveness, but additionally pay special attention to those bugs that are
difficult to find. Determining the correlation between hazardous statements and
difficult-to-find bugs will improve the effectiveness of data-flow testing and
reduce its cost, making data-flow testing feasible in an industrial environment.