* 9704776
* Topics in Dynamical Systems, Ergodic Theory and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Anatole Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2000
* USD 282,476.00

The project covers a classification of Anosov (normally hyperbolic) and certain
classes of partially hyperbolic actions of higher-rank commutative groups, both
discrete and continuous, on compact manifolds, classification of several classes
of smooth actions of lattices in higher-rank semi-simple Lie groups, a
systematic study of invariant measures for Anosov and partially hyperbolic
algebraic actions of discrete and continuous higher-rank abelian groups,
development of a general theory of hyperbolic measures for actions of higher-
rank abelian groups, and developments of a uniform theory of invariant
distributions for various classes of dynamical systems. Among the principal
tools are smooth ergodic theory (Lyapunov characteristic exponents and non-
uniform hyperbolicity), the theory of non-stationary normal forms, geometric
super-rigidity and the theory of group representations. The theory of dynamical
systems is the mathematical foundation of the rapidly developing fields of non-
linear dynamics and chaos theory which provides these fields with their
principal paradigms and tools of rigorous analysis. Those paradigms in turn play
a key role in the development and analysis of mathematical models for numerous
problems within natural and social sciences and engineering. The standard setup
in dynamics considers time as one-dimensional, either discrete or continuous.
One of the central conclusions is that in a variety of situations, the orbit
structure is rich and its robust features can be described by well-understood
symbolic models. The research under the present grant looks at the situation
when the time is multi-dimensional while the phase space is still finite-
dinemsional, i.e. the state of a system under consideration can be described by
a finite set of numerical parameters. The leading paradigms in these cases turn
out to be strikingly different. On the one hand, the symbolic models are no
longer valid. On the other, the orbit structure turn out to be "rigid", i.e. not
only its robust f eatures, but much more subtle structure, including the fine
statistics of asymptotic behavior, do not change under perturbations. The
project intends to identify and systematically study a set of "universal models"
which replace the symbolic models in the case of one-dimensional time.