* 9704417
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Geometry of Kernel Subgroups    of Nonpositively Curved Cube Complex Groups
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/23/1999
* Noel Brady, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/23/1999
* USD 70,796.00

9704417 Brady The investigator of this project will study the geometric and
finiteness properties of kernel subgroups of the fundamental groups of
nonpositively curved cube complexes. A combinatorial version of Morse theory
applied to cube complexes may be used to analyze the finiteness properties of
the kernels of right-angled Artin groups. Some of these kernels have remarkable
finiteness properties. A major goal of this project is to study the geometry and
topology of these kernels. It is hoped that these groups contain examples which
distinguish between geometric and cohomological dimension, and examples which
distinguish between combable and automatic groups. It is also worth considering
more general settings in which the Morse theory arguments may be applied, and
what information these ideas may yield in the study of the coherency question
for various classes of groups. Another interesting direction to investigate is
whether the Morse techniques may be combined with branched covering techniques
to produce examples of torsion-free groups that do not contain free abelian
subgroups of rank 2, and that are of type FP(n) but not FP(n+1). The main
objects under investigation in this project are piecewise euclidean cubical
complexes. These may be thought of as constructed from regular euclidean squares
and cubes, neatly stitched together along their faces and edges. Such complexes
have symmetry groups, which may be thought of as generalizations of the
wallpaper pattern groups, or of the 3-dimensional crystallographic groups one
encounters in the study of lattices in chemistry. The main purpose of this
research is to examine subgroups of these symmetry groups. One technique is to
introduce height functions on the cubical complexes and to look at the subgroups
consisting of all those symmetries that preserve the `contour lines' or level
sets of such functions. These constant-height slices often exhibit remarkable
geometric patterns that are far f rom obvious when one looks just at the ambient
cubical complex. The subgroups of symmetries that preserve these slices have
very different algebraic and geometric properties from those one encounters in
the euclidean crystallographic world. These examples help deepen our
understanding of the concept of geometric symmetry. ***