* 9704103
* SBIR PHASE II: Biosensors for Trichloroethylene (TCE)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Phase II SBIR project involves the development and testing of biosensors
to measure trichloroethylene (TCE) in groundwater. During Phase I, TCE reporter
strains were constructed by fusing a TCE-inducible transcriptional promoter from
Pseudomonas mendocina KRl to a bioluminescence gene cassette. The reporter
strains produced light in the presence of TCE, and the amount of light produced
was proportional to the amount of TCE present. During Phase II we will determine
and validate the performance characteristics of the biosensors by measuring TCE
in a wide variety of TCE-contaminated groundwaters. We also will develop methods
for applying the reporter strains in TCE test kits, including the use of freeze-
dried cells. Furthermore, we will use the reporter strains to develop on-line
biosensor probes that can be used for continuous monitoring of TCE in
bioreactors and/or down hole monitoring of TCE in groundwater monitoring wells.
In addition to TCE biosensors, new biosensors will be constructed to measure
gasoline (BTEX) contamination in groundwater. The BTEX sensors will also be used
as QA/QC check standards to evaluate the accuracy of TCE measurements made with
the TCE biosensors. A new series of biosensors for both TCE and BTEX will be
constructed by replacing the bioluminescence reporter cassettes with genes
encoding the production of green fluorescent protein, thereby allowing
microscopic examination of reporter stains used for modeling the migration and
performance of degradative organisms in aquifers. The biosensors and biosensor
probes will be used commercially to measure TCE in groundwater, improve process
control in bioreactors, and reduce the cost of in situ remediation technologies.