* 9704867
* Renormalization and Global Bifurcations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Charles Tresser, IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 54,010.00

One of the greatest novelties of recent non-linear dynamics is the new meaning
of a qualitative theory: it is no more a weak theory but a theory that allows
one to understand changes in the topology associated to dynamical behavior when
one varies the parameters controlling an experiment. Mathematically, one has to
know how to describe complicated bifurcation structures to be able to make
qualitative predictions about an experiment. In the non-linear regime, one
cannot hope for many quantitative predictions (or quantitative tests on the
validity of models). It is then important to remember that, in the non-linear
aspects of classical statistical mechanics, the theory can only predict numbers
at transition points. At some transitions, the main observables are universal in
that they do not depend on a precise experiment but on a small number of
(generically) small integer numbers. Not so surprisingly, most of the numbers
non-linear mathematics can predict about non-linear sciences are also universal
and associated to transitions. These transitions can be local (and one then uses
local bifurcation theory; for instance one describes in this way most instances
of onset of periodic behavior) or global (like the transition from order to
chaos). In the global case, as in statistical mechanics, the main theoretical
tool is a renormalization group, indeed, essentially the same sort of
renormalization group as in statistical mechanics. The goal of this research is
twofold. One aspect of the work will involve locating new examples of
renormalization groups for dynamics and using them to understand dynamical
properties. A second aspect will involve investigating the bifurcation structure
of parameterized families of maps which exhibit both simple and complex
dynamical behavior, focussing in particular on the transition between order and
chaos (more precisely the transition between zero and positive topological
entropy). The basic aim of the project is furthering the understanding of
complicated dynamic s and the transition from order to chaos which appears as
essential to understanding climate changes and other major ecological events
such as earthquakes or population dynamics. More specifically, renormalization
is essential in explaining a variety of phenomena, from the transition to
turbulence to the dynamics of some basic pieces of electronic circuits such as
digital filters. Global bifurcation theory is the branch of mathematics which
addresses our need to understand quantities which vary in time under adjustable
or varying constraints.