* 9704423
* Nonlinear Problems in Geophysical and Reactive Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Pedro Embid, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 80,000.00

Embid 9704423 The investigator studies mathematical problems with applications
in geophysical fluid dynamics and reactive flows. The two main topics of
research are: 1. Averaging over fast gravity waves for geophysical flows. 2.
Front wave propagation in reactive flows. The investigator combines formal
asymptotic analysis and rigorous mathematical theory of physical models,
together with the numerical analysis of simplified problems. In the first topic
he studies the limiting dynamics of several geophysical fluid dynamical systems
that include the rotating shallow water equations and the rotating Boussinesq
equations for stably stratified flow. In the physically relevant regimes of low
Froude number or low Rossby number the equations evolve with two separated
scales; the slow modes are associated with quasi-geostrophic flows, and the fast
modes correspond to gravity waves. The investigator derives simplified equations
for the limiting dynamics of geophysical flows at low Froude or low Rossby
number by averaging over the fast gravity waves. These limiting equations are
applicable even when the flow is not in geostrophic balance initially. The
investigator studies the resulting simplified dynamics equations, which include
in natural and systematic manner the important effects of three-wave resonant
interactions of three fast gravity waves, or two gravity waves and a vortical
mode. In the second topic he studies the propagation of fronts in the presence
of an underlying advective velocity field. This velocity field involves several
space-time scales, describing large variations both at the integral scale, as
well as rapid fluctuations at a scale intermediate between the integral scale
and the front thickness. The investigator works on the derivation and analysis
of effective large scale equations for the propagation of fronts in the physical
limit of fast reaction, slow diffusion, and fast velocity fluctuations at the
intermediate scale. He applies these results to study the interaction of either
premixed or diffusive flames with the turbulent velocity field, and to study
moist convection in clouds. The research on the limiting dynamics of geophysical
flows and the role of the fast gravity waves has potential applications in
atmospheric and oceanic sciences. As the demand for more accurate numerical
weather predictions increases, it is necessary to gain better understanding of
the effect of the unavoidable fast gravity waves that pollute all calculations.
Similarly, the need for long range forecasting also requires a better
understanding of the accumulative effects of the fast gravity waves.
Additionally, this work is relevant in the area of stratified turbulence, where
the simplified dynamics equations can help to explain some of the universal
features observed in the velocity spectrum in the atmosphere and the ocean. The
research on front wave propagation has potential applications in combustion
design, guiding the engineer in evaluating the reliability of the simplified
advection algorithms currently used in flame front propagation. This work is
also relevant to cloud physics. Clouds are a key ingredient in the radiative
balance of the earth and also a key variable in the study of weather forecasting
and global climate. Currently, in large-scale numerical simulations of the
atmosphere, the important effects of the small-scale cloud physics cannot be
modelled in detail. This work gives insight into ways of incorporating the
small-scale effects of the interaction of moisture and convective currents in
clouds into these large-scale calculations.