* 9704177
* Charge Transport, Injection and Degradation in              Electroluminescent Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Sue Carter, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2001
* USD 231,542.00

9704177 Carter This GOALI proposal addresses basic materials science issues in
a collaborative program between the University of California at Santa Cruz/UCSC
and IBM/Almaden to understand basic phenomena associated with charge transport,
injection and degradation in electroluminescent polymer devices. Research at
UCSC will involve polymer LED fabrication, characterization of the electronic
and optical properties of the electrodes and polymeric materials, measuring
changes in the E-field dependent and T-dependent transport and luminance, and
visualization of changes in device interfaces during operation via confocal
microscopy, scanning probe microscopies, and XAFS. Active participation by the
PI and her students at IBM will involve synthesizing polymer materials, making
diodes, I-V, luminance characterization, lifetime testing and interface studies
using AFM, ESCA, Auger, FTIR, SEM and RBS. The proposed research emphasizes
understanding of fundamental mechanisms and processes along with practical
aspects of electronic/photonic materials technology. The project is supported by
the DMR/EM and the ECS/PFET programs, and by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA). %%% The project addresses materials science and engineering
research issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic devices.
Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the
research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
photonic devices by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***