* 9704266
* SBIR PHASE II: Two Degree-of-Freedom Spherical Pointing     Actuator
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Christopher Kramer, AMHERST SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1999
* USD 299,970.00

*** 9704266 Bandera A key technical challenge to the commercialization of active
vision for demanding avionics and robotics applications, and particularly to the
commercialization of foveal machine vision, is the lack of a pointing mechanism
featuring high speed, high accuracy, fast settling time, small size, small power
consumption, and light weight. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project from Amherst Systems, Inc. will develop a low-cost, high performance,
miniature two degree-of-freedom (DOF) pan-tilt pointing mechanism, called a
spherical pointing actuator (SPA), that meets mobile robot active vision gazing
requirements. This project will also develop a computer interface implementing
open-loop and closed-loop control of the SPA. Conventional pan-tilt mechanisms
couple I-DOF motors, and their kinematics chain imposes large weight (several
pounds), torque (up to tens of foot-pounds), and power (several hundred watts)
payload requirements that are impractical in small mobile platforms. The SPA
reduces the kinematics chain and payload requirements by integrating both
degrees of freedom into one rotary actuator. It provides accurate, rapid (1000
degrees/sec), wide, angle excursion (90 degrees) pointing of small mass (tens of
grains) with little power (10 W) and space (on the order of one cubic inch). The
SPA consists of four coils (two per DOF) mounted on the sides of a tetrahedral
damped magnetic circuit that acts upon a gimbaled magnet; the magnet supports a
visual sensor gazing out the circuit's open base. This design features wider
excursion and simpler control (damped dynamics, inherent centering force, no
home position coil required) than spherical pointing motor designs that do not
use magnetic circuitry. The spherical pointing actuator (SPA) permits smaller
and more reliable active vision systems for autonomous security, automatic
target recognition, unmanned ground and air vehicles, commercial robots, smart
weapons, and smart vehicles. An SPA combined wit h a foveal imager provides wide
field-of-view to improve search, fast frame rate to improve tracking, and high
localized acuity to improve recognition. Low-cost conventional components and
fabrication procedures assure commercial feasibility. ***