* 9704245
* Almost Periodic Differential Equations and Lattice Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Wenxian Shen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2001
* USD 67,411.00

9704245 Shen Research is proposed in two areas: almost periodic differential
equations and lattice dynamical systems. Recently, the principal investigator
and a collaborator systematically investigated the dynamics of various types of
almost periodic differential equations. Fundamental dynamical issues such as the
existence of almost periodic and almost automorphic solutions, asymptotic
behavior of bounded solutions, the structure of omega limit sets, etc. have
received a considerable amount of attention. The principal investigator and her
collaborators also studied the global dynamics of some almost periodic
differential equations arising from biology and physics by utilizing both the
general approach and theory established in the principal investigator's joint
works with Yi. The principal investigator plans to continue her research in
almost periodic differential equations. In particular, she intends to explore
the global dynamics of various almost periodic population models such as
migration-selection models and multiple species competition models; to study
almost periodically forced oscillators such as van der Pol oscillators and
Josephson junctions; to consider spatially almost periodic parabolic equations;
to find conditions on the existence of almost periodic dynamics; and to
investigate almost automorphic dynamics in general differential equations. In
her recent work and also in joint works with her collaborators, she studied the
stability of standing and traveling waves and the existence of chaotic dynamics
in lattice dynamical systems. Among the results, an existence criterion for
chaotic dynamics in coupled map lattices is found; a moving coordinate approach,
which is different from but analogous to the traditional moving coordinate
approach in partial differential equations, is introduced to deal with traveling
waves; and various dynamics such as spatial chaos, propagation failure,
traveling waves, etc., are shown to exist in a discrete Nagumo equation. The
above works provide some insight into the complex behavior of lattice dynamical
systems. Continuing her commitments in lattice dynamical systemq, she would like
to study the following problems in the near future: other possible routes such
as bifurcations to chaotic dynamics; existence and stability of traveling waves
and the appearance of synchronization. Moreover, she intends to continue the
analysis of the dynamics in the discrete Nagumo equation; and to explore the
dynamics in lattice population models. Both almost periodic differential
equations and lattice dynamical systems are widely used as models for many
physical and biological problems. For example, in the population dynamics of a
single species, the dynamics of the species is described by an almost periodic
reaction diffusion equation if a continuous environment is inhabited, seasonal
variation is accounted for (note that seasonal variation may not be exactly
periodic but rather almost periodic) and there is another inherent periodic
variation. If the species inhabits a patchy environment, then its dynamics are
described by a lattice ordinary differential equation. Furthermore, if each
individual of the species migrates from patch to patch in a discrete time
manner, then the dynamics are characterized by a coupled map lattice. Numerous
other examples are found in electric circuits, climate dynamics, image
processing and pattern recognition, material sciences, etc. It is therefore of
great importance to study almost periodic differential equations and lattice
dynamical systems. Though much research has been done, many scenarios appearing
in both areas are far from being well understood. The principal investigator
proposes to do research in these two areas. In particular, based on her previous
experience, she plans to study various models arising from physics and biology
such as competition models, almost periodically fo rced oscillators, etc. The
proposed research is intended to be a mathematical contribution to the
qualitative and quantitative theory of almost periodic differential equations
and lattice dynamical systems, resulting in a better understanding of complex
behavior in these systems.