* 9704053
* SBIR Phase II: Photochemical Process for Transformation of  Ozone-Depleting Substances into Environmentally Benign and  Commercially Valuable Products
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2004
* Moshe Lavid, M.L. Energia, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 07/31/2004
* USD 300,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project will lead to a full-scale commercialization of a
novel technology capable of transforming existing stockpiles of ozone-depleting
substances (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and Halons) into environmentally
acceptable and commercially valuable products. The proposed Photo-Hydro-
Dehalogenation (PHD) technology exploits a synergistic effect obtained by
combining ultraviolet (UV) radiation with a reducing atmosphere. UV fight
promotes chain initiation by carbon-halogen bond cleavage. Long-chain radical
reactions lead to formation of desirable products. Phase I research has already
proven feasibility. Experimental results with three representative
chlorofluorocarbons have convincingly and unambiguously demonstrated that the
PHD process can achieve selective and high conversion at a cost of less than $
1/lb of CFC converted, which is lower than any current destruction technology.
The primary objective of Phase II is to design, construct and employ a pilot-
scale prototype for a field demonstration. To meet this objective, a three-task
work plan has been developed. It includes: (a) bench-scale studies of CFCs and
extension to Halons, supplemented by chemical kinetic modeling, (b) design and
construction of a pilot-scale prototype, and (c) field demonstration and
performance evaluation. Successful completion of Phase II will ultimately lead
to Phase III commercialization. This process should lead to a `green` technology
for environmentally safe transformation of ozone-depleting substances into
commercially valuable products. The current stockpile of estimated 4.5 billion
pounds of CFCs, which poses a serious disposal problem, will become a vital
feedstock to produce high value products. Based on preliminary cost estimates,
the existing stockpile which represents a huge environmental liability can be
turned with the process into about 4 billion dollars of salable products.