* 9704135
* Mathematical Sciences:  Low-Dimensional Geometry and        Topology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* William Thurston, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 320,664.00

9704135 Thurston This project is a multi-pronged investigation into low-
dimensional geometry and topology with the central long-range goal of supporting
and establishing the Geometrization Conjecture, namely, that every 3-dimensional
manifold has a canonical decomposition into pieces with locally homogeneous
Riemannian metrics. The first of these prongs is an investigation, partially
aided by computer, of geometric Dehn filling spaces for 3-manifolds. Geometric
Dehn fillings interpolate between manifolds with distinct topology. A suitable
variation of this idea has the potential to connect all possible 3-manifolds and
equip them with geometric decompositions. The second prong is an investigation
of the geometry of taut foliations and essential laminations and their
relationships to hyperbolic structures and other geometric structures. This
approach has the promise to give a common generalization of the canonical
decompositions of surface homeomorphisms developed by Thurston in 1976, and the
geometrization of Haken manifolds developed by Thurston in the late 1970's and
early 1980's. Additional prongs of this project involve contact structures,
confoliations, and geometric group theory. In addition, the project will explore
connections of low-dimensional geometry and topology to biology, particularly
genetics. Low-dimensional geometry and topology is a beautiful area of
mathematics that has undergone tremendous growth and transformation over the
last two decades. Paralleling this internal development of the subject, lagging
slightly behind, has been the external development of new connections and
strengthened connections to other areas of mathematics and of science. Some of
these connections are direct, like the cosmological issue of the shape of our
universe or the more down-to-earth issue of the shapes of crystals. Other
connections are indirect, to diverse topics such as databases, group theory,
genetics, or computational chemistry. Any topic tha t can be formulated in a
quantitative way can be studied with geometric methods (alongside the more
prevalent symbolic, algebraic and analytic methods), so that in any particular
case, the powerful discoveries and tools of low-dimensional geometry and
topology have a reasonable chance to have a direct bearing. The aim of this
project is further development of the tools of low-dimensional geometry and
topology to make them more portable, more powerful and more universal. ***