* 9704399
* Knot Groups and Symbolic Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Susan Williams, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2000
* USD 90,155.00

The investigators have developed a new method for applying concepts of symbolic
dynamical systems to the study of knot and link groups. The set of
representations into a finite group of the commutator subgroup of an oriented
knot group or the augementation subgroup of an oriented link group has the
structure of a shift of finite type, a special type of dynamical system that can
be completely described by a finite graph. The set of representations into a
finite abelian group of the commutator subgroup of an oriented link group is a
higher dimensional shift of finite type. Dynamical invariants of the shift such
as topological entropy, directional entropy and the zeta function produce new,
computable knot invariants, and give useful information about branched cyclic
covering spaces. Elementary and effective obstructions to conjugacy for free
group automorphisms result as a byproduct. The project will expand the
investigators' previous work, using these new techniques to address several open
questions in knot theory. DNA, solar plasma filaments and garden hoses have a
common feature: each exhibits knotting and linking. The mathematical theory of
knots and links began in the mid-nineteenth century, and today its importance is
recognized in diverse areas of physics, chemistry, biology and engineering.
Until recently, the methods employed in this field have come from topology and
algebra. The two principal investigators have discovered tools from the field of
symbolic dynamics that are novel and effective for studying knots and links.
Symbolic dynamics, which studies arrays of data, is central to information and
communication theory and has important applications in the analysis of chaotic
systems and the science of materials. This project will extend the
investigators' techniques, address unanswered questions in knot theory and
establish new bridges between disciplines.