* 9704547
* Radar and Numerical Modeling Investigations of Dynamical    and Microphysical Processes Within Deep Subtropical         Convection During CaPE
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Kevin Knupp, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 202,663.00

9704547 Knupp In a continuation of previous research, the Principal Investigator
will pursue investigation of the interactions between storm dynamics and
microphysics in deep tropical convection. The analysis components include: (a)
multiple Doppler radar for determination of internal flows, (b) multiparameter
radar for determination of bulk microphysics, and (c) aircraft data for
determination of in situ microphysics and kinematics. Integration of these data
sets will yield a comprehensive description of the interacting microphysical,
kinematic and electric fields within deep convection. Further integration of
these data will facilitate evaluation of the accuracy of radar measurements. In
addition, numerical simulations will be used to further study the dynamical and
microphysical processes of deep convection, and will facilitate interpretation
of the various radar and aircraft observations. Specific tasks included under
this continuation proposal include: determination of the time-dependent vertical
profiles of latent heating, identification of the important microphysical
processes associated with latent heating within deep convection, and the impact
of latent heating on the dynamics of deep precipitating convection;
investigation of the various mechanisms by which cells in proximity interact
dynamically and microphysically; a) examination of the cell (storm) entrainment
properties using aircraft and multiple Doppler data, and 3-D numerical
simulations; b) quantification of errors and filtering associated with multiple
Doppler wind retrievals and multiparameter radar measurements. Successful
completion of this project will advance understanding of how precipitation is
produced in tropical convection. ***