* 9704025
* Development of a Cantilever Magnetometer for Pulsed         Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Michael Naughton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1999
* USD 142,685.00

9704025 Naughton A highly sensitive cantilever magnetometer will be developed
for use in pulsed magnetic fields. It is anticipated that this device will
achieve a sensitivity of order 10-12 Am2 (10-9 emu) in fields up to 100T, thus
exceeding the sensitivity of conventional detection methods by 2 to 3 orders of
magnitude. The motivation for this project is the thermodynamic study of
physical phenomena in the highest available magnetic fields, which are now
obtained only in transient, pulsed fields of 10-2 to 1 second duration. At the
present time, experiments in pulsed fields are restricted to studies of
magnetotransport, magneto- optics, and magnetic susceptibility. For the latter,
an inductive method is usually employed, wherein a voltage proportional to the
derivative of the magnetic moment with respect to magnetic field is induced in a
multi-turn coil. If one integrates this susceptibility signal AC=dm/dH, one
obtains information about the magnetic moment m, with typical sensitivity to
moment of 10-8 to 10-9 Am2, or 10-5 to 10-6 emu. With the successful development
of a cantilever magnetometer for the pulsed field regime, a very significant
improvement over this inductance method can be realized. %%% In this project, we
will design, fabricate and test a variety of cantilever devices configured
especially for use in long (~10-1 s) and short (~10-2 s) pulse magnetic fields.
A low field pulse system will be assembled for local temporal characterization
of the new devices, with full characterization taking place at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory's Pulsed Field Facility at Los Alamos National
Laboratory. If this projects succeeds, it will significantly enhance the
measurement capabilities of a large and growing number of investigators working
with pulsed magnetic fields, by making sensitive magnetometry an accessible
technique to a variety of physical systems in fields approaching 100T. Upon
successful completion of the project, t he new devices will be made available to
users at the NHMFL @ LANL. It therefore has the potential to benefit many
researchers in the condensed matter sciences. In addition, there is significant
potential for the transfer of this technology to industry. ***