* 9704106
* Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential  Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Alfred Schatz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 06/30/2001
* USD 233,527.00

Schatz Abstract: We propose to investigate various aspects of the finite element
method for elliptic and parabolic problems including, (1) A posteriori error
estimation. Conditions were recently given by the proposer, W. Hoffman and G.
Wittum under which a class of averaging operators are asymptotically exact error
estimators for the max norm of the gradient on each element in a model smooth
Neumann problem. The class includes the Z-Z estimator. Preliminary estimates
indicate that these methods do not work for problems on polygonal domains where
pollution effects dominate. We propose cures which we shall analyze.(2) We
propose to investigate a unifying theory for superconvergence which includes
several previously developed by the proposer and co-authors. We shall focus on a
theory which is applicable to smooth and nonsmooth problems.(3) We will
investigate an a priori "universal" mesh grading algorithm which can be used to
provide optimal relative error for problems with power type singularities.These
meshes should be particularly useful for elliptic problems on three dimensional
polyhedral domains where the optimal meshes are highly anisotropic. (4) Problems
with highly anisotropic diffusion will be investigated which are singularly
perturbed elliptic problems which degenerate to parabolic problems. These
problems often exhibit boundary layer behavior and the standard finite element
method does not perform well when this occurs. These problems are not convection
dominated. The investigation and solution of the many complex problems which
arise in science and the manufacturing industry have increasingly benefited from
mathematical and numerical studies of their underlying mathematical models. The
successs of this approach is due to advances both in the developement and unders
tanding of new numerical algorithms and in advances in high performance
computing. In this proposal we study various aspects of the finite element
method for solving a large variety of problems which arise in practice and which
are modeled by partial differential equations. As just a very few examples we
mention problems in elasticity to determine the strength of complex structures a
nd problems in fluid dynamics. The latter includes such diverse problems as the
determination of ground water flows for pollution studies to the study of the ab
sorbtion of medicinal ointment through the skin. This project is oriented toward
suggesting and analyzing new methods for the efficient and accurate solution of
such problems.We shall seek better approximations by enlarging the theory of sup
erconvergence and investigate a means of universally grading meshes for problems
on domains with corners which arise very often in industry. Among other things
we shall study means for obtaining an estimate for the error between the compute
d solution and the unknown true solution to determine a posteriori the quality
of the approximation.