* 9704847
* Stochastic and Numerical Matrix Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Carl Meyer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 06/30/2001
* USD 169,000.00

STOCHASTIC AND NUMERICAL MATRIX ANALYSIS DMS-9704847 Carl D. Meyer TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION. This project focuses on issues from three computational areas in
applied mathematics. 1. The first set of problems concerns the analysis and
computation of eigensystems of stochastic matrices and associated Markov chain
models. Special attention is devoted to nearly uncoupled Markov chains. These
are large systems comprised of collections of loosely coupled subsystems, and
the purpose is to analyze and compute the stability and steady state nature of
such systems with aggregation/disaggregation (or A/D) algorithms. Specific goals
are to provide a more concrete foundation for analyzing (A/D) errors through the
use of ergodicity coefficients instead of tradition norm based bounds; to
provide a better understanding of the nature of errors in multilevel A/D
processes thereby facilitating improvements in the development and performance
of multilevel A/D algorithms; and to develop new techniques for uncoupling the
eigensystems for stochastic matrices. 2. The second set of problems focuses on
the development and analysis of direct projection and implicit factorization
algorithms used to solve large sparse systems of linear algebraic equations
encountered in the numerical solution of partial and ordinary differential
equations. Specific goals are to gain an advantage when solving positive
definite systems by means of conjugate gradient-like methods on high-performance
vector and parallel computers by utilizing implicit factorization algorithms to
construct explicit approximate inverse preconditioners. 3. The third set of
problems stems from manufacturing applications involving the necessity to
describe or measure a manufactured item at various points on its surface in
order to build an accurate computer model so that the item can be machined by
automatic tooling devices. When these description s or measurements are used in
the manufacturing process, constraints are automatically generated by computer
codes to account for complex geometries, to insure smoothness, and to account
for material variability in the surfaces being tooled. But these computer codes
usually generate many redundant constraints, and it is a significant problem is
to distinguish the necessary constraints from the redundant ones. This facet of
the project is dedicated to developing new numerical algorithms for making such
distinctions. The strategy is to improve on costly rank-revealing techniques
currently used to identify redundancies by developing new sparsity-preserving,
row-action algorithms for estimating the smallest singular value/vector of a
matrix. NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. This project focuses on issues from three
computational areas in applied mathematics. 1. The first set of problems
concerns computations involving stochastic matrices and associated Markov
chains. The theory and application of Markov chain models is a recurring theme
in many problems from engineering, economics, and physical and social science.
In particular, analyzing and computing steady-state probabilities associated
with large-scale Markov chains is a fundamental concern in areas such as
queueing models and networks, telecommunications, computer performance
evaluation, economic modeling and forecasting, manufacturing systems modeling,
and more generally, in applications where discrete models are used to understand
and analyze the dynamics of large evolutionary systems. This project emphasizes
computational as well as theoretical issues, and special attention is devoted to
nearly uncoupled problems. These are large systems comprised of collections of
loosely coupled subsystems (e.g., the economy of the United States), and the
purpose is to analyze and compute the stability and stea dy-state nature of such
systems with techniques known as aggregation/disaggregation. Specific goals are
to sharpen and extend the theory of errors in aggregation/disaggregation
processes and to develop new aggregation/disaggregation algorithms for
estimating steady-state behavior in nearly uncoupled systems. 2. The second set
of problems focuses on the development and analysis of a new class of algorithms
for solving systems of linear algebraic equations arising in the numerical
solution of partial and ordinary differential equations of the type typically
encountered in solving large-scale problems in engineering and physical science.
The algorithms under development are aimed at high-performance multiprocessor
computers 3. The third set of problems stems from manufacturing applications
involving the necessity to describe or measure a manufactured item at various
points on its surface in order to build an accurate computer model so that the
item can be machined by automatic tooling devices. When these descriptions or
measurements are used in the manufacturing process, constraints are
automatically generated by computer codes to account for complex geometries, to
insure smoothness, and to account for material variability in the surfaces being
tooled. But these computer codes usually generate many redundant constraints,
and it is a significant problem is to distinguish the necessary constraints from
the redundant ones. This facet of the project is dedicated to developing new
numerical algorithms for making such distinctions.