* 9704186
* SBIR PHASE II:  A Global Multi-Grid General Minimal Residual(GMRES) Scheme for an Adaptive Cartesian/Prism Flow Solver  on Distributed Memory Machines
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Z.J. Wang, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
Parallel Computing System (PCS) for an adaptive Cartesian/prism generalized
minimal residual (GMRES)/multi-grid flow solver. The system will include the
following modules: Performance Monitor, Domain Decompositioner, GMRES/MultiGrid
Flow Solver, Dynamic Load Balancer, and Parallel Flow Visualizer. The
Performance Monitor can display the convergence of the flow simulation and loads
on each processor and if necessary launch the Dynamic Load Balancer. The Domain
Decompositioner and Parallel Flow Solver will be generalized and extended to
three-dimensions in Phase II. For a cluster of workstations with constantly
changing computational loads on each computer, a Dynamic Load Balancer will be
developed to balance the loads on all computers in user defined time intervals.
The company's commercial flow visualizer, CFD-VIEW, will be adapted for
distributed memory machines to post-process the massive simulation data produced
by the parallel flow solver. A Message Passing Interface (MPI) will be utilized
to provide data communications between different modules and flow solvers. The
PCS will run on both parallel computers and a cluster of workstations. The
overall system will integrate grid generation/domain decomposition, flow
simulation, load balancing and flow visualization into a single user-friendly
parallel computing environment to achieve automation, accuracy and efficiency
for flow simulation. Through this technology, significant cost reduction in CFD
simulation will be possible. A successful Phase II should yield a product which
will be very competitive in the current CFD software market because of its
automation, efficiency and parallel computation capability.