* 9704507
* Low-Dimensional Manifolds and Gauge Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* John Morgan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9704507 Morgan The study to be carried out in this project is two-fold. Both
aspects of the study lie at the intersection of geometry and topology, on the
one hand, and theoretical physics (quantum field theory and string theory) on
the other. One aspect concerns gauge-theoretic invariants of four-dimensional
manifolds, in particular, the Donaldson polynomial invariants and the Seiberg-
Witten invariants. Here the aim is to understand the relation of these
invariants to more classical geometric descriptions of a four-manifold, for
example, a handlebody description. The other aspect is the study of holomorphic
vector bundles over elliptically fibered manifolds and the relation of these to
families of K3 surfaces that arise in F-theory in mathematical physics. Here the
aim is to establish mathematical results for both sides of the putative F-theory
duality and then to check that the predictions of this duality do indeed hold.
There has been a resurgence in recent years of the interactions between the
areas of geometry and topology in mathematics and the areas of quantum field
theory and string theory in theoretical physics. This interaction has proved
very fruitful for both disciplines -- the physics brings new methods to the
study of low dimensional spaces, and the mathematics provides the framework in
which the studies in theoretical high-energy physics are done. This project will
investigate in more detail two of these interactions. One is the study of four-
dimensional spaces, using tools provided by theoretical physics. These tools
have yielded much insight in the last few years, and there is much more
information about four-dimensional spaces that should be accessible using these
tools. The other aspect of the project involves the mathematics of a new
physical theory. This theory makes very precise predictions about two kinds of
mathematical objects that, on the face of it, bear little relation to each
other. On the other hand, these mathemat ical objects can be studied in their
own right by purely mathematical tools that have been developed independently of
physics. The results of the mathematical analyses of these objects can be used
to check the predictions of the physical theory in much the same way as physical
experiments are used. ***