* 9704719
* Research Linkages Between Faculty at Predominantly          Undergraduate Institutions and NSF-Funded Materials Research Faculty
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Paul Helminger, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 68,000.00

9704719 Stevens This grant is one of this year's awards by the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) to integrate research and education. It is cofunded by
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences directorate's Office for
Multidisciplinary Activities. In particular, this grant establishes a resource
center for information on the availability of research opportunities for faculty
in predominantly undergraduate institutions with DMR supported grantees. The
Council on Undergraduate Research has developed databases of research activity
and interests of departments and individual faculty members at undergraduate
institutions under its National Information Center on Undergraduate Research.
The grant will help foster exploratory and reciprocal site visits to identify
topics of mutual interest which can then form the basis of Research Opportunity
Awards. The grant will help in intellectual growth of faculty at undergraduate
institutions and generate research opportunities for undergraduate students in
the general area of Materials Research. %%% This grant from the Division of
Materials Research is one of the first awarded in its attempt to integrate
research and education. It is also cosponsored by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate. The grant will help in intellectual growth of faculty at
undergraduate institutions and generate research opportunities for undergraduate
students in the general area of Materials Research. ***