* 9704864
* Discontinuous Data and Media in Physical Phenomena          Modeled by Hamiltion-Jacobi Equations and Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Daniel Ostrov, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 67,203.00

9704864 Ostrov This project is aimed at resolving issues of uniqueness and
computability for a class of Hamilton-Jacobi equations and related Conservation
laws that contain discontinuous spatial data. It will begin with the Hamilton-
Jacobi equation that relates surface height to spatial data collected by
Synthetic Aperture Radar. The characteristic curves for this radar equation
"flow" in one direction like time dependent phenomena. Due to a monotonicity
property of the Hamiltonian, one can establish -- for some cases -- a unique
physical solution for discontinuous data as the limit of continuous data
approximation viscosity solutions. One can also prove that this unique solution
can be simulated by monotone numerical schemes. The first goal of this project
is to combine viscosity solution theory for Hamilton Jacobi equations with the
theory of generalized characteristics from Conservation Law theory to establish
the uniqueness of the solution for most (or all) cases. The second goal is to
establish a unique limit for the case of surface reconstruction from
discontinuous optical data. The optical data equation does not have "flowing"
characteristics and therefore requires Dirichlet, as opposed to Cauchy, boundary
conditions. Generalized characteristics are inappropriate for Dirichlet
conditions, but recent Control Theory approaches appear to work well in their
place. The Hamiltonian is no longer monotonic, but it is now convex, which, it
is hoped, can be exploited in a similar manner to the monotonicity property.
Finally, these methods will be applied to classes of Conservation Laws with
discontinuous media that correspond to the classes of Hamilton-Jacobi equations
previously studied. Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) is used extensively by NASA
(who, for example, collected SAR data for most of the surface of Venus in 1990
using the Magellan probe) and the military. Ideally, one would like to
reconstruct a surface from the collected radar data. Thi s reconstruction
(called Shape from Shading) can -- from previous work -- be accomplished very
quickly for noiseless, continuous radar data. For discontinuous data, which
occurs in the presence of ridges (e.g., mountains, cliffs, tank edges, building
edges, etc.), it is unknown (a) if only one surface corresponds to the SAR data
and (b) if the surface is computable. Previous work has shown that for a number
of surfaces there is only one physically likely surface and it is easy to
compute. First, this project hopes to show that this is the case for all
surfaces. The next goal of the project is to extend this result to optical data
(i.e., reconstructing a 3-D surface from a 2-D photograph), which has numerous
applications both in industry and in the military (where it is typically
referred to as "computer vision"). The final goal of this project is to apply
these results to Conservation Laws with discontinuous media (e.g., describing
chemical separation with two or more solvents, describing two phase flow, etc.),
which is of interest, for example, to Chemical Engineers, who must be able to
compute simulations for these situations to maximize chemical conversions
effectively in industrial processes.