* 9704858
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Representation Theory and the Affine Flag Manifold
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Eric Sommers, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1998
* USD 8,850.00

9704858 Sommers The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
Eric N. Sommers to work with Professor Hamet Seydi of the Universite Cheikh Anta
Diop in Dakar, under the sponsorship of Professor Serigne Aliou Lo, Senegal.
Support for this award comes from the ANESA Program of the Division of
International Programs. This project involves the study of representation theory
of algebraic objects with the affine flag manifold. Specifically, the PI is
interested in studying representations of the affine Weyl group and the double
affine Hecke algebra which can be constructed using geometric techniques
involving the affine flag manifold. A problem that has become integral to his
work involves determining the structure of the ring of functions on nilpotent
orbit closures. As Dr. Sommers works on his project, he will forge new
relationships with mathematicians in newly developing African universities.
Currently, there are few existing ties among mathematicians in the U.S. and West
Africa. ***