* 9704222
* Development of Instrumentation for Research on Magnetic Thin Films and Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,10/31/1999
* John Markert, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 10/31/1999
* USD 133,670.00

9704222 Erskine This award partially supports the development of unique
instrumentation for synthesizing laterally constrained thin film and multilayer
magnetic materials and microstructures and for studying novel magnetic phenomena
in the structures The new instrument incorporates state-of-the-art thin film
growth and characterization capabilities, contact mask and focused ion beam
technology capable of creating submicron structures in the films, and
complementary high spatial resolution magnetic sensitive spectroscopy/microscopy
probes The new instrumentation adds important capabilities to existing research
programs of several faculty at The University of Texas which explore thin film
magnetism, mesoscopic physics, micromagnetics and magneto-transport phenomena.
Scientific issues to be explored based on new capabilities of the instrument
include 1) micromagnetic phenomena including properties of magnetic domains in
ultrathin films and patterned micron-scale ultrathin film structures; 2) the
effects of deliberately induced substrate roughness (atomic steps) and film
thickness variations on magnetic domains and related properties including
coercive forces and anisotropy of thin films and thin film based
microstructures; 3) finite size scaling effects, critical behavior, exchange
coupling and dynamical properties of well characterized multilayer and
microstructured magnetic systems, and 4) magneto-transport and related magnetic
phenomena associated with multilayer films and multilayer- based
microstructures. An important feature of the instrument design is the unique
combination of materials growth and microstructure fabrication capabilities,
materials characterization tools and magnetic sensitive probes which can be used
separately or as an integrated system. The instrument consists of three coupled
subsystems 1) a thin film growth and characterization chamber incorporating
multicell molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with real-time growth monitoring tools
inclu ding Reflection High Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED) and Auger
Electron Spectroscopy (AES); Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED) including
high resolution spot profile analysis capability; 2) a Magneto-Optic Kerr Effect
(MOKE) polarimeter set up for high spatial resolution scanning measurements as
well as analysis of hysteresis dynamics; and 3) a high resolution Scanning
Electron Microscope with Spin Polarization Analysis (SEMPA) instrument. The
SEM/SEMPA instrument is configured to accept a Focused Ion Beam (FIB) column to
mill microstructures while viewing the process using SEM. The system is
integrated with gate valves and air lock chambers permitting the SEMPA/MOKE
subsystem or the MOKE/film growth subsystem to be used independently. %%% This
instrumentation has the potential to advance the fundamental knowledge and
understanding of thin-film magnetic structure. Such structures have great
potential for device applications, which can produce breakthroughs in magnetic
device technology.