* 9704891
* Mathematical Sciences:  Leibniz Cohomology, Differential    Geometry and Foliations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Jerry Lodder, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 44,455.00

9704891 Lodder A major topic of research in the 1970's was the interplay between
foliations and Lie algebra cohomology. A foliation represents the solution of a
partial differential equation on a space, and the cohomology classes that detect
a given foliation provide a concise numerical invariant measuring the (global)
twisting of the solution set of the equation. The first cohomology class to be
discovered in this way was the Godbillon-Vey invariant, a single class in
dimension three that is an element of the classical de Rham cohomology group of
the underlying space. (For codimension one foliations there are no other
invariants.) This project is based on a fundamentally new method of computing
cohomology that does not require the classical symmetries needed for de Rham
cohomology. The ideas for this construction arise from work of Jean-Louis Loday
of Strasbourg, France, and are referred to as Leibniz cohomology. The results of
preliminary computations are striking. In the codimension one case alone, there
are infinite families of invariants for foliations. They begin with the
Godbillon-Vey invariant and then continue in dimensions 4n and 4n+3 (n any
positive integer). Although the new classes result from a one-parameter
variation of a foliation, it remains an open question to interpret their meaning
in terms of physical properties. A more general topic of research in mathematics
remains to classify space according to the criteria set forth by Riemann nearly
150 years ago. Much progress has been made in the past century, but the
classification is not complete. As an unexpected and highly non-trivial
invariant of space, Leibniz cohomology will be a new tool in this field. To aid
in the interpretation of Leibniz cohomology, a construction for this invariant
in terms of more familiar spaces would be helpful. It is auspicious that the
formalism used to define the Leibniz groups appears quite naturally in quantum
field theory. By work of V. Kac, the elements of a field theory form a classical
Lie algebra---but only after a certain number of them are set to zero. If these
elements are not set to zero, the original elements form a Leibniz algebra
lacking the symmetries of a Lie algebra. The cohomology groups of this Leibniz
algebra will be new invariants of quantum field theory. ***