* 9704097
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Coordination of      Optokinesis & Locomotion during Visual Course-Control in an Invertebrate Model System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,12/31/1998
* John Layne, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1998
* USD 44,780.00

9704097 Layne The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. John E. Layne to work with Dr. William J. P. Barnes at the University of
Glasgow in Scotland. Dr. Layne will examine the physiological mechanisms that
underlie the course control during locomotion in the Blue Land Crab, Cardisoma
guanhumi. This will by a lab study in which extracellular recordings from visual
and statocyst interneurons, eyecup motoneurones and muscles will be correlated
with measurements of the eye and leg movements induced by rotation of the visual
field and of the body. A related field study will be done to observe how crabs
make use of visual information during locomotion in their natural environment,
by disrupting their sensory guidance systems (vision, statocyst organ), and
observing its affect on basic locomotion and oriented behavior (escape, homing).
This study will provide an understanding of the process of visual flow analysis.
The host lab is part of the Division of Environmental and Evolutionary Biology,
which contains several behavioral scientists. It will also provide close links
with neuroscientists in other divisions of the Institute of Biomedical and Life
Sciences. The host, Dr. Barnes, has studied eye movements at a behavioral level
for many years, and has established the current behavioral models fmr flow field
analysis in invertebrates. ***