* 9704702
* Postdoc: Planning for Hybrid Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Joel Burdick, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 03/31/1999
* USD 46,008.00

97-04702 Burdick, Joel W. California Institute of Technology Postdoc: Planning
for Hybrid Systems (This award supports CES associate Milos Zefran) Systems that
are governed by discrete and continuous processes are known as "hybrid" systems.
Such systems are described by continuous dynamical equations whose structure
and/or inputs change in accordance with the state transitions of a finite
automaton. Due to the widespread use of computers to control physical devices,
hybrid systems abound. Successful hybrid systems must robustly combine high-
level planning (planning of the finite automaton transitions) with low-level
control (evolution of the dynamic equations). While the planning and control
problems have been addressed separately by computer scientists and control
theorists, the interaction of the discrete and continuous worlds is largely left
to the ingenuity of engineers. As the complexity of the computer controlled
physical systems grows, such methods break down and there is a need for rigorous
theory to design, build, and evaluate hybrid systems. The proposed research will
investigate how to unify discrete and continuous models to help build a
foundation for hybrid system engineering. Prior work on planning for a subclass
of hybrid systems will be extended in two directions. First, an optimal control
framework will be extended to a game-theoretic framework so as to take
uncertainty into account. Second, the hybrid control problem will be explored
for systems whose dynamics exhibit some simplifying properties, such as Lie
group symmetries.