* 9704269
* Acquisition of In-Situ Heating and Ambient Controlled X-Ray Deffraction Tool:  For Remote Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Terry Alford, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 105,000.00

9704269 Alford This award provides partial support by The Division of Materials
Research, The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Arizona State
University for an X-Ray Diffractometer (XRD) configured with a High Temperature
Sample Stage Assembly for materials research. This diffractometer will serve as
a remote analytical tool that can be accessed by students and researchers in the
class room and at other locations. Students and faculty at Arizona State
University (ASU) will use the diffractometer to create new fundamental knowledge
in the science and engineering of interconnect materials systems and processes
for future (&lt; 0.18 m) integrated circuit technologies. Silver metallization
is the technology driver for future microelectronics interconnect systems. This
investigation concentrates on the in-situ study of metal conductor materials
(silver and its alloys) during thermal processing in controlled ambients. This
effort will extend upon preliminary advances in both i) Ag and Cu metallization
materials science and processing and ii) x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of
thin film SiGeC alloys. %%% In collaboration with the ASU Office of Youth
Preparation, ASU undergraduates and graduate students from the Materials
Research Society (MRS) and the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) will
be organized and sponsored to present science exhibitions to Elementary and High
Schools in Phoenix. Students from MRS and NSBE will conduct XRD demonstrations
at the local schools and will be able to control the tool remotely via a
Internet connection. A x-ray characterization course is being planned and will
be offered at ASU in collaboration with Maricopa Community College District.
This course is on modern XRD analysis techniques for specimen analysis and it
will be delivered to ASU students, Community College students, and local
industry. This unique analysis tool will complement characterization facilities
provided by the ASU Center for Solid State Science as well as the High
Resolution X-ray Facility. This organizational structure leverages facilities
and integrates a number of research and education programs at ASU, including the
Alliance for Minority Programs at ASU, the NSF- funded curriculum development
grant in the Synthesis and Processing of Materials, and the NSF/University/State
Center for Low Power Electronics. ***