* 9704281
* Fracture Behavior of Porous Ceramics Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1997,08/31/2001
* David Green, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 316,805.00

9704281 Green Ceramics with moderate amounts of porosity are an important class
of materials that can make a significant impact in applications in which their
permeability plays a key role. This attribute, in addition to their chemical and
thermal stability, makes them suitable as catalytic supports, particulate
filters, membranes for micro- and ultrafiltration and as integrated catalytic
reactors. In such situations, however, the poor mechanical performance of these
materials is likely to be a limiting factor in the full exploitation and
development of these technologies. In particular, there is concern over the
strength, fracture toughness and thermal shock resistance. Unfortunately, little
is understood about the factors that control fracture in these porous materials
and thus, there is a need for a scientific study that tackles this area in a
fundamental and generic way. This is particularly important for the development
of materials with improved mechanical reliability. In the proposed work, the
objectives are to explore some new techniques for processing porous materials
and to identify the microstructural factors that control the strength and
fracture toughness of these materials. The technical approach will involve 1)
exploring new processing techniques, 2) quantifying the microstructure of the
resulting porous materials, particularly contiguity and pore structure, 3)
measuring a set of mechanical properties (elastic constants, fracture toughness
and strength) and 4) evaluating or devising appropriate theoretical models that
link the pore structure to the mechanical behavior. %%%% Ceramics with moderate
amounts of porosity are an important class of materials that can make a
significant impact in applications in which their permeability plays a key role.
This attribute, in addition to their chemical and thermal stability, makes them
suitable as catalytic supports, particulate filters, membranes for micro- and
ultrafiltration and as integrated cataly tic reactors. In such situations,
however, the poor mechanical performance of these materials is likely to be a
limiting factor in the full exploitation and development of these technologies.
In particular, there is concern over the strength, fracture toughness and
thermal shock resistance. Unfortunately, little is understood about the factors
that control fracture in these porous materials and thus, there is a need for a
scientific study that tackles this area in a fundamental and generic way. This
is particularly important for the development of materials with improved
mechanical reliability. In the proposed work, the objectives are to explore some
new techniques for processing porous materials and to identify the
microstructural factors that control the strength and fracture toughness of
these materials. ***