* 9704196
* Development of a Unique Interactive Growth Chamber for      Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Max Lagally, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1999
* USD 190,510.00

9704196 Lagally This award is for the partial support of a new ultra-high vacuum
chamber for the investigation of nanostructure magnetism. The chamber will be a
mobile self-contained system that will be located at the Synchrotron Radiation
Center, University of Wisconsin. It will be coupled to one of three existing
chambers built specifically for measuring magnetic circular dichroism, spin-
resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, and x-ray resonant magnetic scattering.
These methods provide element resolved magnetic moments, spin- split energy
bands, and magnetic roughness, respectively. The proposed growth chamber will
provide a wide variety of magnetic nanostructures with well characterized
morphologies for these magnetic measurements. Special emphasis will be placed on
sputter deposited magnetic nanostructures and comparisons between sputter
deposited and evaporated nanostructures. %%%% This award is for the partial
support of a new ultra-high vacuum chamber for the investigation of
nanostructure magnetism. The chamber will be a mobile self-contained system that
will be located at the Synchrotron Radiation Center, University of Wisconsin. It
will be coupled to one of three existing chambers built specifically for
measuring magnetic circular dichroism, spin-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy,
and x-ray resonant magnetic scattering. These methods provide element resolved
magnetic moments, spin- split energy bands, and magnetic roughness,
respectively. The proposed growth chamber will provide a wide variety of
magnetic nanostructures with well characterized morphologies for these magnetic
measurements. Special emphasis will be placed on sputter deposited magnetic
nanostructures and comparisons between sputter deposited and evaporated
nanostructures. The fundamental knowledge gained and the availability of the
chamber will facilitate magnetic device development and will lead to significant
fundamental research advances in the understanding of magnetic thin films and
interfaces. ***