* 9704156
* Evolution of Shapes, Sizes and Impurity Contents of Ice     Particles in Cirrus Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Marcia Baker, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 08/31/2001
* USD 183,045.00

Baker/Abstract 9704156 The PI plans to use a single crystal evolution model
developed in collaboration with Dr. J. Nelson to investigate the vapor growth
and sublimation of individual ice crystals in realistic atmospheres. This model
produces steady state growth shapes and predicts the conditions under which the
crystals are hollow. The model will be run with SO2 as well as water vapor in
the particle environment to study the simultaneous takeup of the two gases. The
chemical composition of the ensuing particles will be examined as a function of
assumed ice nucleus content as well as environmental gas concentrations,
temperature and pressure. After the single study is completed, the results will
be used in a Lagrangian parcel study of the evolving characteristics (size and
chemical composition distributions) of ice particle populations in realistic
atmospheres This work will be carried out in informal collaboration with Dr.
Nelson (U. Arizona), with Dr. T. Peter and his colleagues at the MPI fur Chemie
in Mainz, who are studying takeup of SO2 on single crystals in the laboratory,
and with Dr. Noone and his collaborators rom Stockholm University, who will be
collecting in situ data on microphysical evolution in cirrus clouds. These
studies will be useful in providing a self-consistent picture of cirrus
particles, and will add physical realism to the models now used, which are based
largely on spherical particle analogues and do not incorporate modern ideas on
the crystal/vapor interface. The final stage of the study will be the comparison
of the new models with the parameterizations used in GCM's to assess the
usefulness of the parameterizations.