* 9704155
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Applied         Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* John Hunter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 98,223.00

9704155 Hunter The proposal is to study a number of nonlinear partial
differential equations which model various physical and biological systems. The
first equation is a free-boundary value problem which models the deposition of
surfactant on a surface by a liquid droplet. There is a complex interaction
between the motion of the droplet on the surface and the deposition of
surfactant. The second equation is a system of reaction-diffusion equations
which models an islet of beta-cells in the pancreas. The aim of Professor
Hunter's research is to understand the collective dynamics of the beta-cells and
the formation of spatial patterns in an islet. The third equation is a two
dimensional Burgers equation which models the diffraction and reflection of weak
shock waves in two space dimensions, where there are longstanding discrepancies
between theory and experiment. The fourth equation is a modulation equation
which describes the propagation of nonlinear gravitational waves in Einstein's
theory of general relativity. Professor Hunter proposes to study this equation
with the aim of understanding the formation of space-time singularities in a
nonlinear gravitational wave. Mathematical models of physical and biological
systems provide a way to understand, predict, and control the behavior of those
systems. The proposed research involves the study of a number of mathematical
models of systems of importance in engineering, biology, and basic science. One
model describes the deposition of surfactant on a surface by droplets. Surface
deposition has many applications in materials science, including the printing of
very small structures on surfaces for the control of fluids, and as an
experimental means of preparing liquid crystal display screens. A second model
describes the collective behavior of beta-cells in the pancreas. These cells
produce insulin and play a central role in diseases like diabetes. A third model
describes the propagation of shock waves, which are generated by transonic or
supersonic aircraft, in turbines, and in many other high-speed fluid flows. The
mathematical theory of shock waves remains very poorly understood. The fourth
model is a set of equations which describe the propagation of nonlinear
gravitational waves in Einstein's general theory of relativity. The general
theory of relativity is the fundamental physical theory of gravity, and it
describes the large scale cosmological structure of the universe. The main
obstacle to understanding the predictions of the theory is the nonlinearity of
the Einstein equations. This work is directed towards an increased understanding
of the effects of this nonlinearity.