* 9704231
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research:  Fractal Models of      Hydrodynamic Type
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Wojbor Woyczynski, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2000
* USD 31,668.00

INT-9704231 Woyczynski This U.S.-Poland Collaborative Research is on "Fractal
Models of Hydrodynamic Type." The principal investigators are Dr. Wojbor
Woyczynski of Case Western Reserve University and Dr. Piotr Biler of the
Mathematical Institute of Wroclaw, Poland. They propose a study of random and
nonrandom problems for nonlocal nonlinear parabolic and parabolic-elliptic
models of the hydrodynamic type with fractal anomalous diffusive behavior. While
the physics and engineering communities have recently suggested and vigorously
studied such models, there is no systematic, rigorous mathematical study of the
subject, such as the principal investigators propose. The research will include
an investigation of the asymptotics of solutions with random data and/or
stochastic perturbations, stochastic stability of attractors, the role of the
forward self-similar solutions in description of global solutions and the
backward self-similar equations near the blow-up time. In particular, random
problems for the fractal Burgers equation and Vlasov-Poisson-Boltzmann systems
will be of interest. This research in mathematics fulfills the program
objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to
combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
benefit. *** ??