* 9704208
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Chemical             Characterization of the Inorganic Material in Individual    Snowcrystals Using SEM/EDS and SIMS
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Sheryl Ehrman, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1998
* USD 41,600.00

9704208 Ehrman The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Sheryl H. Ehrman to work with Dr. Urs Baltensperger at the Paul Scherrer
Institute in Villigen, Switzerland. The Institute has strong programs in glacier
and ice core research. This project will study snow crystals using a scanning
electron microscope coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM/EDS) and
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to gather information on how
concentrations of chemical species in ice relate to concentrations of chemical
species in the atmosphere. By studying ice cores, they can find evidence of past
volcanic eruptions, nuclear weapons tests, and past global heating/cooling
cycles. The selected site is ideal for this research, not only because of its
geography, but because the Monte Rosa glacier which will be studied, is a cold
glacier, the temperature of which never rises above zero, thus avoiding melting
which can blur the time resolution in the ice core samples. ***