* 9704535
* Mathematical Sciences:  Topology, Arithmetic Groups         and Toric Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Mark McConnell, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2001
* USD 78,000.00

9704535 McConnell The project has three parts. First, let G = SL(n,R), let Gamma
be an arithmetic subgroup of G, and let X be the symmetric space for G. The
spaces X/Gamma are one setting where automorphic forms can be defined; they
provide a topological approach to parts of the Langlands conjectures. For each
Hecke operator T on the cohomology of X/Gamma, MacPherson and McConnell have
defined a cell complex W(T) which allows one to find the operator by cellular
techniques, i.e., using only a finite amount of combinatorial data. They will
investigate W(T) and extend the definition to more G. In the second part, Ash
and McConnell are computing the cohomology of X/Gamma in degree five for certain
Gamma for SL(4). The goal is to determine the cuspidal classes and the Hecke
action on them. The third part concerns Sheafhom, a suite of computer programs
McConnell has developed. Sheafhom provides models of chain complexes, spectral
sequences, sheaves, and other objects. The largest application to date is its
algorithm for finding the intersection homology (IH) of toric varieties in any
perversity. One goal is to compute the intersection product on IH of toric
varieties, with applications to convex polytopes. Sheafhom has also been used in
the Ash-McConnell work. A computer algebra system is a program for calculation
with algebra, as opposed to numbers. Any program can find 2 + 2, but a computer
algebra system combines whole formulas: the input (2x + 7) + (4x - 3) becomes 6x
+ 4 automatically. This capacity is more abstract, hence more flexible.
Excellent general-purpose systems, like Maple or Mathematica, are available, but
of course they don't have everything that every mathematician needs. In recent
years, several disciplines have been given their own special-purpose systems--
Cayley/Magma for algebraists, Pari for number theorists, and a dozen others.
McConnell has written Sheafhom, a computer algebra system for algebraic
topology. The program, some 10,000 lines long, is written in Lisp, one of the
liveliest (and most efficient) programming languages. The goal is to apply
Sheafhom to study convex polytopes. Convex polyhedra are solid bodies with flat
faces, like cubes, pyramids, or hundred-faced diamonds. A convex polytope is the
same kind of body in the fourth or higher dimension. Since 1980, algebraic
geometry has become a major tool for studying polytopes. This is surprising,
because algebraic geometry includes some of the most abstract mathematics known,
while polytopes, like crystals, are very concrete objects. Sheafhom will make
possible some difficult computations in algebraic topology and geometry; these
will advance our understanding of convex polytopes. McConnell's project actually
has two other parts that are more loosely related to Sheafhom. These are
connected with the Langlands conjectures, a very deep set of ideas that relates
number theory to other, more geometric parts of mathematics. ***