* 9704368
* Conformal Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Gregory Swiatek, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 75,852.00

Summary: The project concentrates on two problems, one in real conformal
dynamics and one in complex. The real part is about poly-modal mappings of the
interval, i.e., smooth maps of the interval with finitely many turning points; a
map with only one turning point is a unimodal transformation. Here the goal of
the proposal can be very simply summarized: what can be carried ovep from the
unimodal theory, so successful in the last five years, to the poly-modal case?
The complex problem is about Siegel disks. Siegel disks are sub-domains of a
complex dynamical system, usually a rational map, where the dynamics can be
brought to a linear rotation by a holomorphic change of coordinates. A lot of
mystery has surrounded the boundaries of Siegel disks. First insights were
gained only in the mid-eighties with the work of M. Herman. The project proposes
to refine some of the analytic tools used in his work to get more information.
Finally, some research is proposed in areas that do not belong to conformal
dynamics, namely induced hyperbolicity in two-dimensional systems and
combinatorial optimization viewed as an applied problem in a very high-
dimensional setting. Unlike the rather conservative goals set in the first two
problems, these should be termed exploratory research. The proposal is concerned
mostly with one-dimensional dynamical systems. Such systems generally come from
models which describe time changes of an observable parameter. Year-to-year
changes in a single animal population lead to this type of system, provided one
assumes that the population in the next year is determined by the current-year
count and no other factors. Some examples that will be studied, notably the
logistic family, grew from models of interest in diverse areas including
physics, ecmnomics and ecology. The questions that the proposal addresses, when
translated back to these models, are related to the long-term behavior and
stability of such systems. For example: will the population tend to a long-t erm
equilibrium? The proposal is also concerned with the problem of combinatorial
optimization. Practical problems such as the "traveling salesman" problem are
believed by many experts to be intractable if one insists on the exact solution.
The proposal will examine a new approach based on the ideas of thermodynamics
with the goal of getting high-performance approximate solutions.