* 9704268
* International Research Fellow Awards:  A Regional Analysis  of Hydrological &amp; Biogeochemical Processes at the           Terrestrial-Aquatic Interface of Andean Amazon River Sys
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Michael McClain, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2000
* USD 88,000.00

9704268 McClain The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twenty-four-month postdoctoral research visit
by Dr. Michael E. McClain of the University of Miami to work with Dr. Carlos A.
Llerena at the Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina in Lima, Peru. Dr. McClain
will initiate a regional analysis of hydrological and biogeochemical processes
operating at the terrestrial-aquatic interface of rivers in the eastern Andean
cordillera of Peru. This project will link with another NSF sponsored program,
the Carbon in the Amazon River Experiment (CAMREX). This research indicates that
riparian zones are particularly active environments of chemical change and
transport. It is critical that a baseline of chemical and dynamic data be
collected now, for comparison to physical basin characteristics before extensive
development of the often targeted riparian zones. It is an important idea to
calibrate these processes chemically and relate them to broad catchment
properties that can be remotely sensed on a large scale and interpreted within
the context of a GIS model. This work will also provide the nucleus of another
research initiative, the Andean Amazon Rivers Analysis and Monitoring (AARAM)
Project, which is being funded initially by the Inter American Institute for
Global Change Researah. It will link scientists from Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador,
Colombia, Brazil, France and the U.S. ***