* 9704255
* Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe        Microscope for a Multi-Chamber Molecular Beam Epitaxy System Fabrication of Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Michael Santos, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 123,650.00

9704255 Johnson A variable-temperature scanning probe microscope will be
installed in an ultra-high-vacuum system that already consists of two growth
chambers for molecular beam epitaxy and a surface analysis chamber. One growth
chamber is currently used for the heteroepitaxy of fluoride and IV-VI (lead-
salt) materials on silicon, while the other growth chamber produces InSb-based
heterostructures. Incorporating the requested instrumentation with this growth
facility will result in a powerful tool for in situ characterization of surfaces
produced during the epitaxial growth of dissimilar materials. This instrument
will operate as a scanning tunneling microscope or an atomic force microscope.
Samples can be studied at temperatures somewhat higher than the typical growth
temperatures and the same region of a sample can imaged every time the sample is
transferred from a growth chamber to the microscope. Materials research issues
that will be addressed include: the effects of buffer layers in large- mismatch
heteroepitaxy; the atomic structure of novel surface reconstructions; mechanisms
of alloy ordering and clustering, and dopant incorporation; and the real time
progression of strain relaxation for systems with thermal expansion mismatch.
Some information derived from the proposed studies will uniquely apply to the
material studied, while some effects will be prototypical of many materials. As
in the past, improved understanding of such issues will clearly lead to improved
heterostructures and devices. In addition to the direct research benefits,
acquisition of the instrument will enhance the training of graduate students
from several different departments through interdisciplinary research using
state-of-the-art facilities. ***