* 9704564
* Topics in Dynamical Systems:  Attractors, Dimension,        Lattice Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Yakov Pesin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2000
* USD 104,073.00

The proposed work involves a broad range of problems in the theory of dynamical
systems (in particular, hyperbolic theory) and its applications to and relations
with dimension theory, mathematical physics (including coupled map lattices),
ergodic theory, and statistical mechanics. Projects in the dimension theory of
dynamical systems include: the description of several multifractal spectra
(including dimension spectra, entropy spectra, and spectra for Lyapunov
exponents) and the corresponding multifractal decompositions for various classes
of dynamical systems of hyperbolic type (non-conformal expanding maps, Axiom A
diffeomorphisms, etc.); and the establishment of the multifractal rigidity
phenomenon for multidimensional conformal expanding maps (the classification of
dynamical systems up to multifractal spectra). In the theory of coupled map
lattices (CML), the principal investigator will study: infinite-dimensional SRB
measures for CML, which includes establishing the characteristic property and
thermodynamical limit, describing the Lyapunov spectrum, and proving the entropy
formula; and the stability of traveling wave solutions of CML and relations
between traveling wave solutions for CML and the corresponding PDE (such as
Ginzburg-Landau equation, Kolmogorov-Petrovski-Peskunov equation, Huxley
equation, etc.). The principles of symmetry and self-similarity are nature's
most beautiful creations. For example, they are expressed in fractals which are
famous for their beautiful but complicated geometric shapes. Examples of
fractals vary from well-known ones-cost lines or mountain ranges-to less known-
distribution of stars in galaxies and galaxies in the universe or root systems
of plants. Dimension theory is a mathematical theory which is designed to
explain fractals' structure. And in dynamics the presence of invariant fractals
often results in unstable ``turbulent-like'' motions and is associated with
``chaotic'' behavior. Thus the study of fractals can help understand the most
complicat ed phenomena such as turbulence in the ocean or atmosphere. The
proposed work involves research in a recently developing area which lies in the
interface between dimension theory and the theory of dynamical systems. Focusing
on invariant fractals and their influence on stochastic properties of systems,
the principal investigator intends to provide a comprehensive and systematic
treatment of modern dimension theory in dynamical systems. Results are expected
to be of great importance not only to advanced mathematicians but to a wide
range of scientists who depend upon mathematical modeling of dynamical
processes, including physicists, specialists in numerical modeling, engineers,
molecular biologists, etc.