* 9704893
* Mathematical Sciences:  Properties of Quantum Invariants    in 3-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,08/05/1999
* Lev Rozansky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/05/1999
* USD 65,331.00

9704893 Rozansky An important development in 3d topology of the last decade was
a discovery of "quantum invariants," most notably, the Jones polynomial of links
and the Reshetikhin-Turaev (RT) invariant of 3-manifolds. Although these
invariants are quite effective in classifying knots and 3-manifolds, their
topological nature remains mostly obscure. The purpose of this research is to
study the topological origin of quantum invariants by decomposing them into
simpler pieces, called "finite type invariants," and trying to explain the
nature of these pieces individually. This might be accomplished by using the
tools of quantum field theory, in particular, the asymptotic expansion of path
integrals through Feynman diagrams. E. Witten has identified the Jones
polynomial and RT invariant as certain path integrals taken over the classes of
SU(2) connections on a 3-manifold. This approach has already led to a discovery
of the Alexander polynomial and Milnor linking numbers inside the Jones
polynomial. The simplest "pieces" of the RT invariant were identified (at least,
as a conjecture) with the Chern-Simons invariant of flat connections,
Reidemeister torsion and SU(2) Casson invariant. One hopes that more complicated
topological invariants, such as the Casson invariant of other Lie groups, will
be found among other pieces of the RT invariant. A classification of knots is an
open topological problem. A knot in topology is a closed rope (i.e., a circle)
which is knotted. Can a particular knot be untangled by continuously deforming
the rope without cutting it? How can one determine this just by looking at a
picture of the knot? This problem may be solved if one finds enough knot
invariants. A knot invariant is a number that can be calculated by examining a
picture of a knot. The number should not change when a knot is continuously
deformed. Thus if a knot invariant takes different values on two knots, then
these knots are different, because they cannot be deformed into one another. For
a long time the only effective knot invariant was the Alexander polynomial. A
lot of new invariants, such as the Jones polynomial, were discovered during the
last decade. These invariants are quite effective in distinguishing knots, but
their origin is still a mystery, because their topological interpretation is
mostly missing. The purpose of this project is to try to fill this gap by using
the tools of quantum field theory, such as path integral and Feynman diagrams.
The relevance of quantum field theory to low dimensional topology was discovered
by E. Witten. He demonstrated that the Jones polynomial comes from a particle
theory in which knots appear as space-time trajectories of hypothetical
elementary particles. The particles interact with each other in ways that
resemble the "real life" particles. This approach has yielded numerous
mathematical conjectures that may lead to a better understanding of the
topological nature of the Jones polynomial and ultimately to the classification
of knots. ***