* 9704649
* Robust Parameter Design:  Modeling, Analysis and Layout     Techniques
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* C. F. Jeff Wu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 262,609.00

9704649 Chien-Fu J. Wu Robust parameter design employs statistical methods and
engineering ideas to improve the quality of a product or process by making it
less sensitive to uncontrollable variation. It has had a big impact on
manufacturing as demonstrated by many industrial case studies. The main focus is
to study modeling and analysis of data from parameter design experiments and
layout techniques for efficient experimental planning. First, three aspects of
robust design with static characteristics are considered: 1. theoretical
characterizations of robust factor settings and their relation to commonly used
graphical methods; 2. loss due to poor quality using very general loss
functions, especially where no adjustment factor can be identified; and 3.
assessment of measurement systems that collect ordered categorical data. A
related problem to the last aspect is the modeling and analysis of ordered
categorical data from designed experiments when some of the data responses are
misclassified. Next, two aspects of robust parameter design with functional
characteristics (i.e., whose response is a functional relation, instead of a
single value) are studied: comparison of generalized signal-to-noise ratio based
method to a response function modeling method that employs a two-stage modeling,
and the modeling and analysis of degradationcurves from experiments for robust
reliability improvement. Finally, efficient planning of experiments is studied
for parameter designswith static characteristics and with signal-response
systems. Novel theoretical and computational tools are employed to solve this
problem. Robust parameter design employs statistical methods and engineering
ideas to improve the quality of a product or process by making it less sensitive
to uncontrollable variation. It has been successfully implemented as
demonstrated by many industrial case studies. The investigators study the use of
robust parameter design in more complicated situations than considered to date,
thereb y, extending the scope of robust parameter design. Robust parameter
design uses experiments whose two major issues are how to properly choose the
experimental conditions (i.e., experimental plans) and how to model and analyze
the data (i.e., analysis) to identify the important factors and recommend the
optimal settings for these factors. In Part I, (i) theoretical characterizations
of robust factor settings are obtained and related to graphical methods, (ii)
new strategies are developed for minimizing loss due to poor quality as measured
by very general loss functions, (iii)assessment and analysis of measurement
systems that collect ordered categorical data. In Part II, (i) two methods of
analyzing signal-response systems (e.g., gas gauge where the signal is the
amount of gas in the gas tank and the response is the reading from the gas
gauge) are compared (ii) general models and methods for analyzing degradation
curves are investigated, (e.g., fluorescent light intensity decreases over
time). Using degradation data is strategic because information about reliability
can be obtained sooner and more efficiently. The research results in Part II
will be tested on an automobile project. In Part III, the problem of efficient
and economic planning of experiments is studied for parameter design problems.