* 9704428
* Phase Transformations in Rare-Earth Metals and Alloys       Subjected to Ultra High Pressures and Synthetic Diamond     Anvils
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2002
* USD 449,856.00

9704428 Vohra The research investigates phase transformations in rare- earth
metals and alloys subjected to megabar pressures and develops the scientific
base necessary to fabricate gem quality diamond anvils by chemical vapor
deposition techniques (CVD). The experimental investigations are carried out at
the High Pressure and CVD Laboratory at the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB) and the National High Pressure beamlines at CHESS, Cornell University and
NSLS, at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The focus of this study is to establish
phase diagrams for selected prototype rare-earth metals and alloys in the
megabar regime (100-400 Gpa). The focus is on heavy rare-earth metals, lutetium
and ytterbium, where phase transitions and dramatic changes in electronic
structure and valence are expected at ultra high pressures. Pressure also causes
delocalization of the f- shell giving rise to "collapsed - low symmetry crystal
structures." A high resolution image plate x-ray diffraction technique is
employed in conjunction with a synchrotron source to investigate low symmetry
crystal structures as well as the phenomenon of crystal grain growth discovered
recently in rare-earth metals. Also examined is a related transition metal,
yttrium, which is expected to simulate rare-earth behavior at high pressures,
and recently has been predicted to transform to the bcc structure at 280 Gpa.
The measured phase boundaries and pressure-volume (P-V) relationships provide
stringent tests for various models of f-delocalization under pressure. A second
direction in the research is on fundamental studies on CVD diamond growth for
fabrication of synthetic diamonds with low levels of nitrogen impurity for
applications in diamond anvil cell devices, In addition, high pressure materials
research facilities supported by this grant are employed in research experiences
for undergraduates (REU) projects during the summer and for undergraduates in
the Alabama Alliance for Minori ty Participation (AMP) Program at UAB. %%% This
research has the potential for making significant contributions to the
understanding of the structural and electronic properties of rare-earth
materials. The research on diamond has broad technological applications if
successful. ***