* 9704237
* Development of a Cubic-Anvil Experimental Facility for High Pressure and Current Sintering of Bulk Nanocrystalline      Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Charles Lesher, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1999
* USD 180,810.00

9704237 Lesher This award provides support to acquire equipment for the
fabrication of large volume parts of materials with nanocrystalline
microstructure for mechanical testing and thermodynamic studies. The backbone of
this new fabrication system will be the cubic-anvil apparatus. The multianvil
payload isdriven by a 1000-ton uniaxial hydraulic press equipped with automated
pressure and temperature control for tailored processing. This equipment is
unique in combining ultrahigh pressure (up to 5 Gpa) and large sample capacity
(5-10 cc) of the payload with resistance and pulsing direct current heating
adapted from current plasma activated sintering systems. The recovery of large
nanocrystalline samples using this apparatus offers new research opportunities
to examine sintering behavior, to determine mechanical properties, and to
characterize thermodynamic properties of a wide range of nanocrystalline ceramic
and metallic materials. %%% This project reflects a multidisciplinary
collaboration on the UC Davis campus involving faculty, researchers and students
in materials science, chemistry, and geology. This new facility will greatly
enhance research programs currently supported by NSF to characterize
nanocrystalline ceramics (Al2O3, AlN, Si3N4, SiC) and metals (W, Fe, Ni), and
various nanocomposites (Al2O3-Sic, Al2O3-ZrO2, Al2O3-diamond, Si3N4-SiC, Ni-
Al2O3). New investigations requiring the large sample volume capabilities of the
cubic-anvil apparatus will include tensile strength and fracture toughness
measurements, and enthalpy determinations by solution and high temperature
calorimetry. We anticipate the results of these studies will contribute
fundamentally to our understanding of nanocrystalline structures, mechanical and
thermodynamic properties, as well as processing parameters essential to the
eventual development of large-scale fabrication of durable ceramic composites
and monoliths for technological applications ***