* 9704240
* CAREER:  Building Conceptual Natural Language Processing    Systems for Practical Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2003
* Ellen Riloff, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 04/30/2003
* USD 477,213.00

This research aims to develop a conceptual natural language processing (NLP)
system with adaptable components that can be easily tailored for different
domains and applications. The architecture of the system consists of fine-
grained layers to support various depths of text processing. The shallow layers
support syntactic processing, which may be sufficient for some information
retrieval tasks, while the deeper layers support semantic and conceptual
processing for in-depth language understanding. The system includes components
for part-of-speech tagging, prepositional phrase attachment, semantic feature
identification, and concept extraction. Each component can be tailored for new
domains with minimal manual effort. The layered architecture also allows
students to develop individual components and plug them in to the larger system
for experimentation. The education goals are to use the system as the basis for
a hands-on science workshop for young girls, for summer lectures to high school
students, for class projects in natural language processing and machine
learning, and for graduate and undergraduate research projects. The purpose of
the research is to develop techniques for building conceptual natural language
understanding systems automatically or semi-automatically for new domains.
Generating conceptual sentence analyzers quickly and efficiently is an important
step toward many practical applications, including conceptual information
retrieval, text categorization, and information extraction.