* 9704242
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation:  Mechanical and Electromechanical Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2003
* Edward Haug, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 02/28/2003
* USD 1,277,860.00

EEC-9704242 Haug, Ed/U of Iowa The long time and high costs of developing new
vehicles and equipment for future products are becoming prohibitive. Companies
and the Government are increasingly turning to simulation to determine the
effectiveness of the design of new products. Research to develop a virtual
proving ground will provide the data necessary for product testing without
producing expensive prototypes. The University of Iowa and the University of
Texas at Austin have joined together to form an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center (I/UCRC) for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation: Mechanical and
Electromechanical Systems. About a dozen companies and Federal agencies have
committed to become members of the Center. The Center meets all requirements of
the Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program. The multi-
university Center brings together unique capabilities of research teams from
three universities (two of which will receive NSF I/UCRC funds) to address
research areas that none of the schools could address alone. The Center will
utilize unique capabilities and facilities for vehicle system simulation
developed at the University of Iowa as part of a prior NSF I/UCRC in Simulation
and Design Optimization of Mechanical Systems. These capabilities, with the new
addition of the University of Iowa's National Advanced Driving Simulator (NADS)
for the driver-in-the-loop real-time simulation, combined with expertise at the
University of Texas at Austin in electromechanical system simulation and design
and expertise at Auburn University in vehicle-terrain simulation, will allow the
proposed Center to do virtual proving ground simulation. Virtual proving ground
simulation incorporates the dynamics of the interaction between a vehicle and
the surface on which it moves. The research program consists of core research
projects funded from center membership fees, and pilot projects funded by both
member companies and Federal agencies. The proposed core resea rch projects are:
Vehicle and Equipment Virtual Proving Ground Modeling and Simulation, Virtual
Proving Ground Modeling, Dynamic System Simulation, Tire/Track-Soil Interaction
Modeling (Auburn University), Numerical Methods for Virtual Proving Ground
Simulation, Electromechanical System Modeling, Power System Simulation in a
Virtual Proving Ground Environment, Simulation-Based Design of Power Systems,
and Power System Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation. The bulk of the
funding for the universities to work on pilot projects will come from the
Department of Defense and other Federal agencies. These projects are within the
fundamental goals and objectives of the Center's research program. They greatly
expand the Center's research base and effectively guide the direction of the
research to meet industrial needs. The proposed pilot projects are: Simulation-
Based Design of Hybrid-Electric Vehicles, Agricultural Equipment Virtual Proving
Ground, Construction Equipment Virtual Proving Ground, Military Vehicle Virtual
Proving Ground, Rocket System Virtual Proving Ground, Simulation-Based Design of
Advanced Electromechanical Devices, and Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation
of Critical Power System Components. The DoD and other Federal agencies will
support pilot projects with funds as they become available during the five year
period. The Director (Principal Investigator) and co-Director and their
colleagues are eminent researchers and uniquely qualified to run this Center.
The Center is being cost shared by the Engineering Design Program of ENG/DMII
and will be coordinated with NSF's participation in the interagency Partnership
for a New Generation of Vehicles (PNGV) Program. The Program Manager recommends
the University of Iowa be awarded $43,000 annually for a five year continuing
award. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Director / and or the
Division Director of the Engineering Education and Centers Division will review
the Center on a number of renewal criteria including the following: 1) the
extent to which the industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent
to which the support base is developing; 3) the extent to which a robust
research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program
Director will recommend support for the next period of this continuing award. An
additional authorization of $9,826,236 over five years is recommended for pilot
projects. Funding of the pilot projects from the DoD and other Federal agencies
will occur through a series of separate interagency transfers of funds by the
collaborating Federal agencies, identifying each project and task and the total
amount of funds that are allocated to it. As part of the above, $600,000 is
recommended for a one-year award for an initial pilot project with funds
provided by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. An additional
authorization of $400,000 annually for five years is recommended for anticipated
Federal agency Center memberships.