* 9704032
* Development of a Tetrahertz Spectrometer for Investigating  Correlated-Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ward Beyermann, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2000
* USD 254,000.00

l 8 -w- l 9704032 Beyermann Measurements of the optical response of materials at
terahertz frequencies are the most difficult to perform with existi.pg
e,xperimental techniques. This is unfortunate since interesting physical
phenomena in manwsnms leads to a strongly frequency-dependent conductivity at
terahertz frequencies. The objective of this project is to construct a terahertz
spectrometer for measuring the frequency dependent properties of correlated
materials at low temperatures using a new technique for generating and detecting
broad-band terahertz radiation. The project requires interdisciplinary expertise
that is provided by the two principal investigators (P.I.'s). The terahertz
spectrometer is based on recent advances in the ultrafast laser community. A
femtosecond pulsed laser is used to photogenerate carriers in a GaAs crystal.
The injected carriers accelerate and approach drift velocity in the depletion
electric field on a subpicosecond timescale. The radiation from these carriers
is a coherent-picosecond-electromagnetic pulse which propagates away from the
crystal in the direction of the pump pulse. The source is reasonably efficient
with a peak power of several mW. Using ordinary optical components, the
terahertz beam can be reflected from a sample, which is located inside a
cryostat with a variabletemperature capability, and the electric field can be
detected as a function of time by measuring the electro-optic phase retardation
induced on a time-delayed femtosecond probe pulse in a nonlinear ZnTe crystal.
With this technique, radiation can be produced that is centered between 0.5 and
1.0 THz with a bandwidth of ~1 THz. The complex Fourier transforms of the
incident and reflected electric fields can be used to determine the real and
imaginary parts of the complex dielectric function of the material as a function
of frequency. The broad-band terahertz spectrometer represents a significant
advancement over traditional methods in its ability to measure the response at
frequencies important in correlated systems. For one thing, it is currently very
difficult to measure both the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric
function at terahertz frequencies without invoking the Kramers-Kronig relation.
After building and testing the spectrometer, the terahertz response of several
heavy-fermion and mixed-valent systems will be measured over a temperature range
from 1.5 to 300 K. In these systems, strong electron correlations lead to an
enhanced Fermi-liquid ground state at low temperatures. Measurements using
microwave and far-infrared spectroscopy have observed a narrow Drude response in
some of these systems, but the limitations of the conventional techniques
prohibit a complete characterization of the response on a variety of materials.
Some new systemse such as small-gap Kondo insulators and materials that display
nonfermi-liquid behavior, will also be examined. Features in the conductivity
are expected at terahertz frequencies in both these systems. Other systems,
including quantum magnets, quantum well and dot structures, compounds with
charge and spin-density-wave ground states, and materials where disorder-induced
localization is important are all examples where strong correlations produce a
frequency-dependent conductivity at terahertz frequencies, and experiments are
planned for many of these systems in the future. Finally, the spectrometer's
utility goes beyond the measurements that are being proposed. After developing
capabilities to reduce the sample' s temperature below 1 K, we could examine the
electrodynamic response in the exotic superconducting ground state of some heavy
fermion materials. ***