* 9704181
* An Analytical Model for the Bond of Steel Prestressing Strands
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Anant Kukreti, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 12/31/2000
* USD 209,596.00

In 1986, reported research results indicated that current design provisions that
govern the anchorage of steel prestressing strands were inadequate. The Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA) responded by issuing a moratorium in October of
1988 that increased the development length requirements for pretensioned strands
until additional research was available to restructure or verify the current
code provisions. That moratorium remains in effect today. Subsequently, several
research projects were undertaken to measure experimentally the transfer lengths
and development lengths of pretensioned prestressing strands. However, the
results from various research projects indicate widely disparate results, with
measured transfer lengths varying more than 100% between different research
projects. In fact, the defining characteristic of transfer length measurements
appear to be their wide degree of scatter, despite researchers' best efforts to
control variables. Collectively, the widely disparate transfer length and
development length results indicate that all of the relevant variables have not
been sufficiently identified nor quantified. This research will investigate the
fundamental bond mechanisms to develop behavioral and analytical models that can
become the foundation for design.