* 9704364
* Topics in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Michael Chris Laskowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 11/30/2000
* USD 65,712.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to continue his research on five problems of
model theory, a branch of mathematical logic. The first three problems are
connected with extending and generalizing Shelah's dichotomy theorem.
Specifically, the PI proposes to study the possible types of branching that can
occur in decomposition trees of models of classifiable theories, inherent
limitations on extending Shelah's theorem to uncountable languages, and those
theories whose models are characterized by systems of invariants involving
finite subsets of the model. The first of these problems emanated from the
completion of the classification of the uncountable spectra of countable
theories. The last two problems deal with new methods of constructing models
that are reminiscent of forcing constructions. In work with Shelah, the PI
defined two new methods of constructing models of small, stable theories with a
type of infinite multiplicity, one based on choosing realizations of the type
with positive measure and the other based on choosing non-meager realizations.
Whereas the notions of measure and category typically go hand in hand throughout
mathematics, there is an essential asymmetry between the notions in this
context. The final problem is to investigate the feasibility of obtaining an
o-minimal expansion of the reals containing a function whose growth rate exceeds
any exponential polynomial. It seems possible that by using new results of
Wilkie and Macintyre, such an expansion could be constructed in the manner of
Cohen forcing. As the term is used here, "model theory" is essentially the
systematic study of algebraic structures. A theory is simply a set of sentences
and its class of models consists of the possible universes in which each of the
sentences of the theory is true. It turns out that if one asks rather general
questions about the class of models of a theory (such as the number of models of
a certain size) the answer depends only on a small set of combinations of
elements. Tha t is, the number of models of a certain size is determined by
which of these combinations are permitted by the theory and which are
prohibited. Much of the focus of this proposal is to better understand what
these sets of combinations look like in various contexts. The study of some of
these sets of combinations has recently found applications in PAC learning
theory and in the study of the expressive power of neural network architectures.