* 9704711
* Studies in Industrial Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Dennis Lin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 132,450.00

NSF DMS-9704711 Topics in Industrial Statistics Dennis K.J. Lin Penn State
University PROJECT SUMMARY A major objective of the National Science Foundation
is to improve the nation's capacity for intellectual and economic growth. It
does this by supporting the discovery of new knowledge and the enhancement of a
skilled workforce. American industry is becoming increasingly aware of the
benefits of running statistically designed experiments. In complex experimental
work, the number of potential factors is large, but often only a few active
factors are expected. A problem frequently encountered is how to identify the
factors that matter, and consequently improve the quality and productivity of
the products. The basic results we hope to obtain here will be extremely useful
to practitioners, since new designs will be furnished that will save
considerable cost when real world issues are involved. When the number of
potential factors is large and only a few active factors are expected, we do not
need unbiased estimates to detect those active factors. In this project, we
propose the use of supersaturated designs -- allowing for a slight bias in
estimation but significantly reducing the design size in experimental work. Some
initial results were actually utilized in electronic and chemical industries
(specifically, IBM and Lonza). The proposed methodology helps extract useful
information that may not be provided by "traditional wisdom." From these
practical experiences, it is anticipated that a much wider application is
possible. On the other hand, this research has broad theoretical implications.
Some theoretical results have been obtained, and it is shown that those results
can be applied to other statistical areas, such as linear models, information
theory and optimal design. Another statistical area that has received a great
deal of attention in industry involves reliability problems. The estimation of
system (or component) reliability is a common problem for many industries. When
a system consists of several components, and when the cause of failure is
unspecified, the estimation problem is unresolved. This project proposes the use
of a Bayesian approach. Some initial results applied to IBM PS/2 personal
computer data have been obtained. More general fundamental research will be
further studied. Problems given here are very specific to be realistically
solved during the funding period. However, it has a much wider research impact
for both industrial applications or academia type research.