* 9704534
* Matrix Inequalities in Engineering and Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Chi-Kwong Li, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 06/30/2001
* USD 117,000.00

Matrix Inequalities in Engineering and Sciences (DMS 9704534) Chi-Kwong Li and
Roy Mathias The theory of matrix inequalities has applications in many fields
including electrical engineering, statistics, economics, psychology, graph
theory, differential equations, operations research and optimization, operator
theory, quantum physics, numerical analysis and control theory. However, many
researchers in these areas are not able to use the existing results and proof
techniques in matrix theory to develop their theory effectively because their
expertise is not in matrix theory and there is a lack of communication between
them and researchers on matrix theory. The principal investigators have
considerable experience in matrix inequalities and have developed from scratch,
adapted, or borrowed many techniques to study the subject. In this project, they
plan to develop and apply the theory of matrix inequalities to different
problems that arise from applications. In particular, the emphasis will be on
proving matrix inequalities by conceptual rather than computational techniques,
and putting them in more general and accessible settings, so that the results
can be readily used by non-specialists. It is worth mentioning that this project
has strong connections with a number of areas of Federal strategic interest. For
example, in high-performance computing, one needs to be able to do computation
efficiently and accurately. In many situations, computations are very sensitive
to round-off error introduced by the machine itself. The design of fast
convergent methods in these cases is greatly facilitated by the theory of matrix
inequalities. As mentioned in the first paragraph, matrix inequalities are
important tools in control theory, a regime that is crucial to the design of
manufacturing plants, aircraft, automobiles, etc. Applications of matrix
inequalities in other subjects, including quantum physics and semi-definite
programming are proposed , and problems arising in economics, statistics and
psychology will also be considered.