* 9704567
* Reactive Flows in Porous Media:  Applications, Modeling,    Simulation, and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* John Chadam, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 244,000.00

Chadam 9704567 Reactive flows in porous media may undergo shape instabilities in
the reaction (equivalently, porosity/permeability change) front. Because flow
changes are coupled to these instabilities, it now appears to be the case that
this reaction-infiltration mechanism plays an important role in many
strategically significant problems (see below). The investigator models such
phenomena as coupled nonlinear partial-ordinary differential equations and as
moving free boundary problems and investigates the importance of the role played
by dispersive effects, geomechanical effects, boundary and inertial effects,
layered and random media, concentration dependent diffusivity and permeability
and surface reactions. Basic existence, uniqueness and regularity of the coupled
system of equations are studied as well as the sharp interface limit. The loss
of stability of high-symmetry solutions is studied using bifurcation theory and
numerical simulation. These mathematical models of goechemical processes and the
results listed above have direct application to many problems in the petroleum,
mining and waste management industries. For example, in enhanced oil recovery,
the loss of stability of the spherical reaction front at the injection well
often leads to fingering of the reactants directly to the removal site
completely bypassing the oil. Moreover the dissolution and reprecipitation of
the porous media by the reactants can sometimes lead to complete plugging at the
injection well requiring expensive redrilling. Similar processes can explain
observed reductions in the effectiveness of bioremediation of environmental
wastes or predict the observed, but previously unexpected, rapid encroachment of
nuclear and chemical wastes on sensitive environments. By calculating the shape
of redox fronts, these methods can also be used (avoiding expensive drilling) to
locate lens-shaped (roll-front) uranium deposits. Funding for the project is
provided by the progra m of Applied Mathematics and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the Hydrologic Sciences program in
EAR.