* 9704462
* RPG: Social Behavior And Population Genetics of Subterranean Rodents
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1997,10/31/1998
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 10/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9704462 Lacey The proposed research will explore relationships between social
behavior, demography, and population genetic structure in two species of tuco-
tucos (Rodentia: Ctenomyidae) from northern Patagonia. Previous studies by the
PI have revealed that these taxa exhibit marked differences in social behavior
and demography that generate discrete predictions regarding interspecific
differences in the apportionment of genetic variation within and among local
populations. To quantify population genetic structure, tissue samples will be
obtained from multiple populations of each species by sampling along north-south
transects through the Limay Valley, Neuquen Province, Argentina. Ctenomyid-
specific microsatellite primeers developed by the PI will be used to
characterize levels and patterns of genetic diversity in each species. To assess
the role of historical factors in creating observed differences in population
genetic structure, sequence data will be generated for two portions of the
mitochondrial genome. Sequence data from the mitochondrial control region will
be used in phylogeographic analyses that distinguis between current and
historical gene flow. To place comparative studies of ctenomyids into an
evolutionary framework, sequence data from the cytochrome b locus of the
mitochondrial genome will be used to explore the phylogenetic relationship
between the study taxa. Although current hypotheses regarding the evolution of
sociality among subterranean rodents suggestthat social behavior and population
genetic structure are fundamentally linked, no studies have explicitly compared
patterns of genetic variation in solitary and social taxa. When combined with
behavioral and demographic data from ongoing studies of tuco-tucos from theLimay
Valley, the proposed molecular analyses will yield a uniquely detailed picture
of ctnomyid population structure. Data form these taxa will, in turn, provide
the basis for comparative analyses of social behavior, demography, and
population str ucture among ctenomyids from other portions of South America.
More generally, the proposed research will establish much needed links between
the disciplines of behavioral ecology, population genetics and evolutionary
biology.