* 9704110
* Acquisition of a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for the      Characterization of Nanocomposite Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Andrew Gavrin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1999
* USD 71,540.00

9704110 Gavrin This vibrating sample magnetometer will be used to perform
research on the magnetic properties of metal-rich granular ferromagnetic solids.
These are nanocomposite materials in which there exists a continuous meal matrix
with inclusions of an immiscible nonmagnetic phase (e.g., Al2 O3). Using the
language of percolation theory, they may be described as well above the critical
concentration, with a percolating magnetic phase. While recent years have seen
an upsurge in granular metals research, metal-rich materials have been largely
ignored due to the absence of the giant magnetoresistance effect. Although
natural in the course of research, this state of affairs should not persist;
metal rich systems offer several promising avenues of research, both in applied
and fundamental science. Compared with granular metals below the percolation
transition, these materials are both easier to study and more technologically
promising. There are two principle reasons for this: There is no difficulty
evaluating the effects of a particle size distribution, and The net
magnetization is much greater, and Tc may be well above room temperature. This
proposal will detail two studies of these materials. The first deals with the
fundamental nature of magnetism in disordered systems, while the second
addresses a possible application. Respectively the projects are: A study of the
magnetic phase transition as the nonmagnetic impurities reduce the magnetic
correlation length, and An evaluation of potential magnetic recording
characteristics of hard magnetic alloys with nonmagnetic impurities. %%% This
vibrating sample magnetometer will be used to perform research on the magnetic
properties of metal-rich granular ferromagnetic solids. These are nanocomposite
materials in which there exists a continuous meal matrix with inclusions of an
immiscible nonmagnetic phase (e.g., Al2 O3). Using the language of percolation
theory, they may be described as well above t he critical concentration, with a
percolating magnetic phase. While recent years have seen an upsurge in granular
metals research, metal-rich materials have been largely ignored due to the
absence of the giant magnetoresistance effect. Although natural in the course of
research, this state of affairs should not persist; metal rich systems offer
several promising avenues of research, both in applied and fundamental science.
Compared with granular metals below the percolation transition, these materials
are both easier to study and more technologically promising. There are two
principle reasons for this: There is no difficulty evaluating the effects of a
particle size distribution, and The net magnetization is much greater, and Tc
may be well above room temperature. This proposal will detail two studies of
these materials. The first deals with the fundamental nature of magnetism in
disordered systems, while the second addresses a possible application.
Respectively the projects are: A study of the magnetic phase transition as the
nonmagnetic impurities reduce the magnetic correlation length, and An evaluation
of potential magnetic recording characteristics of hard magnetic alloys with
nonmagnetic impurities. ***