* 9704194
* Japan STA Program:  Novel Element-Specific Studies of       Magnetic Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Kazimierz Gofron, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/1999
* USD 20,100.00

Gofron 9704194 This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Kazimierz Gofron at the Japan Atomic
Energy Research Institute (JAERI), Kamigori, Japan. Dr. Gofron will work with
Dr. Jun'ichiro Mizuki, Lead Scientist at the Spring-8 Facility, on a research
project entitled, "Novel Element-Specific Studies of Magnetic Materials." The
proposed research will use a magnetic circular x-ray dichroism technique (MCXD)
in conjunction with photoemission and conventional magnetic probe to study the
element specific magnetism of magneto- optic materials. The novel, high-
resolution magnetic study will focus on both the empty and occupied electronic
states. Attention will also be paid to orbital specificity. In these synchrotron
radiation experiments the polarized x-ray photons will be used as an element
sensitive magnetic probe for precisely monitoring the electronic structure of
specific atomic species in magneto-optic material. As magneto-optic materials
are currently used in data storage, of particular interest are materials with a
large Kerr effect, the rotation of the plane of polarization of incident
linearly polarized light. One of the foremost goals of the research is to better
understand how individual chemical species contributes to magnetism and magneto-
optic response, as well as obtain insight as to how each orbital of a given
atomic species contributes to the magneto-optic response. ***