* 9704257
* Acquisition of a High Field Low Temperature Cryo-system for Neutron Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Jeffrey Lynn, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

9704257 Broholm This award provides support for the acquisition of a cryo-
system consisting of a 12 Tesla superconducting magnet and a dilution
refrigerator for use in neutron scattering experiments. The instrument will be
located at the Reactor Radiation Division of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology in Gaithersburg, MD. It will be shared by investigators at Johns
Hopkins University, Princeton University, and the University of Maryland,
College Park. Researchers will use this instrument for NSF funded research of
magnetic and superconducting materials of fundamental interest in condensed
matter physics. These include: low-dimensional antiferromagnets where quantum-
induced disorder gives novel cooperative phenomena, orgranic conductors
(Bechgard salts) that display a cascade of unusual field-induced phase
transitions between spin-density wave states, and heavy fermion materials where
interactions between local magnetic moments and conduction electrons yield novel
magnetic states. Also featured are high-field studies of the vortex lattice in
high- Tc superconductors, and exploration of the coexistence of magnetism and
superconductivity in the high-Tc materials and a new class of quaternary
intermetallic compounds. All of these are systems where the application of a
large magnetic field can proufoundly alter their behavior, particularly their
magnetic correlations and excitations. By probing these effects directly with
inelastic neutron scattering, it will be possible to greatly extend the
understanding of these materials. The instrument will be made available to other
researchers through the neutron scattering users programs at NIST. It will
therefore become an important world-class resource for the entire United States
neutron scattering community. %%% This award provides support for the
acquisition of a cryo- system consisting of a 12 Tesla superconducting magnet
and a dilution refrigerator for use in neutron scattering experiments. The
instrument will be located at the Reactor Radiation Division of the National
Institute of Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, MD. It will be shared by
investigators at Johns Hopkins University, Princeton University, and the
University of Marylald, College Park. Researchers will use this instrument for
NSF funded research of magnetic and superconducting materials of fundamental
interest in condensed matter physics. These include: low-dimensional
antiferromagnets where quantum-induced disorder gives novel cooperative
phenomena, orgranic conductors (Bechgard salts) that display a cascade of
unusual field-induced phase transitions between spin-density wave states, and
heavy fermion materials where interactions between local magnetic moments and
conduction electrons yield novel magnetic states. Also featured are high-field
studies of the vortex lattice in high- Tc superconductors, and exploration of
the coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity in the high-Tc materials and
a new class of quaternary intermetallic compounds. All of these are systems
where the application of a large magnetic field can proufoundly alter their
behavior, particularly their magnetic correlations and excitations. By probing
these effects directly with inelastic neutron scattering, it will be possible to
greatly extend the understanding of these materials. The instrument will be made
available to other researchers through the neutron scattering users programs at
NIST. It will therefore become an important world-class resource for the entire
United States neutron scattering community. ***