* 9704289
* SBIR PHASE II:  Powder Lubricated Bearing Development
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Hooshang Heshmat, MOHAWK INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/2000
* USD 288,069.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is directed toward the
development of a solid lubricated bearing suitable for high-speed, extreme-
environment applications. The research will extend the Phase I analytical
developments and experimental results to demonstrate operation of a self-
contained, solid/powder-lubricated, high-speed journal bearing. The work will be
accomplished in collaboration with end users, including Sundstrand, GE, and
Pratt &amp; Whitney. Self contained backup bearings are needed for magnetic
bearing supported rotors in flywheel energy storage systems, auxiliary power
units/integrated power units (APU/IPUs), and gas turbine engines. The specific
objectives of this project are to: 1) identify a lubricant material and
processing parameters to manufacture stick type lubricants for the powder
lubricated journal bearing; 2) design test coupons and lubricant geometries; 3)
conduct pin-on disk tests of the selected lubricant; 4) design a prototype
powder/solid lubricated multi-pad journal bearing; and, 5) Conduct high-speed
verification testing of the prototype bearing. The firm has invested in the
design and fabrication of two test facilities in support of the proposed Phase
II bearing development effort. APU/IPUs represent the most promising near term
application of this technology and will be the primary focus for this effort.
However, the technology is also applicable to gas turbine engines and flywheels
and the research will explore ways to ensure the generality and applicability of
results to such applications.