* 9704299
* Development of a Submillimeter Spectrometer Operating at    He-3 Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/2000
* USD 220,930.00

9704299 Basov This award is provided to develop a submillimeter spectrometer
operating at He-3 temperatures for the studies of fundamental properties of
novel materials. Experimental methods of infrared and optical spectroscopy are
extremely informative in condensed matter science. However, usually these
methods do not permit to perform measurements at frequencies below 30-50 cm-1
and at temperatures below 6-12 K. An immediate consequence of these common
restrictions is the existence of a vast unexplored territory of new materials
phenomena which lie beyond the scope of routine spectroscopic techniques.
Instrumental prerequisites for the experimental study of these phenomena include
the ability to reach frequencies as low as 2-3 cm-1 while keeping the specimens
at T down to 0.3 K. Development of the facility that meets the above stringent
requirements is the primary goal of this proposal. The initial research project
will be devoted to one of the forefront problems of condensed matter physics
which is Unconventional Conductivity and Superconductivity in Intermetallic
Compounds. The exotic transport properties of intermetallic materials pose
fundamental questions which challenge the foundation of the theory of metals.
Currently several groups at the UCSD physics department are involved in the
study of intermetallic systems with strongly correlated electrons. This
spectroscopic program will greatly enrich the joint research capabilities by
extending measurements in the infrared region where the effects due to
interactions and correlations dominate the response of these correlated systems.
An infrared facility described in this project will provide the means to launch
experiments which were previously impossible because of instrumental
limitations. In particular, super-conducting state electrodynamics has not been
explored in heavy fermions, in organic materials or in borocarbides. A thorough
study of the infrared response of the above compound s is one the primary
targets of the initial research program. Another direction will be concerned
with Nd2-yCeyCuO4 which is an electron-type cuprate superconductor. Unlike all
other cuprates this specific materials shows certain similarities with
conventional BCS superconductors. On the other hand, transport experiments
indicate that this system reveals heavy fermion-like low-energy excitations. The
controversial nature of this material may be clarified through a survey of its
electro-magnetic response in the superconducting state. Finally, experiments
aimed at the spectroscopic study of the superconductor-insulator transition
(SIT) and of a pseudogap in (Y-Pr)Ba2Cu3O7-x will be performed. %%% It is
expected that the detailed investigation of superconducting state in synthetic
metals and of the SIT physics will enhance our understanding of unconventional
superconductivity and of general behavior of highly correlated electrons. ***