* 9704681
* Postdoc: Brownian Dynamics of DNA Slithering
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Tamar Schlick, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Van Rosendale
* 04/30/2000
* USD 46,200.00

The PI's will develop and apply novel computational modeling techniques on high-
performance computers to enhance our understanding of DNA on a global level,
i.e., thousands of base pairs. Specifically, the PI's will describe the
dynamical features of slithering in supercoiled DNA over microsecond to
millisecond time frames. Slithering, which is thought to be important in
recombination mechanisms, is a reptilian motion in which individual base pairs
slide against each other in a "conveyor-belt" fashion. The PI's will extend a
previously developed Langevin dynamics model of supercoiled DNA to incorporate
hydrodynamic interactions. The DNA molecule will be represented by a B-spline
model that smoothly transforms into a bead model. The singular value
decomposition will be used to transform a vector in the space of the independent
variables defining the DNA curve ("control" points) to a vector in the space of
the actual curve (DNA) points. Because the millisecond simulations are
computationally intensive, a 12-processor Power Challenge computer and efficient
parallel strategies will be employed. To measure characteristic times related to
slithering, the PI's will use three-dimensional graphics tools to analyze
interparticle distance and curvature time-evolution, and thus determine the
scaling of site juxtaposition times with DNA size. The computational modeling of
this project will complement experiments and provide insight into the vital role
of supercoiled DNA in replication, recombination, and transcription. The
algorithms developed here are general and can be applied to a wide range of
other important biomolecular problems.