* 9704549
* Nearly Integrable PDES:  Open Mathematical Problems and     Their Technological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 135,000.00

9704549 Forest Modulation theory and rigorous analysis of the small dispersion
limit of scalar and vector nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equations are fundamental
to data transmission in nonlinear fiber optics. For pulses in use today, so-
called "non-return-to-zero" or NRZ pulses, fundamental issues consist of: how do
the pulses degrade?, and, what combination of fiber properties and pulse
features determine how much and where the pulse degrades? The principal
investigator and Ken McLaughlin have studied these questions for two particular
transoceanic fibers in use today, with answers provided to the above questions.
Proposed new research involves the description of pulse propagation once
degradation has begun; mathematically, these results require generalization of
integrable PDE methods in two fundamental ways. First, one must provide detailed
behavior of the solution after shock formation, including how fast the ripples
spread and evolve with the main pulse; and second, there are no results to date
for weak dispersive behavior of the coupled NLS equations which apply when there
are birefringent effects, and there is no systematic construction of oscillatory
solutions for coupled NLS pdes. Current data transmission questions in nonlinear
fiber optics have to be answered in order to achieve a robust, faithful
communication link for the various planned applications. These questions relate
to: the type of fiber one uses; for a given fiber, the type of data one sends as
carriers of information bits; for given fiber and data, how long can the
transmission line be before unacceptable errors occur as bits become distorted.
Remarkably for the applied mathematical community, each of these issues can be
framed in terms of cutting-edge questions in special nonlinear partial
differential equations called nearly integrable. The pulse propagation in modern
nonlinear fibers is well-known to be approximated by the solution of perturbed
nonlinear Schrodinger equations, special equations studied in great detail by
the principal investigator for twenty years. The material properties of the
fiber give coefficients in the equations, the length of the fiber dictates how
long one must construct the solution, and the shape of the data that is sent
along the fibers is the input for the solution. The modeling of pulse
propagation and degradation involves two phases: the mathematical understanding
and description of the solutions of these equations for these special types of
input data; and the transfer of the mathematical insights and tools to practical
understanding, identification of problems, and suggestions for remedies. The
issues of how pulses degrade and how to shape pulses to minimize degradation are
fundamental mathematical issues which form the core of the proposed research.
The P.I. has and will continue to communicate with the technological community,
consisting thus far of visits and conversations with staff scientists at Lucent
Technologies and Corning, Inc.