* 9704020
* Development of Instrumentation for High Field Ultrasound    Studies of Highly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* John Ketterson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2001
* USD 410,000.00

9704020 Sarma This award provides partial support for the development of
instrumentation to perform acoustic propagation experiments at the two sites of
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (Tallahassee, Florida; Los Alamos,
New Mexico), by the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the National Science Foundation, and by the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. The primary quantities to be measured are the
velocity and attenuation of high frequency sound waves, which would be studied
as a function of magnetic field and absolute temperature. The materials of
interest are primarily highly correlated electron systems; our specific
expertise involves the high electron effective mass (heavy fermion) systems,
such as the interrnetallic compound UPt3, and the high temperature
superconductors. For the heavy ferrnion materials, the interesting physics
arises from the fact that the magnetic energy of the spin system, H (where is an
effective magnetic moment), can be made comparable to a characteristic
f-electron energy describing the heavy fermion state (loosely, a Kondo coherence
energy or an f-electron resonance bandwidth). For the high temperature
superconductors, an interesting area of study involves observing changes in the
elastic constants (as mirrored in the sound velocity) accompanying phase
transitions or structural changes in the Abrikosov vortex system and
accompanying changes in the dissipation (as mirrored in the acoustic
attenuation); an example, though not relevant here, is the two dimensional,
liquid-solid melting transition. %%% The Tallahassee and Los Alamos sites focus
on steady state and pulsed magnetic fields respectively, which necessitates some
differences in the acoustic measurement techniques employed. We will utilize the
pulsed-transmission/phase-sensitive-echo- detection approach developed earlier
at Milwaukee, Northwestern and elsewhere. Steady state fields permit the use of
a low repet ition acoustic pulse rate with relatively long averaging times (via
"box car integration") of the received acoustic echo(s). Pulsed acoustics
requires very high repetition rates (essentially at the reciprocal of the echo
decay rate) and separate sampling and storing of the received echo(s). For this
purpose digitizers of the type used at the Los Alamos site will be incorporated
in instrumentation purchased from this proposal.. ***