* 9704224
* Japan JSPS Program:  Mate Selection in Free-Ranging         Japanese Macaques
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Joseph Soltis, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1998
* USD 5,800.00

Soltis 9704224 This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Joseph M. Soltis at Kyoto
University, Inuyama, Japan. Dr. Soltis will work with Dr. Yukimaru Sugiyama,
director of the Primate Research Institute, on a project entitled, "Mate
Selection in Free-Ranging Japanese Macaques." The conflicting mating strategies
of males and females interact to produce mating and reproductive outcomes. The
proposed research will investigate the mating strategies of males and females in
a wild troop of Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). Japanese macaques live in
complex, mixed social groups, with mating strategies dependent upon factors
relating to aggressiveness and subordination. The proposed research will combine
behavioral and genetic data on subject animals to determine the influence of
these varied factors on mating and reproductive outcomes. Previous research has
indicated that the primary determinant in mating strategies is subordinate
position among the troop. The proposed research is designed to generalize these
results based on data obtained from a wild, free-ranging troop of Japanese
macaques. Results from the proposed research will provide insight into the
underlying strategies of male-female interaction in Japanese macaques and the
mating and reproductive outcomes in complex social groups. ***