* 9704546
* Topics in Fluid Mechanics and Hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* W. Stephen Childress, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2001
* USD 136,000.00

9704546 Childress This research deals with several problems in fluid dynamics
and magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). Continuing work on the MHD dynamo problem will
focus on the dynamical fate of intense small-scale magnetic structure creating
duing the kinematic phase of fast dynamo action. This question is important
since observations of galactic magnetic fields indicate that the equilibrated
fields have no dominant small-scale structure. A second project deals with
separation in the corner region of Prandtl-Batchelor flows within a domain (such
as a rectangle), where the Euler limit has boundary stagnation points. The
breakdown of boundary layer theory due to the presence of boundary stagnation
points can be investigated in the limit of large Reynolds number R by imposing
wall data which is within close to that of the Euler limit with core vorticity
1. A third con- tinuing study deals with an experiment in non-Boussinesq convec-
tion at high Rayleigh and Prandtl numbers and an analysis of the large-scale
motion which occurs in this flow. In a new research initiative, we will study
analytical and numerical modeling of high-lift mechanisms in flapping insect
flight, with particular emphasis on hovering. We will study by simulation the
shedding of vortices from a sharp edge in time-dependent 2D Navier-Stokes flows
at Reynolds numbers of several thousand. We shall analyze the significance and
implication of the Kutta condition, the optimal use of shed vortices in the
production of lift, and applications within conical symmetry to 3D flapping
motions. The Universe is pervaded by magnetic fields, threading through
galaxies, and surrounding stars and planets. However, the origin of these fields
is not well understood. In particular the galactic fields pose many unanswered
questions. This reseapch concerns the dynamo theory of this magnetism. This
unifying theory proposes that all fields originate from amplification of a seed
magnetic field developed during the big bang. The process of amplification,
dynamo action, resembles the laboratory dynamo effect but is more complicated
because it occurs in free fluid motion, usually turbulent motion. Our research
is attempting to understand the processes underlying this amplification and the
structure of the fields which result, especially how this structure is developed
by the natural processes available in turbulence. Other parts of our research
program deal with aspects of classical fluid dynamics of importance in the
convective flows within planets and stars. It is flows of these kinds which are
often responsible for the dynamo effect. For example, convection within the
Earth's fluid core is believed to drive the Earth's dipolar magnetic field. A
new initiative in our research program will deal with the fluid mechanics of
insect hovering flight. Our ilterest is in utilizing lifting mechanisms of
flapping insect hoverers in the design of small unmanned airborne vehicles.
These mechanisms utilize vortices which are shed into the fluid near the flyer,
and interact with it so as to augment the lift. We shall study the basic process
of shedding of vorticity from surfaces, the optimization of the resulting lift,
and the numerical simulation of the flows in two dimensions. Important three-
dimensional effects will be modeled using conical symmetry of the flow field.