* 9704011
* Physical Science Ph.D Careers and Training (A Qualitative - Quantitative Study)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Liane Pedersen-Gallegos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2002
* USD 247,282.00

The federal government provides a significant amount of support for graduate
education in science, and responsible stewardship of this investment should help
to assure that scientists are able to make use of their graduate training in
their careers. Constrained federal budgets, the end of the cold war and global
economic changes are altering employment patterns and work environments for many
professions, including Ph.D. scientists. Much current information on Ph.D.
careers is in the form of broad, national statistics or anecdotal information.
Combining new research with present data, this in-depth study of the careers and
work activities of recent physical science Ph.D. graduates will use qualitative
and quantitative techniques to provide information that is needed to evaluate
and `reshape` graduate education and to help graduates prepare for a range of
possible careers. In order to assure its relevance to the scientific community,
a broad-based and expert advisory committee will oversee and advise throughout
the project. The study will focus on two issues: the relationship between
graduate education and work activities, and career transitions. Better
information on scientific careers is needed to evaluate the prevalence of
`alternative` careers, to determine what skills, experience, and knowledge
graduates should take away from their training, and to develop strategies to
facilitate a successful transition to a non-academic job. In order to focus on
current conditions, the study cohort will be scientists about 4-8 years after
receipt of their Ph.D. - the point at which they are seeking, or have found,
more permanent employment. The project will use a combination of ethnographic
and survey techniques. Ethnographic interviews will be used to develop and frame
the questions for the subsequent survey. Analysis of the interviews will allow
difficult issues such as temporary positions and work activities to be
accurately translated into specific questions. The project will examine the
careers of the study cohort at a level of detail that is not possible in
nationwide studies. The cohort will include the entire graduating class, for the
specified years, of physical scientists from 6-7 research universities. The
target universities will be representative of both the large institutions that
produce most Ph.D. scientists and the medium institutions whose programs and
graduates may differ from those at the large institutions. A complete sample of
recent graduates will be surveyed to obtain a quantitative picture of their
careers and work activities. A substantial effort will be made to obtain a high
response rate, particularly for graduates with non-traditional career paths. The
project will finish with a second level of ethnographic inquiry, to explore
questions raised in the previous stages of the project. Results will be reported
at appropriate meetings and in both the academic literature and general-interest
scientific publications. Techniques will be documented in order to assist
departments in evaluating their graduate programs. This activity is partially
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.