* 9704288
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron           Microscope for Nanophase Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Thomas O'Keefe, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9704288 Switzer This project to purchase a field-emission scanning electron
microscope with energy dispersive light-element x-ray analysis (EDX) and
electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) capabilities will enable important
materials research work to be carried out. The SEM will be housed in the
Graduate Center for Materials Research at the University of Missouri- Rolla. The
Center is designated as a campus resource for major equipment. The proposed
instrument will be used to probe the nanostructure, composition,
crystallographic orientation, and phase composition of electrodeposited
compositional and defect-chemistry superlattices of conducting metal oxides,
metal/semiconductor nanocomposites, nanophase relaxor ferroelectrics and
piezoelectric ceramics, nanostructured shape memory alloys, environmentally
compliant polymer coatings, glass fiber reinforced composites, nucleation and
crystallation of glass, and magnetic films deposited by plasma-enhanced chemical
vapor deposition. The new instrument is optimized to operate at low beam
voltages and currents, and is therefore ideal for studying materials like
polymers which are damaged in conventional filament-based scanning electron
microscopes. %%% The instrumentation is essential for work on nanoscale
epitaxial architectures, work on electroceramic materials, work on glass
sphere's for the treatment of liver cancer and encapsulation of nuclear waste in
glass, and work on a corrosion protection material to be a replacement for
chrome on aluminum and in work on nanomaterials in metallurgy. ***