* 9704768
* Mathematical Sciences:  Asymptotic Topology, Analysis       and Dynamics of Spaces and Foliations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Steven Hurder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2001
* USD 98,774.00

This project has two themes: the study of the asymptotic geometrical,
topological and analytical properties of complete open manifolds and foliations;
and the study of geometrical and topological invariants for operator algebras
arising from geometric constructions. Regarding the asymptotic properties of
open manifolds, we propose to investigate: 1) the structure and applications of
entropy of spaces; 2) coarse cohomology for foliations and mapping spaces; 3)
ergodic theory of leaves of foliations and asymptotic invariants; and 4) index
invariants of geometric operator algebras. Regarding operator algebras arising
from geometric models, we propose to study a variety of invariants derived using
techniques based on geometric constructions. We propose to consider: 5) entropy
and spectral properties of operators; 6) index theory of non-taut Riemannian
foliations; and 7) differential topology of foliations and the structure of
operator algebras. Finally, this project includes a computer aided research
component - with the work to be done jointly with a graduate student - to study
the geometry and dynamics of surfaces via computer modeling. Our research is
related to many areas of mathematics, especially to topics in differential
topology, dynamics, and spectral theory of operators. These are all areas of
pure mathematics which have proven in the past to have applications to "real
-life problems" - including the investigations of questions in mathematical
physics, the modeling of phenomenon in nature, and for understanding symmetries
in the behavior of physical systems. This project is broad in its scope and
variety of topics, reflecting outgrowths of many fruitful research projects and
collaborations with other mathematicians supported by previous funding of the
National Science Foundation. This breadth ensures that the proposed projects
will find new connections with other areas of mathematics, enables the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students in the research, and
increases the probability of the broad applicability of the results obtained.