* 9704606
* Numerical and Analytical Studies of Wave Phenomena in       Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Paul Milewski, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 88,000.00

Milewski 9704606 We propose to apply numerical and asymptotic methods to study
several problems of physical relevance in fluid mechanics and wave propagation.
In particular we propose to study, together with several collaborators: The
resonance phenomena of equatorial Kelvin waves and of certain waves in
stratified flows; The strong interactions of solitary waves on a beach, and of
the rotational-irrotational components in free surface flows; The diffraction of
nonlinear long waves due to abrupt changes in the lateral boundaries. These
projects are relevant both in developing efficient psudo--spectral numerical
methods and in understanding resonance effects in a large class of geophysical
wave propagation problems. We also continue ongoing collaboration on
Singularities in two- and three-dimensional free surface gravity flows and
similarity solutions of jets impinging on rigid walls; The evolution of
hexagonal patterns in reaction-diffusion equations with applications to the
dynamics of stabilized flame fronts. In this proposal we use mathematical and
computational methods to study problems of physical and geophysical importance
in fluid mechanics. Specifically we work on 1) Equatorial and mid-latitude waves
in the atmosphere. These waves are thought have an impact on the global climate
and a mathematical understanding of their interaction with other waves and with
topographical features is therefore of practical importance. 2) the diffraction
and amplification of waves approaching a beach. Here we attempt to predict
mathematically the size and pattern of ocean waves near a beach. The
mathematical predictions can then be compared to real data from ocean waves
during a storm. 3) Shapes of the free surfaces of fluids. We study different
types of singular free surface flow (such as sharp wave coasts) and the shapes
of fluid jets impinging on objects. 4) The evolution of patterns in flame-
fronts. Here, we study the propagation and stability of flame fronts in a fuel-
air mixture. The mathematical formulation and efficient numerical method used
here is applicable to a wide class of physical problems.