* 9704923
* A Fast Numerical Method for Imaging Small Abnormalities in  Diffusion Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 90,000.00

Klibanov 9704923 A fundamental challenge in inverse problems is the
determination of the composition of an unknown medium given the boundary
measurements of radiation by an outside source into the medium. The investigator
and his collaborator make a theoretical and numerical study of this problem from
situations modeled by the parabolic/diffusion equation using a novel approach --
the Elliptic Systems Method (ESM). The ESM involves the derivation and solution
of a system of coupled elliptic partial differential equations with boundary
conditions developed from a normalized form of the temporal data. The diffusion
and absorption coefficients of the medium are then reconstructed from the above
normalized solution, yielding the composition. This project involves a number of
explorations, extensions, improvements and testing of this new method applied to
a variety of situations. It provides a fast and accurate new approach to the
important problem of reconstructing images from scattered data. In a recently
published report by the National Research Council (Mathematics and Physics of
Emerging Biomedical Imaging), a call is made for the development of new
effective medical imaging algorithms. An example is the early imaging of small
cancerous breast tumors using optical (near infrared laser) methods. Cancerous
tumors are more light-absorbing than the bulk of breast tissue, leading to an
increased interest in developing early detection methods by "optical"
mammography. The difficulty is that unlike x-rays, which travel in essentially
straight lines, light is highly scattered, making reconstruction difficult. The
investigators develop their new approach to this problem, which uses the methods
of numerical solutions of partial differential equations to achieve rapid and
accurate reconstructions. This approach, among other applications, has a very
good potential to lead to an optical alternative to x-ray mammography exams or
to a decrease in the number of biopsies resulting from false positives.