* 9704740
* Resolvable-and Subgrid-Scale Measurements in the            Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* James Brasseur, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 11/30/2001
* USD 398,488.00

Abstract/Wyngaard ATM-9704740 Large-eddy simulation (LES) has become t he
modeling method of choice in micrometeorological research. Nonetheless its
performance in the surface layer suffers because of inadequate numerical
resolution and heavy reliance on the precision of the subgrid-scale (SGS) model
there. Until recently, little attention has been focused on these deficiencies
in the surface layer, probably for two reasons. First, experimental limitations
make it difficult to produce data for thorough testing of LES. No direct
measurements of the resolvable-scale fields that LES predicts have been
reported, for example. Second, the weaknesses of the traditional SGS models in
the surface layer have not been documented in much detail. Measurements of
resolvable- and subgrid-scale atmospheric turbulence in the atmospheric surface
layer for the purpose of testing and improving SGS closures for LES are proposed
here. Recent studies indicate major weaknesses of the widely used Smagorinsky
SGS model near the surface. A new experimental technique is proposed whereby a
lateral array of sensors is used to measure two-dimensionally filtered
turbulence variables in the atmospheric surface layer. The preliminary studies
presented here, which demonstrate the potential of the technique, will be
extended in the proposed studies. Resolvable and SGS variables will be measured
in the surface layer over a range of ABL states, from nearly neutral to highly
convective, and shall be analyzed to study resolvable and subgrid-scale dynamics
in detail. The resulting data and new physical insight will be coupled with
parallel program using direct numerical simulation and LES data to provide the
necessary impetus for the development of improved SGS models for surface-layer
turbulence. The proposed program is part of a coordinated effort in a multi-
disciplinary research group at the Penn State University directed at analysis
and improvement of SGS modeling through combined numerical simulation and field
measurement. The present studies will provide benchmark data for the development
of remote sensing techniques for the measurement of filtered turbulence in the
surface layer.