* 9704204
* Mathematical Sciences:  Low-Dimensional Topology and        Gauge Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,09/24/1998
* Nikolai Saveliev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 09/24/1998
* USD 44,914.00

9704204 Saveliev The research is concerned with a topic which is central to the
theory of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds, namely the homology cobordism group of
integral homology 3-spheres. The long-term goal is to make progress in solving
the long-standing problem of R. Kirby about the existence of elements of order
two in this group carrying the Rohlin invariant. The investigator concentrates
his attention at the elements represented by the links of algebraic
singularities, in particular, Seifert fibered homology spheres. His approach is
based on application of the methods of modern gauge theory to investigation of
the invariant introduced in the 70's by W. Neumann and L. Siebenmann for the so-
called graph homology 3-spheres. This application is threefold. First, he uses
some special resolutions of singularities to construct a 4-cobordism of an
algebraic link with the prescribed intersection form, and he then applies the
gauge-theoretical results which prohibit certain integral bilinear forms as
intersection forms of such a resolution if the link bounds a homology ball. The
result of this investigation is further applied to show that Rohlin invariant
one algebraic links cannot have order two in the homology cobordism group.
Second, the investigator uses the instanton Floer homology to introduce a new
invariant for arbitrary homology 3-spheres, and he proves that it agrees with
the invariant of Neumann and Siebenmann when the latter is defined (graph
manifolds). This result also gives new insights into Floer homology, in
particular, answers positively M. Atiyah's question whether there is a Milnor
fiber description of Floer homology of certain algebraic links, and whether it
is related to the complex conjugation action on the homology of the Milnor
fiber. Finally, the investigator applies his new invariant to investigate
Kirby's problem for general homology spheres. The first step in this direction
is to prove that his invariant should vanish on all hom ology 3-spheres that
bound a homology ball with just one 1-handle (and a 0- and 2-handle). His
technique is to use the Floer exact triangle to keep track of the Floer homology
along the cobordism. One of the central objects of investigation in both
mathematics and theoretical physics is a smooth n-dimensional manifold. Although
this object looks locally like an n-dimensional Euclidean space, its global
structure may still be very rich and complicated. Most major results about
2-dimensional manifolds were obtained in the 19th century. Manifolds in
dimensions greater than or equal to 5 were successfully classified in the
1960's. Though some major questions about 3-manifolds remain unanswered, it is
manifolds of dimension 4, the dimension of relativity theory, that occupy the
most special place in the manifold hierarchy. On the one hand, they are not "big
enough" to apply to them the arguments that proved to be so useful in higher
dimensions. On the other hand, their dimension is too big to apply more
intuitive methods that work effectively in lower dimensions. Progress has been
slow here for a few decades until recent developments that involved the
application of ideas from the physics of gauge theories. The main results are
due to S. Donaldson, who initiated the whole program in the early 1980's, and
most recently to N. Seiberg and E. Witten. The gauge-theoretical approach proved
to be very fruitful and led to the solution of many hard problems. The
investigator is applying these modern methods to make progress on yet another
long-standing problem in topology, the structure of the homology cobordism group
of homology 3-spheres, which would provide new insight into manifold structure.
***