* 9704554
* Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications in Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Mark Levi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1999
* USD 108,000.00

9704554 Levi The first part of the project part deals with the study of
mathematical aspects of Josephson junctions. It was discovered recently that the
junctions occur naturally in certain crystals where superconducting layers
interlace with insulating layers. It is proposed to derive and to study a
mathematical model of such crystals and to develop theory of traveling waves in
discrete media. In the second part of the project it is proposed to produce the
qualitative analysis of systems of relaxation oscillators of a recently
discovered type. The third part of the project deals with various applications
of the investigator's recent observation on the role of curvature in high-
frequency averaging. These applications include the study of the motion of rigid
bodies (such as particles embedded in fluid) or coupled systems of particles,
such as molecules subjected to rapidly varying force fields. Another application
includes the behavior of a resonant medium subjected to an electromagnetic
pulse. Finally, the last part of the project deals with establishing a
connection between two classes of systems: the geodesic motion on a surface on
the one hand and the billiard motion inside that surface on the other. The first
of the four parts of the project deals with the study of Josephson junctions --
superconducting devices whose properties offer great potential for applications.
The advantages of Josephson junctions lie in their small size and in low energy
consumption, which allow for a great reduction of the circuit size, but the
disadvantage is the low power output. To overcome that disadvantage, the
junctions can be put in arrays. Remarkably, such arrays occur naturally: some
crystals were discovered to consist of stacked Josephson junction layers. This
recent discovery offers potential new applications, notably for use in
interfaces between ultrafast optical communication lines and electric circuits
as well as for generation of high frequency oscillations for use in
communications and radio-astronomical observations. Understanding the behavior
of such arrays takes on a crucial importance. The project proposed here aims at
such understanding. The second part of the project addresses relaxation
oscillators - these occur in biological and electronic systems whose
oscillations consist of slow drifts punctuated by fast jumps. A large class of
such oscillators exhibiting chaotic behavior was discovered recently, and an
isolated oscillator analyzed. Understanding systems of coupled oscillators (the
goal of this project) offers great challenges and is of importance in some
biological and electric systems. In the third part of this effort, the dynamical
effects of high-frequency oscillations will be explored. Such effects underlie
the operation of the Paul trap (the inventor was awarded a Nobel prize) and the
more recent "laser tweezers" which allow to move objects inside the cell without
damaging it. This research will extend mathematical analysis of these phenomena
with the aim of possible applications which include vibrational control as well
as environmental applications such as separation processes (removing particles
from the air, etc.) In the fourth part of the project it is proposed to
establish a connection between two century-old geometry problems which were
developed in parallel but without a direct connection, by showing that one is a
limiting case of another. Both of these problems played a central role in the
development of the theory of dynamical systems, and thus indirectly but
crucially in the development of particle accelerators, in astronomy and in
optics.