* 9704793
* Surface Tension Driven Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Demetrios Papageorgiou, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 125,979.00

Papageorgiou This project will study several nonlinear problems involving free
surfaces separating fluids with different properties and where surface tension
is important. We will study flows modelled by nonlinear evolution equations
which encounter finite-time singularities as interfaces touch and a change in
topology takes place. An example is the breakup of a liquid jet into droplets. A
paradigm problem of physical interest is the compound jet comprised of a core
fluid surrounded by a second immiscible annular fluid. Breakup under the
capillary instability usually produces compound spherical particles and analysis
of the local singular phenomenon is of value in both designing experiments and
incorporation into and testing of hybrid large scale simulations. In addition we
will study the motion and management of bubbles in surfactant solutions (fluid
phases with impurities). Of particular theoretical importance is the prediction
of parameter ranges where the bubble is remobilized after its bouyant or
thermocapillary motion is arrested or retarded by surfactant build-up at the
back end of the spherical bubble. In many cases system parameters are large and
asymptotic solutions of the singular perturbation type will be constructed and
analyzed. We study two related classes of fundamental problems encountered in
several key technological and manufacturing situations. A common feature is the
presence of interfaces separating fluids. These have important effects on how
the fluids move and the mathematical and computational analysis of such models
is extremely useful in diverse manufacturing processes as well as on-going
experiments in microgravity environments (for instance parabolic flights as well
as in the space shuttle). Using tools of mathematical analysis and modern
computational methods will enable us to identify important physical regimes
which would perhaps be prohibitively expensive in the laboratory or in space. In
addition, the use of mathematical analy sis is imperative in extreme situations
(which are more the rule rather than the exception in many processes - for
instance the breakup of a liquid jet into droplets). Besides their intrinsic
usefulness, such mathematical solutions can be used to make large scale
computations more accurate and efficient as well as test the accuracy of
existing codes. Liquid jet breakup has many modern applications in addition to
the more traditional ones of printing and fuel injection systems. Compound jets
are useful in the manufacture of compound particles used for slow drug release,
the manufacture of fibres used to reinforce mechanical or aerodynamic
components, and color printing with environmentally friendly inks and dyes. Our
studies of bubble dynamics should lead to identification of efficient
operational regimes in large scale purification systems (contaminated liquids
are often purified by passing large numbers of gas bubbles through them),
provide theoretical guidelines for the design of safe agricultural sprays, and
produce theories that can be compared to experiments done in space aiming at the
production of sophisticated materials in containerless microgravity
environments.