* 9704906
* Development of Dynamical Systems Techniques with            Applications in Nonlinear Optics and Oceanography
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Christopher Jones, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9704906 Jones Dynamical systems offers a body of modern mathematical techniques
with the potential for application to a number of problems in current science
and technology. The principal investigator plans to develop techniques that are
specifically geared to solving important problems in optical pulse propagation
and mixing attendant to mesoscale ocean structures. In optical communications,
lasers, and fiber couplers a key issue is the support of multiple pulses. These
pulses may be separated in time, by polarization, frequency or live on distinct
but coupled fibers. Based on needed extensions of the current mathematical
technology, techniques will be developed that promise a major contribution to
these issues through stability calculations of pulses found by homoclinic
bifurcation theory and other related methods. For mixing in ocean structures,
perturbations of the quasigeostrophic models will be used to assess the efficacy
of the added mechanisms to promoting Lagrangian transport. This has already been
successful in studying the effects of viscosity and, using this analysis as a
starting point, the plan is to incorporate other effects and ascertain their
role in what is now known to be a significant phenomenon in ocean transport,
namely the advection of fluid particles due to the splitting of separatrices.
The importance of the work in this project lies both in the significance of the
applications and the promise of building a body of techniques that can be used
in other areas. The capacity of optical communication systems is limited by the
ability of the fiber to carry, simultaneously, multiple pieces of information.
Many scenarios have been proposed but most require the resolution of difficult
mathematical problems concerning the stability of these pulses and assessment of
their interactions. Envisioned in the work of this project is the development of
techniques for addressing these difficult questions. The second application to
be considered is quite different. To understand the distribution of fluid
properties, such as salinity and temperature, in regions of the ocean governed
by well-known currents, such as the Gulf Stream, is central in understanding,
for instance, the origin and progress of weather patterns. The key to
determining these distributions are the transport mechanisms associated with
well-defined structures within these currents. The flows are, however, so
complex that the elucidation of these transport scenarios remains a formidable
challenge. The work under this project will be to implement analytic approaches
aimed at isolating the underlying physical mechanisms responsible for certain
observed types of transport and thus lead to more effective predictability of
fluid redistribution near such currents and other ocean structures.