* 9704630
* Dynamical Systems Approach to Flow and Transport in         Heterogeneous Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Garrison Sposito, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 121,356.00

9704630 Sposito This project entails the application of dynamical systems theory
to the problem of groundwater flow and transport in an isotropic aquifer of
arbitrary spatial heterogeneity. The overall objective of the project is to
provide new physical concepts that permit greater advantage to be taken of
recent breakthroughs in experimental methodology and computer simulation of
field-scale groundwater movement. The specific objectives of the project are: To
calculate and interpret the vorticity field for steady groundwater flow in a
stratified aquifer, based on field measurements of the hydraulic conductivity,
and to develop and "extended phase" representation of this flow. To establish
general conditions under which tracer-plume spatial concentration moments
modeled as averages over an ensemble of advective flow trajectories can be
equated to plume concentration moments determined from a single field
experiment. To investigate, using the methods of dynamical systems theory,
conditions under which chaotic motions of a tracer following advective flowpaths
can be induced, leading to more efficient tracer spreading in a heterogeneous
aquifer. These three objectives, if met successfully, will result in the
following technical advances: (1) a confirmation of the hypothesis that the flow
topology of an arbitrary, steady groundwater flow can always be transformed
mathematically to that of steady flow in a perfectly-stratified aquifer; (2)
precise criteria as to when stochastic transport models can be applied
accurately to solute transport data from a single field experiment; and (3) a
strategy for using chaotic advection to improve contaminant solute spreading in
groundwater. One postdoctoral researcher, Dr. Scott Weeks (Ph.D. in Applied
Mathematics), will be supported by project funds.