* 9704913
* Smooth Dynamics, Dimension Theory, Geodesic Flows, and      Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Howard Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 51,800.00

Invariant sets of dynamical systems are not generally self-similar in the strict
sense. However, in work with others, the PI has shown that in some important
cases, these sets can be decomposed into subsets each possessing a type of
scaling symmetry. Sets which admit such structure are called multifractals (MF).
This proposal involves the continuing investigation of the fine structure of
these multifractals and an attempt to use the MF analysis to give new insights
into dynamical systems and possibly yield a new (physical) classification of
dynamical systems. In addition, the proposed work involves various problems in
dimension theory which arise in mathematical biology as well as research on the
relations between non-negative curvature and complicated dynamics of the
geodesic flow. Regarding the latter, the (in)famous (xy)^2 Hamiltonian system, a
model for a classical Yang-Mills field, which is orbit equivalent to a geodesic
flow on a non-negative curved surface will be studied. Many physical and
biological systems (including turbulent fluids, root systems of plants, stressed
pieces of metal, NMR images of the brain, clouds, and galaxies in the universe)
seem to possess some type of complicated fractal structure. Mathematically such
objects are called multifractals. In previous work, the principal investigator
presented a rigorous mathematical foundation for the study of some important
classes of multifractals. The plan is to extend this work to larger classes of
systems and to use this mathematical analysis to help understand the underlying
physical or biological systems. The PI is particularly interested in
applications to plant biology. In a different area, a large class of physical
systems which are central to celestial mechanics and plasma physics can be
studied by first transforming them to a ''geometric system'' called a geodesic
flow and then studying the geodesic flow. In previous work, the PI showed that a
large class of these flows, which some thought were easily understood and
mathematically and physically boring, have extremely complicated behavior and
are in fact chaotic. The investigations into some specific examples including an
example from gauge field dynamics, which is one of the central theoretical
problems in particle physics will be continued.