* 9704089
* Acquisition of a Scanning Force Microscope and a            Cryo-preparation System for a SEM
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Recep Avci, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/2000
* USD 176,790.00

9704089 Avci An award is provided for the acquisition of a Scanning Force
Microscope (SFM) and a Cryopreparation System, the latter as an accessory for an
existing scanning electron microscope (SEM), in the Image and Chemical Analysis
(ICAL) of Montana State University (MSU). These instruments will complement
existing imaging and analytical equipment used to characterize the morphology,
atomic structure, composition and chemistry of solid state materials, and will
also expand the capability of ICAL to undertake similar studies involving in
situ characterization of biological specimens in their natural state. ICAL is a
central, multi- and interdisciplinary user facility. It was established in order
to serve research-needs and promote collaboration in research, education, and
industrial technical applications in the physical and life sciences, as well as
engineering disciplines. ICAL provides critically needed analytical facilities
based on microscopy and spectroscopy for bulk and surface analysis of materials.
At present, the laboratory is home to an SEM with energy dispersive X-ray
microanalysis (EDS), cathodoluminescence spectrometer (CL), and backscattered-
electron (BSE) microanalysis capabilities; a scanning Auger microprobe (SAM); a
small-spot X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS); a time of flight secondary
ion mass spectrometer (ToF-SIMS) with the ability to do ion microscopy; and an
automated X- ray powder diffractomer (XRD). A high resolution SFM will augment
and extend the range of these capabilities to provide in situ, nanometer-scale
characterization of the morphology and variations in composition, adhesion,
friction, and viscoelasticity on the surfaces of natural and synthetic solid
materials as well as biological samples. The SFM can operate under fluid
environments, and thus, can be used to monitor materials that have undergone
sorption, catalytic, and dissolution/precipitation processes. A high-resolution
SFM in tapping or contac t mode of operation in liquid or air makes complex
biological structures as well as complex macromolecules accessible to study in
their natural environment, a capability outqide the scope of traditional
electron microscopy. The cryo-preparation stage for the SEM will allow high-
resolution imaging of biological samples in their natural state, without the
risk of introducing artifacts associated with standard sample preparation
procedures. With the crucial advantage of cryo- fixation allowing the specimen
to be preserved in a state closest to its natural living state, added to the
imaging and spectroscopic compatibility of the electron microscope, study of
living organisms preserved in their hydrated environments become possible. The
cryo- state will also enhance the CL signal in studies of trace element
distribution in synthetic and natural materials. The ICAL facility serves
researchers in all fields of science and engineering at MSU and also supports
research in the private sector and government agencies. The existing items of
equipment support many but not all the research needs of many groups. For
example, the researchers from the NSF-supported Center for Biofilm Engineering
who study biofilm formation on surfaces can currently obtain chemical mapping
over the region of interest, but are unable to obtain simple high resolution
images of bacteria in their natural surrounding, since the existing equipment is
not equipped to carry out such research. The proposed equipment will augment in
a very essential way the instrumentation available to these researchers. Other
projects are proposed to characterize the distribution and geochemical pathways
of organic and heavy metal contaminants in natural systems. Related projects are
proposed by life scientists in Microbiology and Plant Pathology as well as
materials scientists in Physics, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, and Plant and Soil
Sciences.