* 9704217
* Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-ray Scattering System for    Investigation of Metallic Glasses and Polymer Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John van Zanten, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9704217 Hufnagel Small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) is one of the foremost
techniques for studying the structure of materials on a scale of 1-100 nm. The
ability to study materials on this scale is important both in understanding the
development of the microstructure of metallic alloys, as well as for
investigating the structure and dynamics of polymer solutions. The SAXS
instrument is critically important to several research projects on metallic
glasses, complex fluids, and polymer solutions at Johns Hopkins. Two of the
primary research projects that will benefit from the SAXS instrument concern
bulk metallic glasses. One of these projects seeks to develop new bulk metallic
glass materials and processes through an improved understanding of the kinetics
of phase separation and crystallization. The other project probes structure-
property relationships in nanocrystalline composite materials, which consist of
a dispersion of nanometer-scale metallic crystals in an amorphous metallic
matrix. The SAXS equipment will contribute to this research by providing a means
to study the nanometer-scale structure of metallic glasses, which is a critical
regime in both phase transformations and micromechanical behavior. %%% Another
class of materials to be examined with the SAXS instrument are soft materials
such as complex fluids and polymers. Complex fluids are solutions containing
surfactants, polymers, colloids or a combination of these components. The focus
of this research is on the structure and dynamics of these systems. SAXS
capabilities are crucial to this research program, especially for highly
concentrated systems where light scattering is not applicable, The SAXS
equipment will provide a means for investigating and ultimately understanding
the coupling between structure and dynamics. Another area of active research is
supercritical fluid-polymer solutions, where a particular interest is the
conformation of polymers in such systems. Supercrit ical solvents are capable of
dissolving a whole host of polymers such as fluoropolymers, random copolymers
and block copolymers. The emphasis of this program will be on the structure of
the polymers or supramolecular assemblies in these supercritical solvent
systems. The SAXS instrument will be a powerful tool for investigating the
structure of metallic alloys and polymer solutions. It will also provide a
necessary adjunct to current small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) and anomalous
small-angle x- ray scattering (ASAXS) investigations, which, while crucial to
these programs, are limited in terms of instrument availability. ***