* 9704304
* Catalytic Hydrocarbon Carbonylation and Aldehyde            Decarbonylation:  The Design of Soluble Transition-Metal    Based Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Alan Goldman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 04/30/2001
* USD 208,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research in the laboratory of Professor Alan S. Goldman of Rutgers
University to develop catalysts that will photochemically functionalize at C-H
bonds. This photochemical carbonylation of hydrocarbons is based on a developing
understanding of the chemical mechanisms whereby it occurs. Representative
catalysts will be studied as to their kinetics, thermodynamics, and molecular
orbital transformations. Systems are based on soluble late transition-metal
complexes, which are promising because of their success in related catalytic
processes, particularly industrial hydroformylation processes, and their unusual
regioselectivity. The reverse reaction, aldehyde decarbonylation, will also be
studied as it is the microscopic reverse of carbonylation and also of
significant potential value. Efficiently turning the world's major carbon-
containing resources, such as coal, natural gas and petroleum, into commodity
chemicals and low pollution fuels is essential to a thriving economy. The
chemically difficult and economically important process of adding organic
functionality by activating stable C-H bonds will be undertaken using new
photochemical catalysts developed in Dr. Goldman's laboratory. The development
of these catalysts depends on furthering our understanding of how the catalysts
work at a molecular level. The mechanism of photochemical carbonylation is to be
probed in a systematic series of kinetic and thermodynamic experiments coupled
with theoretical calculations.