* 9704589
* Problems in Nonlinear Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Rachel Kuske, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 80,537.00

9704589 Kuske The first objective of this project is understanding how small
noise can effect qualitative changes in nonlinear behavior. For example, small
noise can eliminate chaotic behavior in slow-fast dynamics. Recently the
principal investigator has developed a new approach for studying these systems
in terms of probability densities. These techniques will be adapted to
investigate small noise effects in delay phenomena in excitable systems and
chemical reactions. Comparison of these problems will provide a basis for
characterizing a variety of noisy phenomena. The second objective is to discover
conditions for spatially localized oscillations in systems of coupled
oscillators. In particular, the principal investigator will consider bistability
of localized and nonlocalized dynamics in laser arrays and structural dynamics.
Numerical simulations and singular perturbation methods are combined to explore
competing influences of the system parameters, initial conditions, and
resonance. The third objective is to explore pattern dynamics in reaction-
diffusion systems. Complementary analytical numerical methods are used to derive
evolution equations and study the dynamics and stability of modulated patterns.
These techniques will be applied in general reaction-diffusion problems and a
specific application of burner-stabilized flames. They will also be applied to
investigate modulated nonequilateral hexagonal patterns and transitions of two-
dimensional patterns in spatially inhomogeneous systems. The first objective of
this project is motivated by the dramatic effects of small fluctuations in
systems with interacting components. In some examples of chaotic interactions,
such as convection, waves in plasma, turbulence and laser dynamics, small noise
causes nearly periodic behavior to replace large fluctuations and chaos. Noise
can also change the transition from a flat state to an oscillatory state in the
propagation of nerve impulses an d in laser intensities. When a time variation
in a system parameter controls the transition, there can be a delay or lag in
the transition. The introduction of small, rapid fluctuations in the control
parameter reduces this delay, as observed experimentally. Realizing the first
objective will facilitate the development of mathematical models which account
for system noise and describe realistic physical behavior. The second goal is
motivated by the effects of localized behavior in several examples of
interacting oscillations. Oscillating quantities include chemical concentrations
and electrical currents which act as timing or reaction mechanisms in biological
and chemical systems. Localization of these oscillations can limit the
propagation of an electrical impulse or chemical reaction. Coupled oscillators
also model fluctuations in laser arrays, used for applications which require a
high optical power output, such as space communications and high speed optical
recording. The power of coupled lasers is influenced by variations in
intensities and synchronization, which occur in localized oscillations about a
steady intensity. Vibrations in repetitive engineering structures are also
coupled oscillations, such as in large space structures and bladed disk and beam
assemblies. Irregularities in engineering structures can cause vibrations to be
spatially localized. Localization can result in increased local stresses and
cracking or serve as a desirable damping of energy. Understanding the causes of
localization allows the control of the phenomena by adjusting the physical
system. The third objective of this project focuses on the dynamics of two
dimensional patterns which occur away from equilibrium in many physical or
chemical systems, including convection, chemical reactions, and sedimentation in
rivers. Patterns occur as superpositions of periodic waves of components such as
temperature, concentration or velocity. Spatial variation of geometry or
physical control parameters can cause spatial intermittency of the patterns. For
example, in a meandering river, rippled sediment deposits are found in certain
regions and not in others. In reaction-diffusion systems, slight spatial
variation of control species causes periodic variation of chemical concentration
in limited regions of the reaction. Since the equations describing pattern
evolution appear in a variety of applications, understanding these patterns in
one application leads to the understanding of patterns in others.