* 9704301
* RUI:  Granular Friction, Fluid Mixing and Related Nonlinear Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Jerry Gollub, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 297,000.00

9704301 Gollub This is a renewal project which will extend our understanding of
nonlinear physical phenomena, especially those involving granular materials and
fluids, using small scale laboratory experiments and involving undergraduate
students. An extensive study will be made of the phenomena of shear friction in
granular layers. Delicate shear force measurements will be combined with
simultaneous microscopic imaging. These improvements will allow the onset of
stick- slip motion, precursors, and the transition to continuous slipping to be
investigated in detail. One goal is to compare and contrast granular friction
with solid-solid friction. A second focus will be the study of fluid mixing
phenomena, in which a passive impurity is mixed by a flow. These experiments
will include investigations of chaotic advection in random cellular flows, and
transport in granular media. Finally, continuing experiments on pattern
formation and dynamics of nonlinear waves will explore phenomena such as
hexagonal superlattice patterns with multiple spatial periodicities. %%% This a
renewal project which will extend our understanding of nonlinear physical
phenomena that can give rise to complex or unpredictable behavior. The project
will focus especially on granular or particulate materials and fluids, using
small scale laboratory experiments. The training of undergraduate students in
research will be an important aspect of this work. An extensive study will be
made of the motion of layers of granular material when subjected to shear
forces. Shear friction in granular layers is potentially important in connection
with earthquakes, though these studies are aimed at achieving a basic
understanding. Delicate force measurements will be combined with optical imaging
to understand the onset of sudden slipping events, and the localized precursors
that occur in advance of major events. A second area of study will involve fluid
mixing phenomena, in which a passive impurity is transported or mixed by a fluid
flow, which may contain a porous medium such as sand. Studies of this type may
be relevant to the transport of impurities in soils. ***