* 9704018
* Dissertation Research:  Animal Exploitation and the Middle  to Late Woodland Transition:  A Comparison of Animal Use at Mound Centers and Hamlets in the Lower and Central Illinois
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Pam Crabtree, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1998
* USD 11,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. Pamela Crabtree, MS Julie Holt will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze faunal materials from two
archaeological sites, Ogden-Fettie and Baehr-Gust the former in the Central the
latter at the junction of the Central and Lower Illinois Valleys. Both of these
large sites date to the Middle Woodland period, between ca. 150 BC and 450AD. In
addition to ceramic, shell and lithic remains both sites have yielded extensive
series of faunal materials which have the potential to provide important
insights into both prehistoric subsistence practices and social organization.
With National Science Foundation support, MS Holt will travel to the Illinois
State Museum and use their extensive comparative zoological collections to
identify the archaeological faunal remains. She will also obtain radiocarbon and
thremolumeniscense dates from both sites to allow for a more exact chronological
placement. Ogden-Fettie and Baehr-Gust are large mound sites and the patterns
observed there will be compared to results of similar studies of smaller
counterparts which lack such impressive architecture. The goal of the research
is to understand the specific functions mound sites played within a larger
Middle Woodland social system. The Middle Woodland period provides the first
evidence for a high level of social complexity within the Midwestern United
States. Although groups lived by hunting and gathering, they constructed large
earthen mounds and the amount of labor involved indicates some degree of large
scale centralized control. Many Middle Woodland sites yield `exotic` and
valuable objects manufactured from non-local stone or shell which was obtained
from a considerable distance, evidence of organized long-distance trade
networks. It is clear, based on extensive archaeological research that the
settlement system consists of both mound and much smaller sites but
archaeologists do not understand the function which the large ones served and
how the two were integrated into a single system. MS Holt has hypothesized that
mounds were, in fact, elite residences which were provisioned from smaller
settlements. This implies that social and status differentiation was present in
these hunting and gathering societies. Through the analysis of faunal remains
will be possible to test this idea. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and increase
understanding of this little known period of American prehistory. It will shed
new light on the emergence of social complexity and assist in training a
promising young scientist.