* 9704524
* Improved Estimation in Multivariate Location Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* William Strawderman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 82,434.00

9704524 STRAWDERMAN This research project is devoted to the development of
improved estimators in problems where several parameters are to be estimated.
Attention will be primarily focused on estimation of location parameters. The
types of improved estimators to be studied fall under the general category of
shrinkage estimators and will typically be hierarchical bayes, empirical bayes
or Stein-type estimators. Attention will be focused on deriving improved
estimators when the normality assumption is removed or the loss function is
other than quadratic. Conditions on prior distributions which lead to improved
procedures will also be emphasized. One of the most important problems in
science involves the estimation of unknown quantities based on data obtained via
experimentation and sampling. It is typically the case that several parameters
are to be estimated. A standard method of estimating such quantities ( called
parameters by statisticians) is to take the averages of several observations
based on a series of experiments. In certain circumstances, when several such
parameters are to be estimated, it has been shown that one may obtain improved
estimators by combining data across (seemingly) unrelated experiments. We study
this phenomenon, extend the class of problems where such improved estimators
exist, and study the extent of improvement possible over standard procedures.
This research is applicable in virtually all areas of physical, biological and
social science science. In particular the author has been involved in a number
of studies in environmental sciences where these techniques have been
successfully employed.