* 9704048
* Experimental and Theoretical Study of Electron-Deficient    Intermetallic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Chong Zheng, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 679,531.00

9704048 Zheng This research project entitled Experimental and Theoretical Study
of Electron-Deficient Intermetallic Compounds focuses on the synthesis and
characterization of this novel class of compounds. Since many of these compounds
exhibit interesting physical properties such as superconductivity, unusual
magnetic behavior, valence fluctuations and heavy fermion phenomena, and since
the structure of these compounds often strongly influences these physical
properties, studying their structure-property relationships will also be
emphasized. Theoretical electronic structure calculations and computer
simulations of the structural changes will be carried out. %%% Understanding the
chemistry and physics of this class of solid state compounds has relevance for
device fabrication at the molecular level, and investigating the degree to which
solid state chemical synthesis can be applied to the fabrication of molecular
electronic devices is of high technological interest. Some of these compounds
have the capability of confining electrons in two-dimensional layers, similar to
that of a superlattice. Others show the tendency of charge disproportionation, a
mechanism being explored for the occurrence of superconductivity in the cuprate
materials. Investigating the chemical and physical properties of these compounds
is crucial to exploring new routes to material processing and fabrication, and
new device applications. This focused research group project is funded by the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences and the Solid State Chemistry and Polymers Program of the
Division of Materials Research. ***