* 9704175
* Acquisition of an Electron Energy Imaging Filter for the    Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory (EMAL)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Xiaoqing Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 131,510.00

9704175 Martin This award provides support for the acquisition of a Gatan
Imaging Filter (GIF) accessory for the JEOL 4000 EX High Resolution Transmission
Electron Microscope (HREM) located in the University of Michigan Electron
Microbeam Analysis Laboratory (EMAL). The GIF consists of a curved magnetic
sector lens that acts as a prism to disperse the transmitted electron beam as a
function of energy. The dispersed beam can then be filtered to create images or
diffraction patterns from selected portions of the electron energy loss spectra.
This instrument would significantly enhance the microanalytical capabilities of
the electron optics instrumentation at EMAL. Additional functionality provided
by the GIF which is not presently available includes: (1) high resolution
elemental and electronic state mapping of low atomic number elements, (2)
improved contrast of polymer and organic thin films on substrates, (3) improved
electron diffraction analysis by removal of inelastically scattered radiation,
and (4) improved contrast in convergent beam electron diffraction patterns.
Research underway in our laboratory which wi11 directly benefit from this
acquisition includes the construction and characterization of grain boundary
defects in optoelectronically active ordered polymers; the synthesis, and
processing and characterization of thermally reactive benzocyclobutene
functionalized polymers; the processing and microstructure of genetically
engineered polypeptides for biocompatibility of micromachined silicon sensors
for neural prosthetics, and the microstructure of polymers and polymer
composites near surfaces. The instrument will also provide useful capabilities
for other research projects in Materials Science and Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, and Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences departments, as
detailed in the text of the proposal. %%% The GIF will provide an enhancement of
the electron optics facility at EMAL, directly influencing the re search
opportunities available for students, staff, and faculty who use these
instruments. It will also be used in the curriculum as part of the laboratory
sessions for graduate and undergraduate courses in Microstructure of Materials
(MSE 460, MSE 560, and MSE 662). The GIF will also be used in summer short
courses on Polymer Microscopy offered through the University of Michigan
Continuing Engineering Education program. ***