* 9704732
* Computationally Tractable Estimation Methods for Markov     Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Peter Glynn, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2001
* USD 85,500.00

NSF DMS-9704732 Computationally Tractable Estimation Methods for Markov
Processes Peter W. Glynn Stanford University Markov process theory provides a
rich analytic and probablistic structure which is intrinsically natural from a
modelling perspective. Much of the literature on inference for continuous- time
Markov processes assumes that the process has been observed continuously over
some time interval. However, in practice, many of the data sets available
involve observing only discrete ``snapshots'' of the process. Existing theory on
parameter estimation in this setting often results in computationally
prohibitive methodologies. This research addresses the issue of computationally
tractable parameter estimation for discretely observed continuous-time Markov
processes. Many of the results utilize Monte Carlo simulation to achieve
tractability. The second fundamental question examined in this research is that
of error propagation through a stochastic system. When the output performance
measure of the stochastic system cannot be evaluated in closed form the output
measure is simulated from the modelled system. To address this situation, the
investigators develop estimators and their sampling properties for functionals
of the stochastic system. Statistical models have always proven a powerful tool
for purposes of modelling, understanding and predicting complex systems. This
research advances the frontier of statistical models for dependent observations.
For example, the statistical methods of this research are applicable to the
diverse areas of modelling levels of pollutants and contaminants in air, soil
and water which evolve over time and/or space; forecasting changes in the stock
market; and predicting or assessing demand for the development of an optimal
communications network. The use of statistical models for purposes of modelling
complex systems has been limited in the past due to the state of computing
power; a state which has certainl y improved in recent years. In this research,
the investigators develop a framework for practical implementation of advanced
statistical methodologies which capitalizes fully on the high performance
computing available today. The research addresses the issue of modelling under
partially observed information. For example, the electrical or computer engineer
may use such models to assess network status when only partial information is
available on the state of the system; in predicting air quality for a given
region, observations of pollutant levels are made at sites irregularly located
over the region and often at irregular points in time. The theoretical
constructs necessary to implement the models in the more common scenario when
only partial information is available are presented. Additionally, this research
involves error assessment of the predictions or output performance measure of an
estimated complex system again capitalizing on the availability of high powered
computing.