* 9704233
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Hormonal Control of  Seed Germination in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Camille Steber, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1998
* USD 37,100.00

9704233 Steber The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Camille M. Steber to work with Dr. Peter D. McCourt at the University of
Toronto in Toronto, Ontario. Dr. Steber will investigate the role of the plant
hormone gibberellic acid (GA) in the control of seed dormancy and germination.
To ensure that plant embryos survive the interval between release from the
mother plant and germination, seeds accumulate nutrient reserves and become
dormant and desiccation tolerant. There are mechanisms that ensure that seeds
germinate only under "dormancy breaking" conditions that provide a beneficial
environment for growth of the seedling. In studying the Arabidopsis thaliana,
the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is needed to establish dormancy while the
GA is needed to end dormancy and induce seed germination. Little is known about
the mechanisms by which GA induces germination. This project will focus on
understanding those mechanisms governing GA receptivity in the seed using two
genetic approaches: the first will identify GA-insensitive mutations using a
screen for suppressors of an ABA-insensitive mutation; the second will identify
genes which when overexpressed, suppress the inability of the GA auxotroph gal-3
to germinate in the absence of exogenous GA. Gaining this understanding of GA
response will have important applications in the area of agriculture. Dr.
McCourt is one of relatively few North American researchers who has investigated
the role of both ABA and GA in the control of seed dormancy and germination. His
laboratory at the University of Toronto will provide an opportunity for
interaction with a wide- range of experts in plant biology including plant
physiology, biochemistry, and development. ***