* 9704639
* Applications and Theory of Controlling Symbol               Dynamics:  Communicating with Chaos
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Erik Bollt, United States Military Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2000
* USD 49,230.00

9704639 Bollt This project addresses problems in controlling chaos and
controlling symbol dynamics with small perturbations. Recent work has
demonstrated the utilization of symbolic dynamics representation of controlled
chaotic orbits for communications with chaotic signal generators. The evolution
of trajectories of a chaotic dynamical system is equivalent to symbolic dynamics
in an appropriate symbol space. The recent advent of controlling chaos using the
OGY (Ott, Grebogi, and Yorke) technique and a variety of targeting algorithms,
with physical applications, has demonstrated that chaos can be mastered, and
inherent instabilities can be used as an advantage in allowing small deliberate
perturbations to cause large signal variations. Coupling control of chaos
through small perturbations with learning the grammar of the corresponding
symbol dynamics means that the control perturbations are actually a coding
scheme on the original dynamics. Controlling symbol dynamics using a map based
description of the dynamics requires resolution of the following issues:
learning the response of map iterates to variations in the control parameters,
learning the semi- conjugacy, or coding function, between the dynamics of the
map on the attractor and the grammar of the corresponding symbol dynamics, and
finding the minimal grammar which is dependent on the appropriate choice of the
partition in phase space. In particular, extensions include on-going work on
communicating in higher dimensional dynamical systems. Investigations include
issues of practical noisy environment control versus bandwidth trade-off and
issues of ergodicity, learning system response to controls, and symbol dynamics
of a chaotic dynamical system which is known only by time-series embedding of
experimental data, and the further development of practical grammar learning
algorithms. This new field of nonlinear communication theory promises to develop
into a new paradigm offe ring a general information transmission technique,
useful to both electronic and optical media, which should find wide applications
in civil and military communications infrastructures. A great deal of recent
research in applied and theoretical dynamical systems has been focused on taking
advantage of the fact that a chaotic dynamical system can be controlled. The
sensitive dependence characteristic of chaos is actually advantageous to
building a highly agile control system in which a small deliberate system
variations can cause a large response; the so called ``butterfly effect" allows
us to steer the system responses with extremely small powered controls. Ergodic
theory tells us that a chaotic system can be considered as an unlimited
information source; and control of chaos allows us to manipulate this
information flow with extremely low-powered controls. An example application is
a high-powered signal generator (e.g. an electronic circuit), which operates
intentionally in the chaotic regime, so that a small-scaled piggy-back
controller circuit, on the micro-chip scale, has the ability to accurately
manipulate high-powered message bearing signals. This method is in contrast to
standard linear communication techniques, in which a high powered electronic
circuit requires an equally large-scaled switching device to affect the large
power variations required to transmit a high powered message. Not only is
communicating through control of chaos applicable to one-dimensional dynamics,
as previously demonstrated, but also applies to the more widely typical class of
higher dimensional chaotic dynamics found in nature. Communicating by control of
chaos promises numerous practical applications including the engineering of new
and simple electronic communications devices, and new and simple optical
communications devices, as well as the modeling of phenomenon in biology,
chemistry, and cognitive science.