* 9704045
* Development of a UV-laser Based Ultra-High Resolution Angle-Resolved Photoemission Capability for Electronic Structure  Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Tracy Clement, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 08/31/2000
* USD 290,750.00

9704045 Dessau A state-of-the-art high resolution photoemission capability will
be developed at the University of Colorado with support from The Division of
Materials Research and The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. A novel and
particularly powerful aspect of the instrumentation will be the development and
usage of a high power femtosecond UV laser system as an excitation source for
photoemission experiments of electronic materials. The UV-laser system will
provide: (1) a photon flux orders of magnitude higher than is achievable by
other means, including the best wiggler or undulator sources at a synchrotron.
(2) Very high energy resolution (1-10 meV), depending upon the temporal length
of the pulses. (3) Greater ease in controlling the photon polarization (linear,
circular, etc.), which is very helpful for obtaining the symmetry of the
electronic states. (4) Much greater bulk sensitivity because the electron mean
free paths get very long at low kinetic energies. For studies of the bulk
electronic structure, this will overcome one of the major difficulties of
photoemission today, and open up the technique to the study of many materials
systems which have not to date yielded high enough quality surfaces for reliable
photoemission experiments. (5) Pump-Probe based photoemission which will enable
us to (a) Study the unoccupied levels near the Fermi energy. This may replace
inverse photoemission as the too of choice for this purpose, as inverse
photoemission suffers from poor resolution (a few tenths of an eV), low count
rates, and is damaging to a sample surface. (b) Study the dynamics of the system
by varying the delay between the pump and the probe beams. The system will make
use of the most advanced electron spectroscopic and laser instrumentation. To
our knowledge, this powerful combination does not currently exist anywhere in
the world. The requested instrumentation will also fill a hole in the techniques
available in the greater Boulder area, and will be available to the local
scientific community. ***