* 9704817
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mapping Class Groups and            Teichmueller Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Nikolai Ivanov, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 63,000.00

9704817 Ivanov This project is concerned with the algebraic structure of the
mapping class groups of surfaces and the geometric structure of Teichmueller
spaces. As is well known, they are deeply related, and also related to the
combinatorial structure of complexes of curves of surfaces. The investigator,
Nikolai Ivanov, has successfully exploited these interrelations in the past, and
intends to continue this line of research. First, he is planning to explore the
possibility that the mapping class groups are quasi-isometrically rigid, guided
by the analogy between mapping class groups and arithmetic groups and recent
results about arithmetic groups due to R. Schwartz, B. Farb, A. Eskin, B.
Kleiner and B. Leeb. Another part of the project is concerned with the structure
of subgroups of the mapping class groups normally generated by pseudo-Anosov
elements. The hope is that the Teichmueller spaces are "sufficiently hyperbolic"
(as evidenced by the recent theorem of H. Masur and Y. Minsky about
hyperbolicity of complexes of curves) in order for such subgroups to exist in
abundance. Finally, the investigator is planning to explore two more recent
geometric structures on Teichmueller spaces, namely, the Thurston semi-metric
and the Kerckhoff geometry. In particular, he is planning to find all
automorphisms of these structures. The global study of surfaces and of various
geometric structures on them goes back to the last century, with the foundations
laid down by Gauss, Moebius, and Riemann. The mapping class groups encode all
possible symmetries of surfaces, while Teichmueller spaces collect together all
possible geometric structures of a particular sort on a surface. It turns out
that these two aspects of the theory of surfaces are deeply interrelated, and
the project focuses on several aspects of this relationship. In the last decade,
the theory of surfaces acquired an additional significance as a result of a
promising physical "theory of everything ," namely the so-called string theory.
In this theory, the elementary constituents of matter are not point-like
particles, but rather collections of loops ("strings") sweeping a surface during
their motion. It turns out that both various geometric structures on surfaces,
as well as their symmetries, are of fundamental importance here. ***