* 9704728
* Subgrid Scale Models Based on the Estimation of Unresolved  Scales of Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Julian Domaradzki, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 08/31/2000
* USD 224,867.00

The main goal of this project is to transform a new modeling procedure into a
general large eddy simulations tool for engineering and geophysical flows. To
accomplish this goal the following tasks will be performed. The modeling
procedure will be further investigated and validated for several non-stationary
flows and flows with additional physical effects like rotation. The performance
of the model for high Reynolds number flows will be evaluated. The model will be
extended to the physical space representation and to general finite difference
codes. Finally, the numerical implementation of the model will be optimized in
terms of the computer memory and CPU time. The motivation for this effort is the
fact that numerical simulations of turbulence at very high Reynolds numbers
require models to account for small scales which cannot be resolved explicitly
because of inadequate capabilities of current as well as future supercomputers.
In large eddy simulations (LES) several competing subgrid-scale (SGS) models are
currently in use, e.g. the classical Smagorinsky model, several variants of the
dynamic model, the structure function model, the renormalization group model,
similarity models, etc. While these models successfully capture some features of
turbulent flows they often fail to predict other, equally important features.
For instance, correct predictions of backscatter present a significant challenge
for all eddy viscosity models while similarity models usually under-predict SGS
dissipation. In addition, the existing models require the calibration of
adjustable constants and various ad hoc averaging procedures which depend on
simulated flows. Deficiencies of the models may be traced to inadequate
representation of nonlinear interactions between resolved and subgrid scales in
the modeling procedures. The model to be utilized represents a new approach to
the problem of subgrid-scale modeling in turbulent that makes maximum use of the
knowledge of nonlinear interactions acquired during last several years through
the analyses of direct numerical simulations databases. This model has several
important properties which distinguish it favorably from the traditional models:
it does not contain any adjustable constants; no wall functions are required;
the modeled SGS stresses exhibit very high correlations (50 - 90 %) with the
exact stresses for all six SGS stress components; mean and rms values of modeled
quantities (stresses, SGS forces, SGS dissipation, etc.) are accurately
predicted; significant local backscatter is predicted in a numerically stable
manner without any averaging procedures; and all the SGS stress components have
correct near-wall behavior. The model has already been implemented and tested
for turbulent channel flow and for isotropic turbulence in statistically steady
state.