* 9704532
* Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Quantum Magnets,    With and Without Disorder
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Robert Birgeneau, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2000
* USD 280,000.00

9704532 Birgeneau In this project, we will carry out a comprehensive
experimental study of three classes of materials (a) one and two-dimensional
quantum magnets, (b) Sr- and excess - Oxygen doped La2CuO4 high temperature
superconductors, (c) model crystalline insulating magnets which are extremely
disordered at the microscopic level. Problems (a) and (b) have evolved into
distinct, but closely related areas of research. For the copper oxides our
understanding of both the normal and superconducting states is still far from
complete. Research in the copper oxides has produced a renaissance in studies of
low-dimensional quantum magnets revealing subleties which were barely suspected
until the recent past. For the diordered magnets new issues connected with
history dependence and irreproducibility of the properties arise which require
an extension of our existing understanding of equilibrium properties of
materials. These systems will be studied using both neutron and x-ray scattering
techniques. %%% There is a remarkable variety of materials in Nature which
exhibit properties as varied as magnetism, superconductivity and semiconducting
electronic behavior. Some of these materials such as the semiconductors Si or Ga
As as well as simple metals such as Al or Cu are by now well understood. There
are, however, many materials such as ceramic superconductors or magnetic alloys
which are barely understood at all. In this research program, our general
strategy is to look at these materials at the atomic level using specialized
techniques known as neutron and x-ray scattering and to see how the properties
evolve as one goes from the microscopic to the macroscopic level. Our goal is
thereby to elucidate the fundamental physics which underlies these materials.
***