* 9704056
* SBIR PHASE II: Telling Mathematical Stories: A Combination  of Research and Technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Marjorie Cappo, Learning in Motion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9704056 Cappo This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project from
Learning in Motion, Inc. proposes to combine cognitive research, mathematics
theory, and technology in a CD-ROM for primary mathematics. Students early
success in mathematics depends upon a solid concept of number. To that end,
'Telling Mathematical Stories' proposes to synthesize four important elements:
1) students' intuitive sense of number and multiple perspectives on number,
i.e., transference of conceptual development from number (counting) to weight
and volume; 2) sound used to transition from acoustic counting to estimating
number; 3) multiple tools to encourage students' own strategies and a move
toward formal mathematizing; and 4) experimentation with three-dimensional
figures. Four- cycles of developmental research are planned to test the uses of
technology in ways not currently seen. These include the design, programming,
and field testing of: 1) contexts and mathematical objects, 3-D, and sound; 2)
models and their visual representation and interface, and 3) 'look ,and feel',
character hosts, and features of the 'worlds' that will encourage own
productions. The fourth cycle is a field test of the integrated program. The
commercial potential for a K-2 Math program that combines research on cognition
and mathematics with new technology is very high. Currently, most products are
drill and practice and relegated to counting and calculating with symbols. The
proposed product builds students' intuitive sense of number. It offers multiple
model tools, incentives for own productions and communicating mathematics, and
new uses of sound and 3-D animation. ***