* 9704080
* SBIR PHASE II:  High Perfromance Nondestructive Evaluation  System Using Giant Magnetoresistance Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Timothy Tiernan, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will conduct the
research necessary to design and develop a fully functional non-destructive
evaluation (NDE) system based on sensors made with giant magnetoresistance (GMR)
materials. Phase I research demonstrated that an NDE system based on such
sensors has vastly superior performance to current NDE techniques. Using a
simple, low cost sensor and electronics system, and a proprietary analytical
technique, it was possible to detect creacks with widths in the 20 microns to
100 microns range in both aluminum and steel sheets, with signal-to-noise (S/N)
ratios exceeding 100. Of even greater importance, tests with an aircraft section
showed it was possible to detect cracks beneath overlying sheets of metal, and
under rivet heads at high S/N levels. These results indicate the new technology
will represent a major advance in NDE capability, with considerable implications
for safety, efficiency and cost savings. As both the age and complexity of the
nation's transportation and civil structures increase, the importance of
improved NDE technology is amplified. Due to the lack of appropriate technology,
many existing in-service inspection (ISI) programs are conducted using visual
inspection only. This high-sensitivity, deeply penetrating electromagnetic
sensor would provide rapid, cost-effective inspection for embedded defects in
electrically conductive structures including commercial and military aircraft,
pressure vessels and pipelines.