* 9704253
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Population and       Community Structure of Grassland Birds on Wintering Grounds in Northern Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Martha Desmond, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/1999
* USD 50,945.00

9704253 Desmond The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twenty-four-month postdoctoral research visit
by Dr. Martha J. Desmond to work with Professor Alberto Lafon Terrazas at the
Universidad Autonoma de Chihuahua in Chihuahua, Mexico. The U.S.-Mexico Program
will provide 50% of the funding for this project. Desmond proposes to examine
populations and community assemblages of grassland birds on wintering ground in
Northern Mexico. She will look at data on life-history characteristics which are
unknown for many grassland birds in winter habitats. This is essential to
understand how these migrants are adapted to use habitats. She will test
hypotheses related to differential migration due to morphological size variation
between sexes and inter-sexual and age class competition for resources. Many of
these species are showing significant population declines. This research will
specifically examine the influence grazing by domestic and native herbivores on
habitat use by grassland- adapted birds and test hypotheses related to habitat
use and community structure. Information on the basic life history
characteristics on winter grounds is essential for understanding community
dynamics and evaluating potential threats to these populations. ***