* 9705298
* Galapagos
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Laurence O'Reilly, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,563,036.00

9705298 O'Reilly The National Museum of Natural History is producing 3-D and
2-D versions of a large format film on natural history. With a working title of
Wonders of Life, the film will explore the diversity of life on Earth and how
this diversity came to be. It will examine the biological, geological, and
cultural entities that interact in myriad ways to generate, shape, and sustain
the enormous biological and cultural diversity of our planet. The film will be
supported by outreach material designed to support further exploration of the
topic of diversity in both informal and formal settings. An inexpensive family
activity guide to be available at venues that show the film will feature
engaging and challenging activities for families with children ages ten through
15. A teacher resource guide, distributed free to teachers attending the film
with groups of students, will be developed for use in grades 5 through 8. A
classroom activity poster will be developed to serve grades 2 through 5. A
Wonders of Life home page will support in-depth study of the film's topics.
Larry O'Reilly, Director of The Discovery Center Project at the NMNH, will be PI
and Executive Producer for the film. The Senior Scientific Advisory Board will
be chaired by Dr. Robert S. Hoffman, Senior Scientist and former Assistant
Secretary for Science at the Smithsonian Institution. The board also includes
Sir David Attenborough, Dr. Sylvia Earle, Dr. Margaret Geller, Ivan Hattingh,
and Dr. Thomas Lovejoy. Dr. Kay Behrensmeyer, Curator of Paleobiology and former
Associate Director for Science at the NMNH, will lead a core team of scientists
who will be directly involved in production. The film will be produced by
Christopher Parsons and David Douglas will be Director of Photography.