* 9705058
* Quantum Mechanics of Macroscopic Variables
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1998,03/31/1999
* James Lukens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

9705058 Lukens Experiments will be undertaken to explore the quantum mechanical
behavior of a macroscopic variable---in this case, the magnetic flux through a
ring. A particular focus of this work will be to understand the effect of the
environment (damping and temperature) on the evolution of the flux from purely
classical to quantum. The system to be studied is a superconducting loop
containing a Josephson junction (SQUID) which undergoes transitions between two
fluxoid states by tunneling through a potential barrier between potential wells.
The system energy is quantized within each fluxoid well as has recently been
confirmed using macroscopic resonant tunneling. At low temperatures only the
lowest state in a well is occupied, giving a model two state system. These
states differ in magnetic moment by about 10^10 Bohr magnetons---a very
macroscopic quantity. The primary goal of this work is to attempt an observation
of macroscopic quantum coherence (MQC) between these two states and to
understand the role of the environment in determining the extent of such
coherence. %%% Quantum mechanics predicts many `strange' phenomena which are
very much at odds with our everyday experience. This was illustrated rather
vividly in the early years of the field by Schroedinger -- one of the founders
of quantum mechanics -- through a thought experiment in which he postulated his
cat in a state where it oscillated between being dead and alive. We are usually
spared the consequences of these paradoxes since they tend to only arise in
atomic scale systems: interactions with the rest of the world prevent them from
occurring in the sort of macroscopic objects we encounter in our everyday lives.
Recent advances in experimental technology are, however, predicted to make it
possible to observe such effects (called macroscopic quantum coherence (MQC)) in
a superconducting system known as a SQ UID, which generates a magnetic field (or
magnetic moment as it is more correctly known) about 10 billion times greater
than that of an atom. In our experiments, which must be performed a few
thousandths of a degree above absolute zero, we hope to be able to observe this
system in a coherent superposition of states with the magnetic moment pointing
up and down. ***