* 9705193
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the  Mathematical Sciences- Graduate Research Assistantships in  Industrial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* George Corliss, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2000
* USD 59,783.00

Graduate research assistants in industrial mathematics are placed at Johnson
Controls, Inc. (JCI), and at Penta Technologies. These collaborations strengthen
the Marquette's educational and research missions in faculty research in
industrial mathematics, industrial partnerships, and research training, and
deliver business-critical industrial mathematics solutions to JCI and Penta. At
JCI, a manufacturer of automotive seats and batteries and HVAC controls, the
student will investigate chaos theory models of the enterprise and measures of
enterprise agility with validation using real data and will explore
scoping/targeting systems analysis. We will develop simple mathematical models
and business gaming simulations of the problem and then use traditional
operations research tools such as econometric models and computer simulations.
JCI's work on biological and ecological paradigms of the enterprise are
complemented and enriched by the technical expertise and resources of Marquette
University. At Penta, a business solutions provider for the engineering and
construction industry, the student will use mathematical modeling and nonlinear
global optimization techniques to develop a software distribution system aimed
at providing maximum flexibility in the delivery of real-time updates. Penta is
actively exploring on-line software distribution and product update systems to
deliver software to clients in a timely manner. The review, design, development,
and implementation of the SDS will be coupled with a mathematical analysis of
SDS optimization for a heterogeneous environment of customer sites. We will
determine components causing the greatest constraints to SDS on-time delivery.
The data will include load-balancing, internet transport rates, real-time
computational time, and human-interaction delays. This data will be used to
develop an optimization model that will be solved to address the most critical
bottlenecks in the system. This GOALI project is jo intly supported by the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences (DMS).