* 9705051
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the  Mathematical Sciences:  Rensselaer-Rockwell Senior          Research Fellowship
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Donald Schwendeman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 62,575.00

This award supports the initiation of a collaborative research program between
Dr. Barna Bihari of the Rockwell Science Center and Professor Donald Schwendeman
of the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
The research will be performed at Rensselaer during the academic year, 1997-98,
and the subsequent summer, with follow-up collaborative activity planned. The
focus of the research will be on multiresolution schemes for the numerical
solution of nonlinear conservation laws. Specific tasks will include the
implementation of high-order multidimensional ENO schemes on general curvilinear
grids, the study and implementation of high-order boundary conditions, the study
and implementation of error estimates and adaptivity, and the application of
these methods to highly relevant computational fluid dynamics (CFD) problems to
the industrial sponsor. A wide range of research and teaching activity is
planned including the formation of a research activity group on numerical
methods for conservation laws which will focus the research efforts of faculty
and students initiated by this award. Through the interaction with this research
group and with other programs at Rensselaer, such as the Scientific Computation
Research Center (SCOREC), the collaboration will have a broad impact. In
addition to bringing new areas of active research to Rensselaer, this
collaborative program will enrich existing programs. A benefit to the teaching
activity at Rensselaer will occur through the interaction with students in the
math department and with students involved in the Computational Science and
Engineering program. Dr. Bihari's collaboration will also enhance the ongoing
effort to encourage academic-industry interaction through programs such as the
Workshop on Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI). This award includes
significant cost sharing by Rockwell. This project is jointly supported by the
MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OM A) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS).