* 9705421
* Home, School, and Community:  Supporting Children's         Mathematical Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2003
* Richard Cossen, Developmental Studies Center
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Saul
* 07/31/2003
* USD 2,811,740.00

9705421 Robertson The Developmental Studies Center is supporting the active
involvement of parents in their children's mathematical development, helping
parents understand more about how their children learn mathematically and
socially, and increasing the likelihood that children will discuss mathematics
with an adult who is significant in their lives. The first phase of this project
develops, pilot tests, and evaluates a Homeside Math resource book for each
grade level, K-2, with activities teachers can send home to foster positive
interaction about mathematics between parents and their children. These
activities are related to exemplary school curricula, particularly those
developed with NSF support. The next phase develops a limited number of
additional activities to add to the Homeside Math collection to be published as
Community Math. Community Math is a resource book for youth workers with
activities that foster mathematical discussions between children ages 5-8 and a
significant adult and can be used in a variety of community organization
settings and sent home for family use. Workshops are developed for parents,
teachers, and youth workers to strengthen their knowledge of child-centered
instructional strategies, meaningful activities, and how children develop
mathematically and socially. And facilitator workshops are developed for
parents, teachers, and youth workers to enable them to lead workshops for
parents.