* 9705997
* Integrated Modeling of Groundwater, Unsaturated Zone, and Surface Hydrologic Processes Over Prairie Topography
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Guido Salvucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1999
* USD 51,000.00

9703997 Salvucci The research described in this proposal addresses the spatial
structure and the scaling properties of hydrologic fluxes over complex
topography. It is designed to test the hypothesis that under certain geologic
and climatic conditions, the spatial structure of hydrologic fluxes is
controlled by the two-way coupling of ground- and surface-water processes as
constrained by topography. The issue of spatial structure will be addressed
using recent advances into the understanding and modeling of interactions
between long time scale groundwater flow and short time scale surface hydrologic
processes (Salvucci and Entekhabi WRR, 30 (10), 2737-2749, 1994; WRR,31 (7),
1725-1739, 1995 ). These studies demonstrated that the vadose zone interactions
between shallow groundwater and surface fluxes can in theory be parameterized by
the equivalent steady-state moisture profile (the steady moisture profile which
transmits the long term mean recharge to or discharge from the saturated zone.)
This simplified coupling represents the critical feedback between the depth to
groundwater and the near surface soil moisture, which in turn has a strong
influence on event time scale evapotranspiration and runoff generation. Through
this feedback and a statement of long-term mean continuity, the equilibrium
surface water balance, water table depth, and groundwater divergence are
uniquely related. Here this technique will be applied to a series of groundwater
simulation experiments over a well-studied prairie landscape in Canada Toth,
1966 . The numerical experiments will be used as a means of testing whether or
not the observed spatial patterns of recharge, midline and discharge can be
explained by the coupling expressed by the equivalent steady moisture profile.
If verified here and in future studies, this approach would offer both a
tractable way of conceptualizing certain groundwater-surface water interactions
and a practical alternative to the current practice of a priori specification of
recharge and discharge areas in regional groundwater modeling. For this site the
influence of naturally occurring sub-hillslope length scales of recharge,
midline and discharge on the scaling of hydrologic fluxes will be studied.
Prgogress in the scientific understanding of these issues has direct impact on
practical problems involving the spatial disaggregation of remotely sensed
estimates of soil moisture and the parameterization of subgrid scale land
surface fluxes in numerical climate models.