* 9705171
* Effects of Intrinsic and Disorder-Induced Anisotropies on   the Vortex Dynamics and Superconducting Gap of   High-Temperature Superconductors-From Macroscopic to Microscopic Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705171 Yeh This experimental research project
focuses on the vortex dynamics and vortex-pinning of anisotropic cuprate
superconductors, emphasizing a wide range of length- and excitation-frequency
scales. Two goals of the work are to investigate competition between the
intrinsic and disorder-induced anisotropies on the vortex pinning and dynamics
of cuprate crystals and films with different static disorder; and to study the
thermally-induced and current-driven vortex dynamics from macroscopic to
microscopic scales. Experiments include measurement of the Hall conductivity up
to 10MHz; the first- and third-harmonic ac magnetic susceptibility from 0.1Hz to
0.1MHz, and the microwave magneto- impedance from 6 to 26 GHz using high-Q
sapphire-loaded microwave cativites. Scanning tunneling microscope measurements
will also be made. %%% This experimental research project is centered on the
effects of magnetic field on the cuprate high temperature superconductors, which
are important in potential applications such as filters for communication
systems and current carrying wires for power transmission. The research focuses
on the stability of the magnetic flux lines as they penetrate the
superconductor, the types of motions of the flux lines and how to minimize such
motions by providing so-called pinning centers. Flux line motions lead to
internal energy loss and heating and are detrimental to efficiency in most
applications. The experimental tools in this project include measurement of
harmonic generation in the interaction of ac magnetic fields with such samples,
and study of vortex geometries using the scanning tunneling microscope. Results
from this research may include unusual new effects or materials which may find
new application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in
nature and involves graduate students who will be excellently trained to enter
positions in industry, government or education. ***