* 9705235
* Innovative System of Continuous Prestressed Composite Bridges for the 21st Century
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Nabil Grace, Lawrence Technological University
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 07/31/2002
* USD 241,510.00

This research presents a new concept dealing with the development of a multi-
span continuously prestressed concrete bridge system that requires no shoring or
forms and has superior characteristics compared to conventional continuous
bridge systems. The non-corrosive bridge system will be built of: (i) modified
precast pretensioned, with internal carbon fiber reinforced plastic (CFRP)
strands, Double-T (DT) girders, (ii) cast-in-place continuous deck, reinforced
with glass carbon fiber reinforced plastic (GFRP or CFRP) rebars, connected to
the DT through CFRP or GFRP shear connectors, and (iii) externally draped
continuous CFRP post-tension strands. An analytical and experimental study will
be conducted by Junior and Senior undergraduate students to examine the static,
dynamic, fatigue and ultimate load characteristics of the multi-span
continuously prestressed new bridge system. These include cracking, flexural
strength, punching shear strength, damping response, natural frequencies and
associated mode shapes and fatigue strength. The multi-span continuously
prestressed bridge system and its construction technique present a leap forward
as well as a breakthrough in the development of a new approach for non-corrosive
efficient bridges. It will result in considerable savings in construction time
and costs and in the complete elimination of corrosion problems in future USA
bridges. The ongoing implementation and design of the three-span simply-
supported bridge over the Rouge River in the state of Michigan is a testimony to
the success of this innovative bridge system and the quality of the research
work of undergraduate students.