* 9705139
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the  Mathematical Sciences- Modeling and Optimization of         Diffractive Optical Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Gang Bao, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/1999
* USD 44,361.00

Title of Proposal: Modeling and optimization of diffractive optical structures
Project Summary The PI proposes training on the professional development of two
Mathematical Sciences Industry-Based Graduate Research Assistants. The first
objective of the training activities is to prepare the graduate students with
skills and experiences that will make them strong competitors in an industrial
environment. Another objective is to produce the graduate students who have
qualifications that will make them important contributors to science and
technology developments in a academic/industrial environment. The proposed
research focuses on computational methods and numerical analysis for modeling
and design of optical micro-structures in linear and nonlinear optical media.
The research will extend the PI's long term collaboration with Honeywell, Inc.,
and develop a new collaboration with Cray Research, Inc. It will provide
opportunities for the graduate assistants to engage in academic/industrial joint
research programs and make important contributions to an exciting area of
applied and industrial mathematics. The main topics of the proposed research are
as follows: -- Computational modeling of optical coatings. Multiscale finite
element methods. -- Inverse and optimal design problems in diffractive optics.
-- Surface enhanced nonlinear optical effects. Optimization and design problems
in nonlinear optics. These problems are motivated by industrial applications.
This project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)