* 9705504
* Parallel Constraints Disintegration and Approximation Methods for Image Recovery
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Patrick Combettes, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2001
* USD 185,800.00

Conceptually, an image recovery problem can be reduced to a constrained
minimization problem. In practice, however, the efficient implementation of
standard optimization algorithms often encounters serious difficulties due to
the complex nature of recovery problems, which not only involve a sizable amount
of data and unknowns, but also a wide variety of constraints. The goal of this
research is to develop, analyze, implement, and test a eeneral convex
minimization algorithm that addresses the specific numerical difficulties posed
by image recovery. The basic principle is to decompose the original problem of
minimizing over a complex feasibility set into a sequence of simpler
minimizations over the intersection of two larger half-spaces. The bundle of
constraints is disintegrated into elementary components and, at every iteration,
the half-spaces are constructed by activating in parallel a block of
approximated (linearized) constraints. A wide range of constraints can thus be
processed in a flexible manner and, moreover, fast convergence is achieved
thanks to extrapolated relaxations. The three major objectives of this research
are to study the proposed constrained image recovery algorithm and rigorously
establish its convergence under very general conditions; to investigate the
numerical issues pertaining to its optimal implementation in the context of high
performance computing; to demonstrate through extensive numerical testing its
flexibility and numerical superiority over existing schemes in a wide range of
applied image recovery problems.