* 9705210
* Photoemission Investigation of Collective Excitations in    Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Zhi-Xun Shen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705210 Shen This experimental project is based on
angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy in characterizing the collective
excitations of novel materials. The goal of the experiments is to provide
critical experimental data to stimulate the development of an analog of the
Nambu-Eliashberg theory for momentum resolved spectral function in systems where
the quasiparticle excitation is strongly coupled to collective excitations such
as phonons or spin fluctuations. Materials of interest are organic conductors
and superconductors, doped C60, A15 compounds, BiK BiO3, and high Tc
superconductors. Synchrotron radiation and a UV laser will be used as the
excitation source. %%% This experimental research project uses the technique of
angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy to measure the energy and crystal
momentum of characteristic excitations in crystalline specimens of materials of
current scientific and technological interest. In this techniq light photons of
well specified direction (momentum) and energy (wavelength) fall upon a clean
surface of the material of interest. The photoelectric effect leads to emission
of electrons from the surface layers of the material. These photoelectrons are
detected in such a way that their number, direction and kinetic energy are
simultaneously measured. These data, making use of principles of energy and
momentum conservation, allow detailed information to be obtained on the
collective excitations of the sample. In this work the materials of interest
include several different unusual electonic conductor, including films of
electronically conducting (alkali- metal doped) carbon-sixty, and several
unusual types of superconductors, including a cubic Bismuth Potassium Barium
Oxide and high Tc cuprates. The intent of the work is to provide excellent data
which may permit theorists to propose and test detailed models for the
interaction of electrons in these systems with "collective modes" including
lattice vibrations (phonons) and spin waves. It is hoped that a theory analogous
to the successful Nambu-Eliashberg theory for electrons and phonons in
conventional superconductors such as lead and mercury, might also be found for
these more complicated materials of possible technological application. This
research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves graduate students
who will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government or
education. ***