* 9705600
* Effects of Cyclic Strain and Oxidative Damage on Airway     Epithelial Cell Permeability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,09/14/1999
* William Miller, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 09/14/1999
* USD 284,042.00

9705600 Waters Cells lining the airways of the lung protect the lung from
inhaled toxins and harsh environmental conditions. Maintenance of this
protective barrier depends upon the contacts between the cells and the re-growth
of cells following injury. The cell barrier can be injured by oxidative species
due to ozone, cigarette smoke, or infectious agents. The response of the cells
to such injury and the repair of disruptions in the barrier are not well
understood. Furthermore, although air flow in the lungs causes variations in the
expansion of the airways, little is known about the effect of such mechanical
strain on airway function. This proposal will investigate the maintenance and
repair of the airway cell barrier following oxidant injury. A major goal of the
proposed work is to develop techniques for the evaluation of barrier function
while cells are mechanically stretched. There is currently no method for
measuring the barrier properties of stretched cells. A novel device will be used
to apply stretch to lung cells grown on elastic membranes. The barrier
properties of the cells will be determined by measuring the electrical
resistance across the cells. Using this tissue model, the response of the cells
to oxidative damage will be measured, and the repair of the tissue will be
evaluated. In addition, factors which may be important in protecting the cells
or in enhancing repair will be investigated. This will lead to a better
understanding of the injury and repair of the lung. ***