* 9705270
* Phase Transitions of Weakly Physisorbed Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Milton Cole, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2001
* USD 330,000.00

9705270 Cole This Focused Research Group grant supports a collaborative
theoretical-experimental study of phase transitions of weakly physisorbed films.
The investigations focus on films of the noble gas helium, including mixtures of
the isotopes of masses four and three, adsorbed on the substrates which offer
the weakest possible binding. Such substrates include alkali metals and
molecular hydrogen. This choice is made to more clearly display novel behaviors
in the areas of superfluid onset and phase separation in submonolayer two
dimensional films; in the varieties of wetting behavior; and in the adsorption
of very thick films. In all cases the research is collaborative, involving close
coupling between experiment, theory, and simulation. The experimental methods
include dielectric constant, volumetric, capillary rise, torsional oscillator,
heat capacity and quartz microbalance measurements. The theory will deal with
film dynamics, statistical mechanics, van der Waals forces, and calculation of
potentials. Grand canonical simulations will be directed primarily toward the
wetting problem. %%% This Focused Research Group grant supports a collaborative
study of the adherence of thin films of gas molecules to several types of
substrates, with an interest in the ability of the molecules to wet the
surfaces. The gases under study are relatively inert noble gases, specifically
helium atoms of masses three and four atomic mass units, and the studies are
carried out at temperatures near the absolute zero, where the helium atoms can
appear in several different types of superfluid state. A superfluid state is one
in which the motion of the helium is not at all impeded by its interaction with
the surrounding container or substrate, in the case mentioned above. If, for
example, the liquid superfluid is put into rotation (like swirling water in a
glass) the swirl ing motion will persist forever, and this effect is the basis
for a gyroscope which can detect extremely slow rotations. The proposed research
will clarify the effects of the substrate on the temperature at which the
superfluid behavior first occurs, and will probe these behaviors down to layers
less than one atomic layer thick, on average. The results may lead to new
insights useful in the variety of situations, such as chemical engineering,
polymer science, catalysis, and others where wetting phenomena are important.
The results will also contribute to general knowledge of situations where
monolayer and submonolayer coverages of surfaces by atoms and molecules occur.
The nation's science and engineering research base will benefit strongly from
the training of graduate students in this program, in addition to the
discoveries which may be made on monolayer wetting and phase transitions. ***