* 9705131
* Study of Excitations in Cuprate Superconductors and Related Systems by Inelastic Scattering of Visible, Ultraviolet, and X-Ray Photons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Miles Klein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,800.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705131 Klein This experimental research project
focuses on the unusual electronic properties of those cuprate compounds which
are "parent compounds" of the cuprate superconductors. These compounds exhibit
correlated electron behavior, and in particular antiferromagnetism. In the
superconducting phases, the residual antiferromagnetism is poorly understood.
This experimental project will clarify the residual antiferromagnetism by
scattering experiments using visible, ultraviolet, or x-ray photons, to study
excitations wherein an electron from an occupied initial state makes a
transition to an unoccupied final state, accompanied by a redistribution of
charge. The objectives are (1) to understand how electronic charge excitations
couple to electronic spin excitations (magnons) and to lower energy electronic
charge excitations, which may include superconducting gap excitations; (2) to
validate inelastic x-ray scattering techniques for studying electronic charge
excitations at finite momentum transfer; (3) to better understand electronic
excitations in conventional metals and semiconductors through use of inelastic
x-ray scattering techniques. The experiments will employ a combination of low
energy and high energy photon probes. These include low energy optical
absorption; resonance Raman scattering, especially resonant two-magnon
scattering; UV excited Raman scattering, and two new techniques, inelastic s-ray
scattering spectroscopy (IXSS) and resonant inelastic x-ray scattering
spectroscopy (RIXSS), which provide data at finite momentum transfer. The work
is expected to advance knowledge of both strongly-correlated electronic systems
and of inelastic x- ray scattering. %%% This research project experimentally
studies the unusual behavior of the cuprate compounds which when "dop ed" become
high temperature superconductors. These "parent compounds" exhibit unusual
behavior, including antiferromagnetism, which is to some extent retained in the
superconducting phases. It is believed that a better understanding of the normal
and parent phases of these materials is necessary for understanding of the
unusually strong superconductivity when suitably doped. The present experimental
project will address the important questions concerning the antiferromagnetic
behavior, by a combination of measurements of the scattering of photons
(visible, ultraviolet, and x-ray) by these compounds. A portion of the work will
utilize the Raman effect, and another portion will utilize a new advanced
experimental technique, inelastic x-ray scattering, which is now available at
the Advanced Photon Source, a world-class synchrotron light source which is
located near the Argonne National Laboratory. The work will advance knowledge of
both strongly-correlated electronic systems and also of the inelastic x-ray
scattering process. The study of these materials and their unusual magnetism is
valuable as a testing ground for theories of magnetic, optical, and electrical
properties of the cuprates, which can then be more confidently applied to other
systems; and in the search for novel properties and new compounds which may find
new application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in
nature and involves both graduate and postdoctoral students who will be
excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government or education. ***