* 9705129
* Magneto-Electrodynamics of High Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,01/31/2001
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705129 Drew This experimental research is on the
infrared and microwave magneto-optical properties of Type II superconductors,
with emphasis on cuprates, in both normal and superconducting states.
Measurements of magneto-transmission of superconducting films using circularly
polarized radiation with frequency and temperature variation, followed by
kramers-Kronig analysis will determine the full complex frequency-dependent
magneto- conductivity tensor. Features in such data recently discovered to be
related to vortex pinning; the hybridized vortex pinning/cyclotron resonance,
the hybridized vortex pinning/vortex core resonance, and the low frequency
depinning loss band, will be a focus of the experimental work. The effects on
these properties of vortex pinning as introduced by ion implantation will be
studied. Additional topics include studies of Josephson plasmons, and of plasma
and magneto-plasma modes of arrays of superconducting disks. These studies are
novel and will provide new information on high temperature superconductivity,
with the possibility of opening new paths for the science and technology of
superconductivity. %%% This experimental research project makes use of
sophisticated optical measurements to clarify the interaction of magnetic fields
with cuprate (high Tc) superconductors. These superconductors have the potential
for application in motors and generators, where the loss-free electrical
conduction and potentially high levels of magnetic field could lead to smaller,
lighter, and more efficient motors and generators. The full exploitation of this
potential has not been reached thus far, because of heat generating motions of
the magnetic field lines inside the cuprate material. Such motions, and how they
may be reduced by introduction of "pinning cent ers" by irradiation or other
means, are one of the topics to be clarified. This experimental grant may
thereby help to develop an improved electrical technology. Results from this
research may include unusual new effects or structures which may find
application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature
and involves graduate students who will be excellently trained to enter
positions in industry, government or education. *** This experimental research
is on the infrared and microwave magneto-optical properties of Type II
superconductors, with emphasis on cuprates, in both normal and superconducting
states. Measurements of magneto-transmission of superconducting films using
circularly polarized radiation with frequency and temperature variation,
followed by Kramers-Kronig analysis will determine the full complex frequency-
dependent magneto- conductivity tensor. Features in such data recently
discovered to be related to vortex pinning; the hybridized vortex
pinning/cyclotron resonance, the hybridized vortex pinning/vortex core
resonance, and the low frequency depinning loss band, will be a focus of the
experimental work. The effects on these properties of vortex pinning as
introduced by ion implantation will be studied. Additional topics include
studies of Josephson plasmons, and of plasma and magneto-plasma modes of arrays
of superconducting disks. These studies are novel and will provide new
information on high temperature su perconductivity, with the possibility of
opening new paths for the science and technology of superconductivity. %%% This
experimental research project makes use of sophisticated optical measurements to
clarify the interaction of magnetic fields with cuprate (high Tc)
superconductors. These superconductors have the potential for application in
motors and generators, where the loss-free electrical conduction and potentially
high levels of magnetic field could lead to smaller, lighter, and more efficient
motors and generators. The full exploitation of this potential has not been
reached thus far, because of heat generating motions of the magnetic field lines
inside the cuprate material. Such motions, and how they may be reduced by
introduction of "pinning centers" by irrradiation or other means, are one of the
topics to be clarified. This experimental grant may thereby help to develop an
improved electrical technology. Results from this research may include unusual
new effects or structures which may find application in technology. This
research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves graduate students
who will be excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government or
education. ***