* 9705044
* Ab-Initio Study of the Finite-Temperature Properties of     Novel Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2002
* Sitaram Jaswal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2002
* USD 147,000.00

9705044 Jaswal This senior theorist PI from an EPSCOR state has been awarded
this grant to work on a subject of considerable technological and also of
fundamental interest. The overall aim in this project is to study the possible
ways of increasing the energy content (which has been measured to be at best 1/3
of the theoretically expected amount) of a rare earth-transition metal magnet.
Additional goals include an understanding of ways of increasing the transition
temperature and the magnetization at a finite temperature. These studies are
carried out using a self-consistent spin- polarized electronic structure
calculations, incorporating a general, non-collinear magnetic structure. The
effects of finite temperature, thermodynamic averaging are carried out using a
Monte Carlo procedure. There are plans to apply the insight gained to other
problems such as exchange coupled hard-soft magnetic phases and magnetic
superlattices. This work is a continuation of a long standing collaboration with
an experimental colleague. %%% This senior theorist PI from an EPSCOR state has
been awarded this grant to work on a subject of considerable technological and
also of fundamental interest. The overall aim in this project is to study the
possible ways of increasing the energy content (which has been measured to be at
best 1/3 of the theoretically expected amount) of a rare earth-transition metal
magnets. The principal approach consists of total energy calculation of
electrons in the presence of arbitrary magnetic order. The PI is also planning
to study several other magnetic materials such as exchange coupled hard-soft
magnetic phases and magnetic superlattices. This work is a continuation of a
long standing collaboration with an experimental colleague. ***