* 9705054
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the  Mathematical Sciences:  Process Design, Modeling and        Optimization in Electronics and Health Care Products
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Douglas Nychka, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1998
* USD 70,800.00

Process Design, Modeling and Optimization in Electronics and Health Care
Products This proposal structures two teams of graduate traineeships that
integrate graduate research with practical contributions to industrial problems.
The industrial partners use cutting edge technology to create new health care
products (Becton Dickinson) and electronic devices (Nortel) and the need for
statistical support to develop and control new processes is acute. This training
plan leverages the close collaboration between the principal investigators and
the partner companies and the projects have been chosen because of their
importance to the companies and their statistical complexity and depth. Many of
the statistical issues are nonstandard and provide a fertile ground for thesis
research in design and estimation for nonparametric regression models, spatial
and spatio-temporal models for batch processes and run-by-run process
optimization. By weaving the trainee's research with their industrial experience
they will learn to transfer the problem solving skills expected for thesis
research to the development of innovative statistical approaches to meet a
company's goals of product development and product quality. This project is
jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).