* 9705097
* Conference: A Plan for Sponsored Attendance of Electrical   Engineering Students to the IEEE Power Engineering Society  Winter Meeting
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Mariesa Crow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 13,000.00

ECS-9705097 Crow In this project, a plan is out to continue the efforts of the
Student/Faculty/Industry Relations Subcommittee of the Power Engineering
Education Committee of the IEEE-Power Engineering Society(PES) to promote
student interest in the power engineering field by sponsoring electrical
engineering students to attend the IEEE-PES annual Winter Meeting. The goal of
this project is to provide an opportunity for U.S. students to be exposed to the
most recent developments in operation, construction, and research in the power
engineering field. This is a particularly critical time for power engineering as
the industry undergoes significant change due to the restructuring of the
traditional utility structure. The career opportunities for students interested
in power engineering are many and varied; opportunities exist within utilities,
vendors, manufacturers, and consulting firms. The impact of this program is
significant and far reaching. This is an exciting time to be involved in power
engineering. The power industry is currently undergoing major changes, and young
engineers entering the marketplace to be exposed to the challenges an issues
these changes are causing. This program will allow students the opportunities to
experience first-hand the energy and vitality of the power area. This will
hopefully encourage students to pursue a life-long career in the power
engineering field. ***