* 9705046
* Indefinite and Singular Optimal (boundary) Control Problems for P.D.E's
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Christine McMillan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2000
* USD 77,191.00

9705046 McMillan This project focuses on issues of boundary
stabilization/optimal control of several linear and nonlinear dynamical systems
on a bounded domain. The main goals of this study are the following: (1) To
develop an abstract theory for the finite horizon indefinite cost problems
(including singular problems) for parabolic and hyperbolic/Petrwoski partial
differential equations (p.d.e.'s) with nonsmoothing observation operators. This
result will be new even for standard (positive definite) finite horizon cost
problems. In addition, we would like to investigate conditions for solvability
of certain differential Riccati equations which are related to certain nonlinear
optimal control problems. (2) Develop a minimax Riccati theory for indefinite
cost problems, after first developing the standard Riccati theory (i.e., the
case where there are no disturbances present in the system). (3) Verify various
assumptions required by the minimax theory (which we have developed previously)
for various shell models. The abstract problems that are being considered arise
out of the mathematical modeling of problems in mechanics and structural design.
In particular, the focus is on large vibrating structures such as satellite
dishes, aircraft, antennae, etc. By necessity, the modeling of the movement of
these structures results in systems of partial differential equations. Ways will
be investigated in which to damp out (i.e., control) unwanted vibrations of
these structures. In addition, the project seeks to address the control of
vibrating structures in the presence of outside disturbances (e.g., external
forces on aircraft wings). The project's goal is to contribute in filling a
large gap in the literature on optimization problems for large flexible
structures.