* 9705645
* Representation Theory of Reductive Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Rebecca Herb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 70,000.00

Abstract Herb Professor Herb plans to continue her work in the field of
representation theory and harmonic analysis on reductive real Lie groups and
p-adic groups. In earlier work on character formulas for discrete series
representations of real semisimple Lie groups, she introduced the notion of two-
structures. She now proposes to extend this theory of two-structures to obtain
discrete series character formulas on arbitrary semisimple real Lie groups via
lifting from groups locally isomorphic to direct products of groups which are
real forms of SL(2,C) or Sp(2,C). She is also interested in investigating
further properties of this lifting correspondence, and continuing to study
induced representations for non-connected linear reductive p-adic groups. The
theory of Fourier series was developed, starting in the 18th century, to study
periodic functions of a real variable. The idea is to write an arbitrary
periodic function as a sum of the well-understood trigonometric functions, that
is expand a function in terms of its "harmonics." This theory has many
applications in the sciences, in engineering, and in mathematics. Many of the
basic ideas involved in Fourier analysis can be extended to analyze functions on
any space with sufficient symmetry. For a given space, the problem is to find a
collection of especially nice elementary functions, and then study how to expand
arbitrary well-behaved functions as a sum or integral (continuous sum) of these
elementary functions. These generalizations of Fourier series are known as
representation theory or harmonic analysis. One class of spaces of special
interest in physics and mathematics is the class of semisimple real Lie groups.
Professor Herb plans to continue her work on the theory of two-structures for
semisimple real Lie groups. This theory can be used to reduce some problems of
harmonic analysis on general semisimple Lie groups to understanding the two
easiest examples.