* 9705694
* Computer Simulation of Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* William Hase, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2000
* USD 329,100.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Professor
William Hase of Wayne State University for the next three years. In this
research project classical molecular dynamics simulations will be used to study
the microscopic atomistic motion of individual molecules and of chemical
reactive systems, with the goals of comparing with experiment and determining
fundamental information about intramolecular dynamics, energy transfer, and
chemical reaction dynamics and kinetics. Since statistical theories are widely
used to interpret experiment, statistical calculations will be performed to
compare with the molecular dynamics simulations. The specific problems chosen
for study are: (1) the kinetics of CH3 and H atom association with diamond
surfaces; (2) energy transfer dynamics in collision-induced dissociation (CID)
and surface-induced dissociation (SID); (3) the dynamics of gas-phase
nucleophilic substitution; and (4) direct ab initio and semiempirical dynamics.
Classical molecular dynamics is expected to give accurate results for these
research problems and, given their complexity, quantum dynamical calculations
would be difficult. In direct dynamics, trajectories are integrated `on the fly`
by interfacing electronic structure theory directly with the molecular dynamics
simulations. This is a frontier approach for performing simulations, which is
directly linked to the computational power of modern computers. Direct
semiempirical dynamics may be used to study large systems for long times (e.g.
CID and SID), while ab initio direct dynamics may be applied to small systems
for short times. An example of the latter is the exit-channel and energy
partitioning dynamics of trajectories as they move from a potential energy
barrier to products. State-of-the art vector and parallel processing computer
architecture will be used to enhance the direct dynamics simulations. In this
research project molecular modeling and simulation is used to study the motion
of individual molecules and of molecular collisions leading to chemical reaction
and energy transfer. Molecular simulation methodologies have become sufficiently
sophisticated that they are often predictive, giving near-quantitative results.
The research to be performed during the upcoming three year period includes
applications of well-developed simulation methods to interpret new experimental
results and test theoretical models, as well as the development of more direct
simulation approaches for studying large molecular systems. The specific
simulations to be performed are of: (1) reactions leading to diamond film
growth; (2) mass-spectroscopy experiments of cluster fragmentation and
fragmentation of ions when they collide with the surfaces. The latter has been
proposed as a procedure for sequencing peptides; (3) reactions between ions and
molecules; and (4) the fragmentation of highly energized molecules.