* 9705475
* Harmonic Analysis Methods and Operator Decomposability in   Modern Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Earl Berkson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 25,164.00

FOR DMS-9705475 ABSTRACT OF PROJECT BERKSON The project will be concerned with
the development of a unified abstract operator theory aimed at expanding the
role of harmonic analysis in the structures of modern analysis. Harmonic
analysis will be used to provide spectral decomposability of operators (and
associated weakened forms of orthogonality) in a wide variety of contexts. The
mechanism for combining the structural decomposability features of harmonic
analysis and operator theory will be the transference theory initiated by A.P.
Calder n and Coifman-Weiss. Studies aimed at expanding the scope and vistas of
transference theory will be involved, as will applications of transference
theory to harmonic analysis. The central theme of the project will be a unified
overview providing new avenues for applying classical analysis to its own
settings and to general mathematical analysis. The broad scope of the methods
will be aimed at new vistas and discoveries applicable to a wide variety of
mainstream mathematical subjects. From the standpoint of human resources, the
NSF support awarded for the operations of the Wabash Modern Analysis Seminar,
which functions as a Mid-Western regional seminar attracting national and
international participation, will provide ready access to the frontiers of
knowledge for many young researchers and graduate students, while furthering a
wide array of research programs.