* 9705812
* A Unified Approach to Characterizing Fracture-Flow          Systems:  Coupling Radar Tomography, Tracer Experiments,    and Hydraulic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2002
* USD 306,456.00

9705812 Gorelick Among the most pressing problems in hydrogeology is describing
heterogeneity in fractured-rock systems. Accurate 3D characterization of the
hydraulic properties controlling fracture flow is required for predictive models
of hydraulic head changes and solute migration. The problem has been difficult
because typically a single type of data (e.g., hydraulic tests) has been used to
deduce the complex pattern of fracture flow paths and flow barriers. Individual
analysis of data set may lead to "maps" of fractured rock geometry and hydraulic
properties that are inconsistent with each other. We suggest that simultaneous
inversion of multiple types of information ranging from geophysical data (local
and cross well radar) to hydraulic tests to tracer tests provides an approach
that can identify fractured-rock aquifer heterogeneities including fracture zone
geometry, connectivity, and transmissive properties. Each type of data is
analyzed with the appropriate physical simulation models, including ones for
wave propagation, hydraulic head changes, and solute migration. We propose a
coupled-inversion process based on a very flexible optimization procedure known
as simulated annealing. The method will yield images that are consistent with
all the types of data (e.g., heads, concentrations, radar) and indicate
fracture-zone geometry, hydraulic conductivity estimates, and spatially variable
uncertainty estimates. It will be developed and applied to both synthetic and
field data. Our past experience for sedimentary deposits has shown that
synthetic data analysis exercises can promotes rapid development and testing of
the "coupled" inversion approach. Once the benefits and limitations of the
proposed method are understood, application to complex field data provides a
true test of the method. The field data will be from the fractured-rock
experimental site at Mirror Lake, New Hampshire. To date, the USGS has collected
radar tomography, seismic tomography, borehole geophysical log s, hydraulic test
data and tracer test data. In what we consider to be a unique opportunity, they
are willing to make these newly collected data available to us. The project will
provide insight into the information that can be extracted from different types
of data, the relative worth of data, and how joint analysis of different types
of data can be used to deduce fracture-zone architecture.