* 9705016
* Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Bernard Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 141,000.00

9705016 Coleman The principal investigator will continue his work on the
development of the elastic rod model for DNA with the goals of (i) attaining
insight into the mode of action of topoisomerases, (ii) finding efficient ways
to calculate configurations of DNA segments and plasmids in circumstances in
which the forces arising from self-contact are not negligible, and (iii)
obtaining mathematical results in the theory of vibrations of elastic rings that
are needed to account for the effects of thermal fluctuations on quantities,
such as writhe, that depend on the tertiary structure of DNA plasmids. In
research in a different area, analytical and numerical methods will be employed
to study the morphological changes and instabilities that result from curvature
driven mass diffusion within the bounding surfaces of solid bodies. Among the
topics to be investigated are (i) the evolution and stability of axisymmetric
surfaces and of planar curves in the theory of curvature driven diffusion and
(ii) the evolution of pit-like defects in otherwise flat films. Much is yet to
be learned about the modes of action of proteins that are known to bind to and
induce deformations in DNA. There are cases in which one can discuss the action
of DNA bending proteins by treating a DNA molecule as an elastic rod. Recent
research has shown that one can use exact solutions of the equations of
equilibrium for elastic rods to investigate the nature of the dependence of the
configuration of a segment of DNA on conditions imposed at its end points.
Several of the problems that are investigated in this way are important for
understanding mechanisms of gene regulation. The work on curvature driven mass
diffusion within the bounding surfaces of solids is expected to have significant
applications in materials science. As the effects of surface diffusion increase
in importance as dimensions become small, the theory of such diffusion can be
applied to obtain insight and quan titative results in the following research
areas: the formation of thermal grooves, i.e., the development of surface
indentations at grain boundaries in heated metals; the stability of field-
emitter cathodes, of interconnecting elements in microelectronic circuits, and
of moving parts in micro-electromechanical devices; fiber spheroidization in
metallic composites; and the pitting of thin films at grain boundary vertices.