* 9705038
* Ultra-Fast Electronic-Photonic Materials and Devices
* O/D,EPS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 05/31/2001
* USD 765,316.00

9705038 Salamo Information technology has become the defining technology for our
world. Ultra-fast delivery of information to anyone anywhere is to be expected
in the near future. Such technology must rely on the development of ultra-fast
microelectronics and information pathways. Fiber optic pathways have
demonstrated transmission capacity characterized by extremely high bit rates
over the longest non-repeated distances. Though impressive capacities have been
achieved, today's systems utilize only a small fraction of the potential
transmission capacity available through optical fibers. The main reason is that
electronic-photonic components at the input and output ends of the fiber
pathways are not capable of operating at the ultra-fast speeds which would be
commensurate with the fiber's potential band width. A new generation of ultra-
faster electronic-photonic materials and devices is needed. This research
endeavor is the focus of the proposal. Parallel to the need for new ultra-fast
devices, a window of opportunity for corresponding entrepreneurial ventures has
opened. University spin-off companies, inspired by new ideas for smaller,
faster, lower power photonic-electronics can emerge wherever the needed mix of
vision, talent and support resides. Given the potential for small companies to
seed and grow in this area, there is little doubt that the next few years will
be witness to a burgeoning microelectronics economy which can be located
anywhere in the United States. The University of Arkansas has decided to seize
the opportunity for research and entrepreneurial ventures in this area. The
approach is based on: (i) frontier research and development of new materials
with the potential for ultra-fast performance; (ii) formation and development of
a competitive interdisciplinary team of scientists, engineers and students with
the talents needed to forge achievements; (iii) initiation of an organization
which will build bridges to industry and entre preneurial opportunities for
faculty and students, (iv) formation of a Center for Ultra-Fast Electronic-
Photonic Materials and Devices, and (v) an innovative educational program which
provides enhanced career opportunities for students. The technical approach is
based on the development of indium phosphide, InP, cubic boron nitride, cBN, and
polymers to produce ultra-fast electronic-photonic components capable of
advancing the rate of processing of information to and from high bandwidth
pathways. This effort is built around a unique Molecular Beam Epitaxy - Scanning
Tunneling Microscope facility, making it possible for the University of Arkansas
to gain a strategic foothold in the global race to advance the frontier of
ultra-fast electronic-photonic materials and devices and inspire corresponding
spin-off companies in Arkansas.