* 9705366
* Social Organization and Task Allocation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Paul Sherman, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Vessey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 102,454.00

9705366 Social Organization and Task Allocation in a Eusocial Mannal The naked
mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber) occupies a unique place among social
vertebrates because of its behavioral similarities to cooperatively breeding
birds and mammals on the one hand and eusocial insects on the other. Naked mole-
rats are playing a pivotal role in attempts to unite occurrences of alloparental
care in vertebrates invertebrates under a single theoretical and terminological
umbrella, to understand the relative importance of extrinsic (i.e, ecological),
intrinsic (kinship), and historical factors in the evolution of eusociality, and
identify proximate and ultimate sources of conflict and cooperation in animal
societies. However, comparative behavioral and evolutionary analyses are
presently stalled by lack of information, or existence of conflicting results,
on key details of intra-colonial social organization and task allocation. The
P.I. s research will address this need by quantifying the behavior of mole-rats
in 5 captive colonies (n=126 animals, presently) housed in transparent burrow
systems. Four specific questions will investigated: (1) Is there a specialized
dispersive morph, or are putative dispersers actually colony defenders instead?,
(2) Are burrows excavated primarily by large individuals or small individuals,
or do large and small individuals participate, but in different aspects of
burrow excavation?, (3) Do particular colony members seek environmental heat
sources and then transfer heat to nest mates (like living hot water bottles),
thereby improving the work efficiency of the entire colony?, and (4) How
accurate is the recently- discovered foraging recruitment system: do scouts that
find new food sources lay polarized trails to them, and how precisely do the
communicate information about food quantity, quality, distance, and divisibility
to potential recruits? For each question, straightforward, non-invasive
experiments and observations will y ield strong inference tests of alternative
hypotheses. Overall, this research will deepen our understanding of individual
and group-level adaptations in one of the most remarkably complex, cooperation
mammalian societies on earth.