* 9705168
* Controlled Topology and Topological Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Frank Quinn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 132,964.00

9705168 Quinn This project has two distinct components, in controlled topology
and topological field theory. The controlled topology objective is to understand
better the failure of approximate fibrations to form a bundle theory because the
formation of pullbacks is obstructed. Hughes and others have made precise the
sense in which approximate fibrations are the normal structure in homotopically
stratified sets. This makes the pullback problem central in the study of these
sets. Much is already known through the work of Hughes, Williams, Taylor,
Weinberger and others, but a more satisfactory version may be possible. The
other topic concerns machine computation in topological field theories defined
on 2-complexes, 3-manifolds, and smooth 4-manifolds. The 2-complex case is
completely implemented, and explorations are well along for field theories
coming from mod p representations of Lie algebras, for p up to 13. The
representation theory of quantum groups needed for 3-manifolds has been
implemented, but exploration of the field theories waits on a more complete
understanding of the 2-complex case. Both 2-complexes and 3-manifolds are
considered test cases for the primary goal of the project, field theories on
4-manifolds. This, however, is still some years off. Some work is also being
done on topological questions on which field theories might shed light: the
"Andrews-Curtis" conjecture for 2-complexes, handlebody structures on
4-manifolds, and topological isotopy of 4-manifolds. The context for the first
topic is the study of stratified sets. Most of the geometric objects occurring
in nature are stratified: built up of layers that are manifolds. The biggest
challenge is to understand how the strata fit together. For most types of
stratified sets (smooth, piecewise-linear, analytic) this fitting-together is
described using a bundle theory. It is complex and hard to use because the
objects are complicated, but is effective and well-understood. Top ological
stratified objects took longer to describe, because it turns out the fitting-
together cannot be given in terms of a bundle theory. This has been extensively
studied, but we do not yet have a fully satisfactory understanding. The field
theories in the second part of the project are also referred to as "topological
quantum field theories." They are rather idiosyncratic theories specialized to
low dimensions. The ones under study are algebraic (as opposed to analytic) and
are constructed using representations of groups or Lie algebras, or their
deformations. These, particularly the 3-manifold versions, became popular about
a decade ago. At the time, we seemed not to know enough either about
deformations of Lie algebras or about 3-manifolds to get significant new
information from one about the other. A particular obstacle was the inability to
compute "random" invariants. This project, now in its eighth year, has numerical
computation as a first goal. This is going well, but the raw output is not very
revealing. The principal activity at present is finding ways to use numerical
data to obtain a global qualitative understanding of a theory. ***