* 9705202
* Investigation of Formation, Stability, Structure and Hydrogen Storage Properties of Ti-Quasicrystals and Related Crystalline Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 07/31/2002
* USD 385,131.00

9705202 Kelton The atomic structures of titanium-based quasicrystals and related
phases, the formability of the quasicrystal and crystal approximants, the role
of impurities in phase formation, and the nature of the phase transitions
connecting the quasicrystal and the crystal approximants, are as yet poorly
understood. Pursuing successes under the past grant period, these points are
explored in titanium and zirconium-based quasicrystals and related crystal
phases. Subjects include: (1) the investigation of the role of interstitial
impurities on icosahedral phase formation; (2) the hydrogenation characteristics
of quasicrystals, related crystalline and amorphous phases, and the
hydrogen/quasicrystal phase diagram and pressure/composition isotherms; (3)
X-ray and neutron diffraction to determine the atomic decoration of stable
crystal approximants in TiZrTM alloys; (4) investigations of the sequence of
phase formation in TiCrSiO, TiZrNi, and TiZrFe alloys; and (5) the nature of the
phase transitions between the stable icosahedral-phase and the rational
approximant phases in TiZrNi alloys. Several collaborations are underway,
including studies of phase formation aided by drop-tube experiments in
collaboration with Cambridge University, UK; the stabilizing role of impurities
by magnetic susceptibility measurements in collaboration with scientists at
Washington University; neutron scattering studies of hydrogenated (and
deuterated) quasicrystals in collaboration with Missouri University Research
Reactor (MURR), and Saclay, France; NMR studies of samples with Knox College,
IL. The elastic neutron scattering and NMR studies lead to a better
understanding of the distribution, symmetry and chemistry of the hydrogen
containing sites in the TiZrNi quasicrystals. These data will be used to refine
quasicrystal models constructed from determined structures for the crystal
approximant phases. Inelastic neutron and NMR studies allow estimates to be made
to hydrogen diffusion rates in the quasicrystal. %%% This research provides
fundamental knowledge related to the potential for quasicrystal alloys to
function as hydrogen storage materials. ***