* 9705369
* NMR Investigations of Spin Density Waves in Organic Metals  and Vortices in Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* W. Gilbert Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 262,186.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705369 Clark This experimental research project
employs techniques of nuclear magnetic resonance in study of the thermal and
driven motions of the local broken symmetry ground state structures in CDW and
SDW one-dimensional systems, and the motion of vortex structure in several Type-
II superconductors. Organic metal systems for study include a Bechgaard salt
alloy system and the blue bronze. Most of the experiments will employ pulsed NMR
over a very wide range of frequencies and up to high pressures. In
superconductors, recent NMR spin-echo field-rocking measurements will be
extended to anisotropic superconductors to measure the anisotropy of the
penetration depth; and to high field to measure the coherence length. Work is
planned to extend the recent observations by NMR of rf-assisted flux-lattice
annealing in anisotropic Type- II superconductors. Some very high magnetic field
work will be performed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. This
study of unusual ground states in novel materials will extend the knowledge base
and has potential to generate significant advances in basic solid state physics.
It also will demonstrate new methods for using NMR which may be applicable in
other circumstances. %%% This experimental research project uses primarily the
technique of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to probe basic electrical
properties of novel organic metal conductors, as well as aspects of the magnetic
behavior in highly anisotropic superconductors. The organic conductors of
interest exhibit nearly one-dimensional electrical conduction. Their electrical
conduction is believed to occur by a novel mechanism known as a "sliding charge
density wave", which involves a highly correlated motion of carriers, unlike
conventional metals. The properties of this unusual effect, and materials that
can exhibit it, a re of interest. Results from this research may include unusual
new effects or materials which may find new application in technology. A portion
of the work will be carried out at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.
This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves both graduate
and postgraduate students who will be excellently trained to enter positions in
industry, government or education. ***