* 9705246
* Exploration of Localization Phenomena at Ultra Thin Metal/  Semiconductor Interfaces:  Going Beyond Surface             Spectroscopies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Hanno Weitering, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 195,000.00

9705246 Weitering The primary goal of this new research program is to explore
the fundamentals of electron localization at crystalline semiconductor surfaces
or in ultrathin epitaxial films. The PI who is a junior faculty member at
Tennessee will measure the temperature dependence of the surface state
conductance and attempt to correlate these classical transport measurements with
state densities and band dispersions as measured with angle-resolved
photoemission, electron energy loss spectroscopy and scanning tunneling
spectroscopy. In addition, we will explore the possible formation of local
magnetic moments using the a.c. susceptibility technique in ultrahigh vacuum. It
is expected that this multi-technique approach will ultimately bridge the gap
between surface science and mesoscopic physics, thereby generating a profound
impact on both condensed matter physics and semiconductor technology. %%% The
primary goal of this new research program is to explore the fundamentals of
electron localization at crystalline semiconductor surfaces or in ultrathin
epitaxial films. The trend toward miniaturization of industrial components is
leading to materials that are so small as to be nearly two-dimensional. The
smaller a sample, the more important its surface properties, simply because the
surface represents a higher percentage of the sample. In order to learn
something about surfaces, scientists have "bombarded" surfaces with quantum
particles such as electrons or photons. Unfortunately, such experiments are
extremely difficult to relate to practical matters such as electrical
conductance. In this research project, we are exploring new ways to measure the
electrical and magnetic properties of semiconductor surfaces and thin films
directly. A novel method is being implemented to electrically insulate the
surface from the bulk so that we can measure the electrical resistance o f the
surface. We are also constructing a very sensitive nstrument capable of
detecting extremely weak magnetic signals from a surface. It is expected that
these new measurements will provide unprecedented insights that will help to
bridge the gap between the physicist's world of atoms and molecules and the
engineer's world of device fabrication. ***