* 9705304
* Boundary Phenomena in Quantum and Classical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Alexander Meyerovich, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 156,000.00

9705304 Meyerovich This project consists of two components. One deals with the
physics of spin polarized quantum systems, specifically the spin dynamics. Here
the anomalous zero-temperature spin attenuation in polarized Fermi liquids,
which is now well established both experimentally and theoretically,
nevertheless needs to be brought under the umbrella of a general theory of Fermi
liquids. There are plans to study the nonlinear phenomena, e.g. close to the
Castaing instability. In the second component, the PI plans to develop a general
framework for a study of boundary roughness effects. Much of this work is an
extensive development of a recent breakthrough formalism by the PI and his
coworkers where the boundary roughness is mathematically expressed in terms of
bulk distortions. In details, this research hopes to develop a description of
particle flow at very high Knudsen numbers and an exploration of random boundary
effects in microscopic models of friction. %%% A renewal to a distinguished mid-
career PI, this grant supports work on two different projects. In the first part
the PI will continue his well-recognized study of highly polarized systems,
equivalent to materials in magnetic fields of the order of hundreds of Tesla.
the second group of problems involve random/rough surfaces and boundaries. The
PI has recently developed a mathematical formalism, amounting to a major
breakthrough in the description of a wide range of problems. The possible areas
of inpact are particle flow at very high speeds and low densities and/or models
for understanding material friction. ***