* 9705179
* RUI:  Microbiological Survey and Inventory:  Eugregarinida  (Protista: Apicomplexa) Parasitizing Selected Mandibulate   Arthropods of the Nebraska Sandhills
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Richard Clopton, Peru State College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 04/30/2001
* USD 207,380.00

9705179 Clopton This project supports integrated faculty and undergraduate
student research on the diversity of certain microscopic parasitic protists that
inhabit the digestive tracts of insects, millipedes, centipedes, and crustaceans
(macroarthropods). These protists are known as "eugregarines," and the organisms
they inhabit are the most speciose of all organisms on earth. During the
project, it is expected that 150-200 species of eugregarines from 12 different
families will be recovered from 125 arthropod species representing 46 families;
these organisms will be collected from a range of 12 different habitats in the
Nebraska sandhills. The project has implications for ecology, agriculture, and
medicine, because of the importance in those disciplines of the arthropod groups
to be studied. Further, there is currently no museum collection of eugregarines
in North America, and no survey of these organisms has ever been carried out for
this continent. Products of this project will include specimen collections that
will be deposited at the Nebraska State Museum, taxonomic catalogs of
eugregarines and their hosts in the Nebraska sandhills, an online specimen
database, and WWW pages that will provide identification keys, images, and
descriptions of the eugregarines. Also, 12 undergraduate students will be
involved in the research, and thus will receive field experience and training in
systematics. The project is jointly funded by the Biotic Surveys and Inventories
Program and the Long Term Projects in Environmental Biology Cluster.