* 9705709
* Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Joseph Wolf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract 9705709 Wolf Prof. Joseph Wolf will continue his research on Lie
groups, harmonic analysis and representation, with some applications to complex
analysis, Riemannian geometry, numerical analysis and control theory. This
includes (1) his work on double fibration transforms and the structure of spaces
of maximal compact subvarieties in flag domains, (2) his work on infinite
dimensional Lie groups that are direct limits of finite dimensional groups, (3)
his study of the Harish-Chandra--Schwartz space of a general semisimple Lie
groups, (4) applications of his results with Milicic, Hecht and Schmid on
equivalence of various constructions of representations of semisimple Lie
groups, and (5) his line of research connecting semisimple representation theory
with certain aspects of applied mathematics. Here (1) has already proved useful
in automorphic cohomology, in indefinite metric quantization, and in geometric
realization and understanding of certain singular representations of interest in
physics. The new work proposed is to complete the precise description of the
linear cycle space and apply the result to concrete analytic properties of the
associated double fibration transforms. (2) is now at the point of understanding
the direct limit analogues of the discrete series from both a geometric and an
analytic viewpoint. (3) is a matter of completing a very beautiful topic in
harmonic analysis. (4) is a question of direct reading of the character and
growth properties of a representation from its defining basic datum. And (5)
combines methods of control theory with the theory of Riemannian symmetric
spaces. That line of research concentrates, at the moment, on the development of
point placement techniques for observation of the heat equation on the sphere,
along with various associated quadrature and approximation techniques. These
research projects all are investigations of the role of symmetry in pure and
applied mathematics. Symmetry simplifies calculations by eliminatin g variables
or constraining their range, and the structure of the symmetry group and its
representations imposes patterns that always lead to better understanding of
complex situations. Thus indefinite metric quantization, which is tightly
connected to project (1), has applications in particle physics. In fact it is
essential for modern understanding of quantization of the photon and other
particles that require a subquotient structure. The point placement and
quadrature aspects of (5) are closely allied to the development of non- invasive
methods of observation and methods of efficient computation. That sort of
consideration comes up in many situations, such as medical applications of
tomography and location of toxic spills. All five projects are closely related.
In project (5), especially, methods developed for use in pure mathematics
(specifically abstract harmonic analysis and differential geometry) turn out to
have extremely interesting consequences for observability, controllability and
practical computation.