* 9705300
* Electron Correlations at the Edge of Instability:  Complex  Materials and Restricted Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Frances Hellman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 427,000.00

9705300 Hellman This is a new project by a PI who collaborates with a well
established group of scientists a UC San Diego to study "highly correlated
electron systems". These are complex systems, with superconductivity, magnetism,
metallic conduction, and insulating behavior found in the same material system,
often with only small changes in composition or structure. One electron bands
are narrow, screening is limited, and electron-electron correlation energy is
high, leading to a general instability of the electronic system to different
competing ground states. In the neighborhood of such instabilities, the effects
of reducing dimensionality, thereby increasing the correlation energy, or of
adding magnetic moments can be extremely dramatic. This complexity is absent in
more traditional materials, where properties can generally be quite successfully
described using Fermi liquid theory, and dramatic effects seldom result from
small changes. In these complex systems the importance of measuring all
properties on the same sample cannot be overstated, since subtle and often
nearly unmeasurable structural or chemical changes can drastically affect
properties. Measurements of specific heat from low temperature up through any
phase transitions reveal important characteristics of the electronic system. Our
ability to measure the specific heat of thin films and microgram size single
crystals allows measurements of magneto-transport, magnetization, IR and
tunneling spectroscopy on the same samples. We plan collaborations with Maple,
Schuller, Basov, and Dynes to prepare and measure samples of materials in which
correlation energies can be varied, either by composition or reduced
dimensionality, and with theorists Sham, Arovas, and Renn to develop models for
these materials. %%% This is a new project by a PI who collaborates with a well
established group of scientists a UC Sa n Diego to study "highly correlated
electron systems". These are materials causing great excitement in condensed
matter physics and with great potential for applications, such as high
temperature superconductors or colossal magnetoresistance. The phase diagrams of
these materials are complex, with superconductivity, magnetism, metallic
conduction, or insulating behavior found in the same material system, often with
only small changes in composition or structure. This complexity is absent in
more traditional materials. The interactions between the electrons, which cause
the magnetism, superconductivity, or insulating behavior, compete with each
other, with one or another winning. It thus appears that the electrons in these
new materials are perched on the edge of many different types of behavior, with
the potential to go different ways depending on extremely subtle differences in
structure or composition. With this in mind, the importance of measuring all
properties on the same sample cannot be overstated, since subtle and often
nearly unmeasurable structural or chemical changes can drastically affect
properties. We have a unique capability here to make a basic measurement
(specific heat) on samples which cannot be measured elsewhere. This grant will
allow us to develop collaborations taking advantage of our unique expertise
together with others' expertise in sample preparation, characterization,
measurement and theoretical understanding. ***