* 9705379
* Dissertation Research:  Plio-Pleistocene Javanese Homo      erectus Subsistence & Tool Use Behavior:  An Experimental & Taphonomic Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 11,996.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Mr. Kildo Choi will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze several large samples of
fossilized mid-Pleistocene bone from Java to search for traces of human
butchering marks. He will also conduct actualistic studies to determine the
cutmark signatures different raw materials which are available on the island
cause on fresh bone. The research is directed at a major anthropological enigma.
Archaeologists know that hominids first produced stone tools over two million
years ago and these virtually indestructible objects have been recovered in many
parts of the world. Although they do not always co-occur in the same site, areas
which contain early human remains are usually rich in stone tools which served a
number of functions. Java is a very interesting exception. Homo erectus, early
hominid remains have been discovered at a number of sites in Java. However stone
tools of similar antiquity appear to be lacking. Several reasons - none
supported by strong data - have been suggested for this. It has been argued that
the people subsisted primarily on soft vegetable foods and did not have a need
for stone tools. Others have proposed that bamboo, which retains a sharp edge
and is still used today, served the needed cutting function. It is also
possible, although unlikely, that no tools were used at all. Mr. Choi has
examined faunal remains, some associated with the hominids themselves, and found
evidence of what he believes are cut marks on the bones. When bones lie on the
ground for significant periods of time, they acquire abrasions and scratches
through natural means. Many experimental archaeologists argue however that
humanly induced cut marks can be distinguished from these other phenomena. In a
preliminary study Mr. Choi has found, what he believes to be evidence of such
cut marks. If such marks do exist, they argue strongly for the presence of
tools. In a first phase of the current study Mr. Choi will use types of stone
which are locally available, as well as bamboo, to butcher animals. He will
observe through low power as well as scanning electron microscopy the marks
which are recorded on the bone. With these controlled data in hand, he will then
examine large series of Pleistocene faunal remains which have been recovered on
the island. This research is important because it will address one of the major
anomalies in the archaeological record. It will shed new light on the cultural
abilities of early hominids and assist in training a promising young scientist.