* 9705068
* Study of the Strength of Interfaces at Elevated Temperatures and its Relationship to Interfacial Structure and Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Soumendra Basu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 05/31/2001
* USD 439,631.00

9705068 Gupta The objectives of this work are to establish experimental
procedures for in-situ measurements of mechanical properties at interfaces under
elevated temperatures, to develop a basic understanding of strength-structure-
chemistry relationships for interfaces, and to generate data for elevated
temperature interfacial strengths of several engineering systems. Because coated
components used in machinery and device applications often undergo local
temperature excursions during performance, the mechanical properties of the
material interfaces and their relationships to interfacial structure and
chemistry at elevated temperatures is important. An earlier one year grant
permitted the development of a laser-generated, stress- pulse system that
induces decohesion at the interface of dissimilar materials under elevated
temperatures. In this renewal grant the tensile strengths of such interfaces are
measured up to 1300 C in 1 to 3 micron thick coatings of Nb on substrates of
sapphire. Interface chemistry and atomic structure are determined by using high
resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. TEM at ambient temperature allows a determination of the
influence of interface interdiffusion, void formation, coating grain size, new
phases, and thickness of the amorphous layer on the measured interface strength
at elevated temperatures. Once the strength-structure-chemistry relationships
are developed at elevated temperatures for the Nb/sapphire interface, the
tensile strengths of other representative systems chosen from applications in
tribology (TiC coatings on Inconel substrates), thermal barriers (zirconia
coatings on Inconel substrates), and microelectronics (Cu and Al coatings on
nitrided surfaces of Si) will be determined up to 1300 C. %%% The grant is not
only interdisciplinary in its approach, but also in its impact, as it serves
particular needs in the composites, tribology, thermal spray, mi croelectronics,
and other thin film industries. ***