* 9705180
* Controlled Fabrication of Tunnel Barriers and Electron      Tunneling into High Tc Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Robert Dynes, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2002
* USD 355,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705180 Dynes This experimental research project
focuses on the controlled fabrication of tunnel barriers intended to permit
tunneling and transport studies of superconductors that are subject to strong
electron correlations and to reduced dimensionality. A topic of interest is the
nature of the superconductor-insulator transition in lower dimensional systems.
A further topic is the search for a useful analogy between two-dimensional
disordered superconductors and high Tc cuprate superconductors. Samples of
varying dimensionality are to be studied by means of transport, tunneling, and
scanning tunneling microscopy, emphasizing the effects of dimensional crossover
and disorder. %%% This experimental research project is based on use of the
technique known as electron tunneling, and in particular on finding methods to
fabricate barriers suitable for the use of this technique. Electron tunneling is
a quantum-mechanical process by which an electron can pass a potential barrier
or "hill", which could not be overcome under the rules of classical physics,
governing macroscopic objects like planets and tennis balls. Quantum mechanics
allows such hills to "tunneled under" on a probabilistic basis with measurable
rates of transfer limited to cases of very small mass and short (Angstrom scale)
distances, such as the case of electrons in atoms. The technique of electron
tunneling is important in determining the density of states, especially in
superconductors; and also as the basis for the scanning tunneling microscope.
This research project probes the effects of atomic scale disorder and geometric
configuration on transport, with emphasis on the metal-insulator transition.
Geometries of interest include planar and one-dimensional linear samples.
Results from this research may include unusual new effects or st ructures which
may find application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary
in nature and involves graduate and postdoctoral students who will be
excellently trained to enter positions in industry, government or education. ***