* 9705376
* The Arithmetic of Integral Canonical Models of Shimura      Varieties of Preabelian Type
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Kenneth Ribet, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 47,900.00

Ribet 9705376 This project is concerned with the interrelation between the
geometry, the stratified geometry, the diophantine aspects, the modular and
cohomology properties, and the combinatorial structure of the integral canonical
models of Shimura varieties of preabelian type and of their special fibres. New
notions of Shimura s-crystals and Shimura Lie s-crystals will be used to attack
the Langlands-Rapoport conjecture, as well as for understanding the Lie
canonical stratification of the special fibres of these integral models. The
investigator will work on a better understanding of the geometry of integral
models with the ultimate goal being a proof of the zeta function conjecture for
Shimura varieties of preabelian type. The Arakelov intersection theory will be
used to study the Diophantine problems in integral models of Shimura varieties
of preabelian type. This project falls into the general area of arithmetic
geometry, a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number
theory and geometry. This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful having
recently solved problems that withstood generations. Among its many consequences
are new error correcting codes. Such codes are essential for both modern
computers and compact disks.