* 9705569
* Parent-Child Interaction Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Les Fugate, Louisville Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Roger D. Mitchell
* 04/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9705569 Fugate The Louisville Science Center and the National Center for Family
Literacy will engage in a year's planning to introduce the Parent- Child
Interaction Project to teams of educators in six target cities. The goal is to
explore the feasibility of a future national implementation of the model. The
Parent-Child Interaction Project aims to empower underserved parents to become
their child's most important teacher and provide these parents and their
children the opportunity to gain science, mathematics, and technology education
together. The participants are the parents and pre-school children enrolled in
family literacy programs. During the Project, parents and children will make at
least four trips to the participating science-technology center and evaluate
their trips during follow-up class sessions. The joint efforts of the family
literacy programs and science- technology centers can achieve the following
goals: * Improve the involvement of low-income and low-literacy parents in the
education of their children, specifically in the areas of science, mathematics
and technology. * Increase the awareness of local science and technology centers
as available community resources, particularly for underserved audiences. * Use
science center visits and related projects to extend NCFL classroom learning for
adult education students, their children and their teachers.