* 9705442
* Low-Energy Spectroscopy of Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Zack Schlesinger, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

9705442 Schlesinger This is a new project to study systems in which the effects
of electron interactions extend the physics beyond the domain of simple non-
interacting theories of solids. For such systems there is generally a
characteristic energy scale in the infrared which separates a strongly
correlated low-energy region from a high-energy region in which interaction
effects are much less significant. The proposed research seeks to use
spectroscopic measurements to probe the dynamics in this crucial infrared range
and thereby to develop an understanding of correlated systems. Specific systems
to be studied include Kondo insulators, mixed-valent systems, metal- insulator
transitions driven by magnetic order, and superconductor- insulator transition
systems. These experiments will elucidate the nature of the charge dynamics in
these systems, and explore crucial relationships between charge dynamics,
magnetism, disorder and localization. Results will provide both a test of and a
stimulus for theoretical work in this area at the forefront of condensed matter
physics. %%% This is a new project to study systems in which the effects of
electron interactions extend the physics beyond the domain of simple non-
interacting theories of solids. Although our basic understanding of metals and
semiconductors is built on theories of non-interacting electrons, future
electronic technologies will increasingly include materials in which
interactions between electrons play a role. It is thus important to fully
understand the electronic properties of these correlated electron systems, in
which phenomena occur that cannot be readily predicted from a knowledge of the
system components (the electrons and nuclei), but rather, arise in a non-obvious
way from the interactions between them. (Examples include magnetism and
superconductivity.) This proposal is directed toward the study o f electron
dynamics in the infrared spectral region, which encompasses the energy range
relevant to the formation of most correlated electron states and is thus
particularly important. Systems to be studied include rare-earth compounds that
can be viewed as correlated semiconductors, and oxide systems where an interplay
between magnetism and electrical conductivity leads to striking effects (e.g.,
giant magnetoresistance). The experimental results can be expected to stimulate
and test theoretical efforts in this area at the forefront of condensed matter
physics. ***