* 9705668
* RUI: Fractional Power Fringe - Adjusted Filter Based Joint  Transform Correlation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Mohammad Alam, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 01/31/1999
* USD 56,684.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9705668 Principal Investigator: Mohammad Alam Title:
Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI): Fractional Power Fringe-Adjusted
Based Joint Transform Correlator In this research, a novel real-time distortion-
invariant filter procedure for optical pattern recognition will be investigated.
Optical pattern recognition involves the use of either a matched filter based
correlator or a joint transform correlator (JTC); only the later is suitable for
real-time applications. Recently a number of nonlinear optical techniques have
been proposed for optical pattern recognition, and the all-optical
photorefractive crystal JTC stands out among these. To date, the photorefractive
JTC architecture is suitable only for single target detection and the processing
speed is slow. The PI's research will develop a novel generalized JTC which
employs nonlinear apodization at the Fourier plane. Preliminary studies by the
PI indicate that this JTC technique results in better correlation output
compared to alternate JTC architectures. This seems true for multiple targets,
which may be rotated with respect to each other and well as single targets; and
for noisy as well as noise-free backgrounds. There are many applications for
such an improved optical pattern recognition technique: machine parts
recognition and label inspection for industrial automation, optical character
recognition, ultrafast fingerprint identification, target detection and
tracking, robotics vision, automated intelligent vehicle control systems, and
real-time region-of-interest identifier in broad area search situations such as
the identification of specific features, patterns or characteristics in earth
resource images. The PI will explore various architectures to effectively
implement the nonlinear Fourier domain processing, through extensive modeling,
simulation and experimentation. The experimentation will be carried out in
collaboration with the Electro-Optics Laboratory at University of Dayton. Fu ll
undergraduate student participation in the research at INPU-Fort Wayne and at
University of Dayton is planned.