* 9705774
* Structure of Local Minimizers in Superconductivity and      Models for Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Peter Sternberg, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 07/31/2001
* USD 78,843.00

9705774 Sternberg In this proposal, the principal investigator decribes a
research program in nonlinear partial differential equations and the calculus of
variations. The research topics come from three areas: the Ginzburg-Landau model
for superconductivity, the Cahn-Hilliard model for phase transitions, and the
structure of stable solutions to volume-constrained least area problems. A
common goal throughout the proposal is to study the existence, disappearance,
and structure of local minimizers to problems arising in continuum mechanics
when relevant parameters are altered. In the work centered on superconductivity,
the P.I. will focus on problems concerning the complex relationship between the
size of an applied magnetic field and the behavior of vortices which appear
within the superconducting sample. The projects related to phase transitions
concern the structure of transition layers bridging two (or more) phases within
the context of the Cahn-Hilliard theory of phase transitions. This work is
inextricably linked to the study of volume-constrained least area problems.
These geometry problems are quite subtle, and their resolution should shed light
on the structure of phase transitions in the Cahn-Hilliard setting as well. This
proposal concerns research projects related to the study of superconductors and
to the study of phase transitions in fluids or alloys. In the production of
superconductors, a major concern is the emergence of vortices which are little
"defects" in the sample leading to a loss of perfect conductivity. In this
proposal, the P.I. will use the so-called Ginzburg-Landau theory as a model for
the superconductor in order to investigate the emergence, disappearance, and
placement of these "defects" when the sample is subjected to a magnetic field.
In the research devoted to phase transitions, the P.I. will study mathematical
models for binary alloys (Cahn-Hilliard theory) and for two-fluid systems (van
der Waals the ory). The goal is to understand the possible shape of the
boundaries between different phases of a medium. Particular attention will be
paid to the effect of the boundary of the container holding the medium on the
structure of these so-called transition layers. These studies are related to
questions about the possible shape of bubbles confined to a container. Since
these bubbles tend to hug the wall of the enclosing container, one wants to
understand how the specific shape of the container will affect the structure of
the stable bubble.