* 9705295
* Properties of Superfluid Three Helium in Novel Porous Media at Very Low Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,04/30/2001
* David Lee, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2001
* USD 816,340.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705295 Parpia This Focused Research Group grant
supports a comprehensive experimental and theoretical study of the effects of
nanoscale disorder on quantum ground states, including superfluid phases. The
discovery that the phase diagram of mixtures of 3He and 4He is radically altered
by a low density aerogel medium was rapidly followed by studies of pure 3He in
aerogel. These studies reveal that the phase diagram of the superfluid phases is
substantially modified, altering the stability of the A and B phases as well as
creating a new normal-to-superfluid transition even at zero temperature. The
role of aerogel as a collection of impurities introduced into the superfluid
will be explored by altering the density and correlations of the aerogel. The
PIs will also study effects of other disordered porous media on the quantum
phase diagrams. Experimental tools include NMR, heat capacity and ultrasound in
addition to sound and torsional oscillator measurements to characterize the
nature of the superfluid. The PIs will design new aerogels specifically tailored
for studies of superfluid 3He and mixtures of 3He and 4He. Very low temperatures
will in many instances be critical for the exploration of the phase diagram of
pure 3He. %%% This Focused Research Group grant supports a comprehensive
experimental and theoretical study of the effects of atomic-scale disorder on
the nature of quantum-mechanical states, including superfluid states, which are
preferred by liquid helium (isotopes of mass three and four atomic units) at
temperatures close to absolute zero. Superfluids flow with no resistance from
the surrounding medium or container. In the case of electron superfluids, i.e.,
superconductors such as lead below its transition temperature, this means
electrical current flow with no resistance. Superfluid states a re found in
nature in helium isotopes and electron systems at low temperatures, and are
believed to taken on by neutrons in neutron stars. Superfluids permit classes of
electronic devices called Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices (SQUID's)
which are the world's most sensitive detectors of magnetic field. SQUID's are
used in advanced medical practice in commercial electrocardiographs and magneto-
encephalographs, which permit, respectively, non- invasive detection of heart
and mental disorders. Superfluid helium put into rotation acts like a gyroscope:
it has recently been demonstrated that such a gyroscope will allow detection of
rotation at an unprecedented level of sensitivity. The research carried out
under the present grant explores the effects of atom scale disorder on such
superfluid states, and may have beneficial effects on technology involving
sensor devices as mentioned, and more broadly, even to include present and
future versions of microelectronic computer technology. ***