* 9705453
* After the Dinosaurs:  A Paleontology Exhibition and         Education Project
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Bruce Erickson, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 06/30/2002
* USD 1,524,486.00

9705453 Redline The Science Museum of Minnesota will develop "After the
Dinosaurs", an exhibit that will feature a detailed reconstruction of the
ecology of a Paleocene subtropical environment that existed in the North Plains
of North America (58 million years ago). Information presented in the exhibit
will come from a 25 year research project carried out by SMM curator Bruce R.
Erickson and his colleagues at Wannagan Creek Quarry in northwestern North
Dakota. This research has yielded one of the most complete assemblages of
Paleocene megafossils in North America. Both the increased knowledge gained from
this research and process of the research will be highlighted in this exhibit.
Visitors will learn that the world's landscape has changed considerably over
time, the analysis of fossils helps scientists reconstruct the past, knowledge
of former ecosystems help us to understand current ecosystems, and everyone can
be a scientific investigator when we attempt to understand our environment in a
systematic way. Two versions of the exhibit will be prepared: a 4000 sq. ft.
permanent version that will be installed in the new SMM river front building and
will open in late 2000. There will also be a 2500 sq. ft. traveling version that
will begin its national tour in 2002. Complementary programming will include an
on-line interactive teacher guide and student project curriculum, a teachers'
institute, and a variety of youth programming including specially developed
interpreter training materials. The exhibit will be accessible to people with
disabilities.