* 9705740
* Systematics of Plant Parasitic Cyst Nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Virginia Ferris, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 94,987.00

9705740 FERRIS The microscopic plant parasitic cyst nematodes are a widespread
and important group. Some kinds are destructive pests on important crops such as
potatoes, soybeans, and cereal grains, whereas other kinds inhabit natural
ecosystems and survive in small numbers on native plants. Much is known about
these nematodes on a global basis, but the information is largely restricted to
knowledge about their shape and form and about their plant host preferences.
Because nematodes are an ancient group with a highly conserved morphology, it is
suspected that gross similarities may mask important differences among
geographical isolates and make it difficult to determine relationships among the
different kinds. In this research, Virginia Ferris will use DNA sequence data
from highly conserved nuclear genes, plus data from more rapidly changing
mitochondrial genes, to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships among plant
parasitic cyst nematodes. Molecular data will be of great help in identifying
the different kinds of nematodes found in all countries of the world, including
many that cannot easily be separated from each other by microscopy alone yet may
have important differences in behavior or ability to parasitize plants.
Moreover, molecular data can help us to establish relationships, and to
determine where different kinds originated and how they spread. This may help us
to learn why it is that some cyst nematodes are destructive pests on important
groups, whereas others seem to be natural components of undisturbed ecosystems.