* 9705227
* Quasiconformal Mappings, Doubling Measures and              Subharmonic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Jang-Mei Wu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 84,000.00

Wu Abstract Professor Wu shall continue her study of removable sets and
nonremovable sets for quasiconformal mappings. She intends to construct
nonremovable sets which are simple in nature and can be described without using
mappings. Such sets are known to exist in the plane, the problem here is for
higher dimensional space. She also intends to study whether the lifting of sets
from the plane into the space will destroy the nonremovability. Also Professor
Wu shall continue her work on null sets of dyadic doubling measures: how easily
a null set may be changed into a non-null set under the multiplication by a
positive number. This problem has a close connection with a question of P. Erdos
on universal sets. Furthermore, Professor Wu shall continue to investigate the
growth of subharmonic functions in half space and its influence on the size of
the asymptotic sets on the boundary. Professor Wu is working in the area of
potential theory and geometric function theory. More specifically, she studies
the growths of the solutions of certain differential equations, the geometry of
the region where the equations are defined, and their relations. One of the
equations under study is Laplace's equation, which has a very important place in
the study of thermal conductivity, electrostatic potential and fluid dynamics.
Moreover, this equation is the root of a whole family of differential equations,
called elliptic equations. Elliptic equations are interesting to mathematicians
due to their origins in physics.