* 9705594
* Experimental Evaluation of Software Coherence for           Next-Generation Networks
* CSE,EIA
* 06/15/1997,09/30/2001
* Wei Li, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 09/30/2001
* USD 798,440.00

Efficiently supporting shared memory on top of commodity hardware is one of the
greatest challenges to widespread acceptance of parallel computing. Coherence is
the central problem: data in a large-scale system must be replicated and kept
near to the processors that use them, but changes must be communicated to all of
the copies. This research addresses this problem through a distinctive
combination of software and low-cost hardware, and through an active integration
of "behavior-driven" coherence protocols with compiler-based program analysis.
Applications to be studied include collaborative work with researchers in
Economics, Biology, Radiology, Genetics, data mining, computer vision, and
virtual reality. The hardware base for the research is a cluster of eight
multiprocessors (32 processors total) acquired under a collaborative agreement
with Digital Equipment Corporation, and connected by DEC's new Memory Channel
network. By directly accessing remote memory, the network allows processors to
interact two orders of magnitude faster than they can in comparable systems.
Software coherence protocols can exploit this fast communication to maintain
directories, implement synchronization, and avoid interrupting the work of
remote processors. The ultimate goal of the research is to obtain supercomputer
performance for both traditional and emerging applications on networks of
commodity machines.