* 9705229
* Theoretical and Computational Problems in Fluid Mechanics   and Climatology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Roger Temam, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 382,500.00

Temam 9705229 The understanding of the equations of fluid mechanics and
turbulence as well as the development of efficient numerical codes for the
solution of these equations are challenging problems of considerable importance,
in particular in industry or for studies in meteorology or global climate
change. The aims for this project are to explore what can be learned about these
problems from the theoretical and computational viewpoints, using the dynamical
systems approach to turbulence. More specifically the investigators and their
colleagues intend: (i) to develop new efficient computational algorithms taking
into account the physics of turbulence and well adapted to the current evolution
of large scale computing towards parallel computing; (ii) to devote special
attention to the problems related to the study of the climate and global
changes. For (i), new multilevel algorithms related to the concept of attractor
and approximate inertial manifolds have been introduced during the past years.
The analysis of these algorithms is developed, their performances improved, and
their range of application extended, in particular towards problems of practical
relevance. During the period of this grant a book will be published on this
subject, describing the state of the art on the theoretical side, and including
many aspects of their actual implementation on parallel computers. For (ii), a
significant part of this project is devoted to the study of models for the
atmosphere, the ocean and their coupling. Involved models based on the primitive
equations are considered, as well as simpler models such as multilayer or quasi-
geostrophic models. The study includes the development of the models and the
mathematical and numerical problems that they raise. The interaction of
meteorology and mathematics has very long traditions going back to such famous
names as Leonard da Vinci, Pierre Simon Laplace or, in this century, after WWII,
John Von Neumann. At a more modest level, the investigators pursue a program of
research initiated a few years ago and aimed at developing interactions between
geosciences and mathematics. These interactions can be mutually beneficial.
Meteorology and oceanography raise very challenging mathematical problems very
useful for mathematicians and other scientists (for example scientists have
learned much from the experience of E. Lorenz in chaos). Conversely,
mathematicians might help scientists of the geoscience communities in choosing
their models by determining if they are well posed. In the long range they might
help also develop new efficient numerical procedures; although the codes
(programs) used in meteorology and oceanography are very involved codes written
over a long period of time, eventually new codes will be written responding to
new needs or new opportunities, and new insights could become useful; it is
hoped to contribute to this daunting task.