* 9705336
* Entropy Driven Ordering in Colloidal Suspensions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards97\fraden5336.doc 9705336 Fraden The objective of this new
project is to develop fundamental understanding of (1) liquid crystal ordering
of colloids, and (2) the phase behavior of mixtures of rodlike and spherical
colloids. These inter-related projects involve understanding of the physics of
colloids at three levels, the microscopic level of the particles and their
interaction, the mesoscopic level of ordered phase formation, and the
macroscopic level of materials properties. The interparticle potentials of the
colloids we study are dominated by steric and short-range repulsive
interactions, and thus serve as experimental models of hard particle
suspensions, where phase behavior is determined solely by entropy. The colloids
are well characterized, uniform particles and since there is an established
theoretical framework for understanding their phase behavior, what we learn
about these particular systems has implications for the fundamental
understanding of liquid crystals, colloid - polymer mixtures, protein
crystallization, and the biophysics of the intracellular environment, as well as
the design of composite materials where molecular ordering and self-assembly is
important. %%% This new project will carry out a series of studies of the
structure, dynamics, and phase behavior of two systems, (1) colloidal mixtures
of rods and spheres, and (2) colloidal suspensions of rods. The interparticle
potentials of the colloids we study are dominated by steric and short-range
repulsive interactions, and thus serve as experimental models of hard particle
suspensions, where phase behavior is solely determined by entropy. Hard particle
theories serve as a basis for the understanding of all fluids, and in particular
capture essential features of the phase behavior of colloidal suspensions. The
colloids w e study are well characterized, uniform particles and since there is
an established theoretical framework for understanding their phase behavior,
what we learn about these particular systems has implications for the
understanding of fundamental properties of liquid crystals, colloid - polymer
mixtures, protein crystallization, and the biological cellular environment, as
well as for the design of novel materials where molecular self- assembly is
important. ***