* 9705482
* GOALI:  Strain Effects in Colossal Magnetoresistance        Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/18/1999
* Andrew Millis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/18/1999
* USD 170,000.00

9705482 Millis This is a award under the Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program and is funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Support will be
provided for research on the relation between materials properties and physical
properties of the colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) manganites. The focus will be
on how strain affects materials properties. The research will be done as a
collaboration between Johns Hopkins University and Bell Laboratories of Lucent
Technologies. Theoretical research will be done at Johns Hopkins and
experimental research will be done at Bell. A graduate student will spend time
at Bell as part of this project. Expressions of interest in this research have
also been given by DuPont, Hewlett-Packard, Varian and IBM. CMR manganites are
perovskite materials in which the resistivity can be changed by orders of
magnitude by application of a few Tesla magnetic field. While there is no
immediate commercial application, it is widely believed that such a dramatic
effect will be useful for technology. It has become clear that the physical
properties of a given sample of CMR material depend strongly on sample form and
on how the sample was prepared. This dependence of physical properties on
materials properties must be understood and controlled if these materials are to
be technologically useful. It is likely that one important source of the
observed variability is strain. The main focus of this research will be on
understanding and quantifying the effects of strain on materials properties, but
other effects arising from the presence of junctions between CMR and other
materials may also be considered. %%% This is a award under the Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program and is funded
by the Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. Support will be provided for research on the relation b etween
materials properties and physical properties of the colossal magnetoresistance
(CMR) manganites. The focus will be on how strain affects materials properties.
The research will be done as a collaboration between Johns Hopkins University
and Bell Laboratories of Lucent Technologies. Theoretical research will be done
at Johns Hopkins and experimental research will be done at Bell. A graduate
student will spend time at Bell as part of this project. Expressions of interest
in this research have also been given by DuPont, Hewlett-Packard, Varian and
IBM. CMR manganites are perovskite materials in which the resistivity can be
changed by orders of magnitude by application of a few Tesla magnetic field.
While there is no immediate commercial application, it is widely believed that
such a dramatic effect will be useful for technology. It has become clear that
the physical properties of a given sample of CMR material depend strongly on
sample form and on how the sample was prepared. This dependence of physical
properties on materials properties must be understood and controlled if these
materials are to be technologically useful. It is likely that one important
source of the observed variability is strain. The main focus of this research
will be on understanding and quantifying the effects of strain on materials
properties, but other effects arising from the presenae of junctions between CMR
and other materials may also be considered. ***