* 9705199
* Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America (NMITA):  A        World-Wide Web Taxonomy Database
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* M.H. Fortunato Martins, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 08/31/2001
* USD 182,923.00

9705199 Budd In this research, Ann Budd and colleagues will develop a vouchered
taxonomic database of the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America (NMITA) for
fossil collections made by the Panama Paleontology Project, the Dominican
Republic project, and associated projects in Jamaica, Curacao, and Venezuela. In
these projects, fossils are sampled following standardized procedures designed
to document changes in marine biodiversity in tropical America over the past 20
million years. NMITA will establish the taxonomic foundation for ongoing
identification of the collections by providing images and synoptic information
on five taxonomic groups (bryozoans, corals, molluscs, ostracodes, benthic
foraminifera). It will be important for standardizing nomenclature and
recognizing taxa that are new to science, and it will provide a starting point
for reconstructing the phylogenies of selected clades. Data for more than 2000
taxa and 7000 images will be entered in an enterprise relational database
management system at the University of Iowa using a model patterned after the
ASC Information Model for Biological Collections. The data include: (1)
taxonomic authorship, synonyms, type specimens, and diagnostic morphologic
characters; (2) images of representative specimens and associated museum catalog
and measurement data; (3) distributional information. Illustrated glossaries of
morphologic terms, character matrices, and computerized identification tools are
being developed for corals and molluscs. Distribution maps and stratigraphic
range charts will be produced using GIS software and other tools. Protocols will
be developed for exchange of information with PaleoBank and the locality and
stratigraphy database of the Panama Paleontology Project.