* 9705476
* Charge Transfer and Energy Transfer in Transmission of Low  Energy (&amp;lt;10eV) Ions Through Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Theodore Madey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

This research project, in the laboratory of Professor Ted Madey at Rutgers
University, addresses questions of the energy transfer and charge exchange in
the interaction of very low energy ions with various surfaces. Support is
provided by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to probe the
interaction of low energy atomic and molecular ions with overlayers of inert
gases, thin film metals and oxides, and condensed molecular layers. Ions are
formed at low energies by electron stimulated desorption, and the energy
distribution and identity of emitted ions is probed as a function of overlayer
composition and thickness. Experimental results will be compared with
calculations which simulate these processes. This information is basic to our
understanding of many ion based surface analysis techniques, as well as the
dynamics of radiation chemistry and low energy plasma processing of materials.
The interaction of low energy ions with surfaces is crucial in the application
of analytical methods using ion probes of surface structure and composition, as
well as in the interaction of low energy ions in materials processing and in
radiation chemistry. This research project explores the detailed mechanism of
the interaction of low energy ions with a variety of surfaces, with the goal of
obtaining a molecular level understanding of these mechanisms. Detailed
experimental measurements will be coupled with calculational studies of these
processes.