* 9705241
* The Secret Life of the Brain
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Tamara Robinson, David Grubin Productions, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 07/31/2001
* USD 1,877,562.00

9705241 Grubin David Grubin Production, Inc., in conjunction with Thirteen/WNET,
is producing a multimedia project entitled, The Secret Life of the Brain. The
project will examine new understandings into the processes of the human brain
that have developed over the last decade. Through an exploration of the brain's
normal development from conception through old age, the project conveys the most
recent knowledge available. The series will enable audiences to appreciate the
current revolution in neuroscience, understand how new technologies have enabled
scientists to unearth a wealth of information, and learn how neuroscience
research impacts the health and future well-being of the average person. The
five one-hour programs in the series will explore the brain from conception
through age two, childhood from age two through puberty, adolescence, adulthood,
and normal aging process in older age. Educational outreach materials for use in
informal and formal setting will include two separate sets of printed materials,
one for adolescents and one for adults. A Secret Life of the Brain Web Site will
include Brain Games, the Brain Quiz, and the Live Brain that present learning
opportunities for adults and teens. The project Principal Investigator will be
David Grubin who will serve as Executive Producer. Grubin previously was the
producer of Healing and the Mind with Bill Moyers and the critically acclaimed
biographies of Lyndon Johnson, Franklin Roosevelt, and Theodore Roosevelt. June
Kinoshita, an internationally recognized science reporter and editor, will serve
as the Series Science Editor. Lead advisors for each program will be Bruce
McEwen, President-elect of the Society for Neuroscience and Professor at
Rockefeller University (Program 1); Steve Petersen, Director, Division of
Neuropsychology, Dept. of Neurology and Neurological Surgery at the Washington
University School of Medicine (Program 2); Steven Hyman, Director of the
National Institute of Mental Health (Programs 3 & 4); and Carl Cotman, Director
for the Institute for Brain Aging and Dementia at the University of California,
Irvine (Program 5). Robert Miller of WNET will be responsible for the
educational materials to accompany The Secret Life of the Brain.