* 9705849
* Microstructural Evolution in Sintering - Experimental,      Mathematical and Numerical Study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,12/16/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/16/1998
* USD 173,586.00

9705849 Zhang The project investigates an important process in materials
science, solid state sintering of powders. In order to understand, control and
predict the results of a sintering process, a close study of the process from a
microstructural point of view is required. This project aims at process
simulations based on specific sintering and related mechanisms rather than
empirical, statistical functions. To model sintering from the mechanism point of
view, the investigators employ a combination of experiments, mathematical
models, and numerical simulations. Among many sintering mechanisms, the
investigators have selected a common one which often dominates the sintering
process, grain boundary diffusion. They couple mass transport by surface and
grain boundary diffusion to form a complete mathematical system. This system
involves high order nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) and moving
boundaries. To solve this system, the investigators use an accurate and
efficient numerical method for solving PDEs, combined with domain decomposition
and adaptive/moving grids. A parallel computation in the simulation algorithm
for both fine and coarse granularity level is also explored. To verify and
corroborate the simulation, the project designs and carries out eight
experiments. Seven of these target simple regular geometries of particles. For
experimental reasons, Ni-coated W wires are used in most of the experiments.
These experiments provide sound comparisons with the mathematical models based
on individual mechanisms. The experimental results will be compared with the
numerical simulations. These comparisons will verify and estimate the validity
of the theoretical models. After comparisons based on these simple cases, the
investigators will conduct an experiment on the sintering of an irregular
cluster of particles where several mechanisms are involved and coupled. This
experimental result will be compared with the numerical simulation of the
enlarged complete mathematical system. %%% This investigation provides a
powerful tool for studying the effects of sintering on the evolution of the
microstructure of a sintering material. By combining experiments, mathematical
models and computer simulations, the results will closely follow real world
situations and better explain the microstructural evolution during sintering.
The simulation will help scientists and engineers to understand better the
properties of the sintered materials and to optimize sintering process. ***