* 9705829
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Biostratigraphic Effects of    Facies Control, Depositional Sequences, and Sampling        Intensity:  An Interactive Modeling and Field Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Mark Patzkowsky, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 63,958.00

9705829 Patzkowsky The principal problem facing all biostratigraphic correlation
methods is that first and last occurrences in local sections do not always
reflect the true times of origination and extinction. Sampling, facies control,
and sequence stratigraphic architecture all impose biases on local stratigraphic
ranges. Many methods claim to account for these biases, but this claim has
rarely been tested and the relative accuracy of different methods is poorly
known. We propose to test three poplar biostratigraphic methods (traditional
zonal biostratigraphy, dual biostratigraphy, and graphic correlation) to
determine which is the most effective at dealing with the biased fossil record
and to identify those factors that exert the strongest control on the accuracy
of biostratigraphic correlation. We will approach this problem through a
combined modeling and field study. Modeling will be used to test the relative
accuracy of these three methods under a variety of sampling densities, levels of
facies control, and sequence stratigraphic architectures. The advantage of
modeling is that we will ultimately know the correct correlation, so we can
objectively and quantitatively measure the accuracy of the various methods under
different conditions. The techniques we develop here will allow many other types
of biostratigraphic methods to be tested in the future. Armed with the knowledge
gained from the modeling studies, we will evaluate a classic correlation problem
with brachiopods in the Middle Ordovician of eastern Tennessee and southwestern
Virginia. We will apply these same three biostratigraphic methods to the field
data and compare the resulting correlations to the existing conodont-based
stratigraphic framework. This study will lead not only to a general evaluation
of the effects of sampling, facies control, and sequence stratigraphic
architecture on three common biostratigraphic methods, but will also apply these
results to develop a combined brachiopod-biozone and sequence strati graphic
correlation framework to supplement existing conodont-based correlations in the
Middle Ordovician of the Southern Appalachians. Because biostratigraphy is the
principal means by which events are ordered throughout much of the stratigraphic
record, the results of this study have broad implications for how Earth's
history is reconstructed.