* 9705155
* RUI: Physics of 2D and 3D Perovskites
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Saul Oseroff, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 215,000.00

9705155 Oseroff We will perform a systematic research on 2D and 3D perovskites.
The first part is a study of La2NiO4 and La2CuO4 doped with Sr and Li, which
will be carried out mainly by Electron Spin Resonance, ESR. Li+ brings a hole
into the plane and this hole appears to be localized. This work offers the
possibility of comparing systems with in- plane holes to those with mobile ones
introduced by out-of- plane substitutions. The second part is connected with the
huge magnetoresistive response found in the perovskite manganate R1-xBxMnO3 with
(R=La, Pr, etc. and B = Ca, Sr, etc.). We will perform: a) An ESR study between
Tc and high T. b) Research on small grain size particles of Lal-xCaxMnO3+ from
20 nm to 100 nm. c) Measurements on diluted systems, such as LaScO3+: Mn. This
research should provide new insight into the underlying physics of these systems
and hopefully lead to better theoretical models. %%% Non-Technical abstract In
1986 Bednorz and Muller discovered that doped La2CuO4 becomes a High Temperature
Superconductor, HTS. Since then an enormous effort has been made by a large
number of experimentalists and theoreticians to understand the origin of high-
temperature superconductivity. In spite of the tremendous efforts made, no
consensus has been reached. We are going to carry out a systematic analysis of
the data already reported. This, in conjuction with a few well selected
experiments, should help us understand the underlying physics of these
fascinating and possibly useful materials. We will follow this by carrying out
measurements on members of a similar family, doped LaMnO3. These systems share
important features with the HTS materials, and they have a great potential for
boosting storage density by becoming the magnetic sensors of the future. ***