* 9705424
* RUI:  Phase Separation Kinetics of Ternary Polymer Blends   Containing a Random Copolymer
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Dean Waldow, Pacific Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2000
* USD 93,574.00

9705424 Waldow This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award is for
three years of support for a research program involving undergraduate students
to study phase separation kinetics of a ternary polymer system. %%% Pesearch
training is an integral component of a broad chemical education for
undergraduate students. This research will complement the growing commitment to
undergraduate research and will allow greater integration of research and
teaching. The research plan focuses on kinetics of phase separation in binary
polymer blends compatibilized with a random copolymer. The specific system is
polybutadiene, polystyrene, and a random copolymer of butadiene and styrene. The
phase separation kinetics will be measured using a temperature jump wide angle
light scattering instrument constructed at Pacific Lutheran University (PLU).
The resulting light scattering information will be compared with nucleation and
growth as well as with spinodal decomposition theories. The results from these
kinetics of phase separation studies (1) will provide new information about the
effect a random copolymer has as a compatibilizer;(2) will help in making
comparisons to theory and simulations;(3) will allow comparisons of efficacy of
random copolymers as compared to published work on block copolymers; and lastly
(4) may lead to information used in the design of random copolymer
compatibilizers. ***