* 9705473
* Materials Studies and Superconductivity of Uranium          Platinum 3
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Michael Bedzyk, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/2001
* USD 540,000.00

9705473 Halperin The Ambitious goal of this program is to understanding the
mechanism for superconductivity in heavy fermion compounds. The first step is to
identify the symmetry of the order parameter and we focus first on Upt3, which
is arguably the prototype unconventional heavy fermion superconductor. In order
to determine the pairing state in Upt3 we propose to make single crystals with a
range of impurities and measure the impurity dependence of the physical
properties, including the thermal conductivity, specific heat and the phase
diagram. In order to identify the spin structure of the pairing state, we will
measure NMR knight shifts and the upper critical fields and compare with
calculations that are sensitive to surface scattering and strong spin-orbit
interactions. We will perform measurements of magnetization and
magnetoresistance and, with our collaborators at other institutions, we will
investigate further the magnetic phase diagram using neutron and magnetic X-ray
scattering. We will compare these results with calculations of impurity and
defect scattering on the physical properties for the principal candidate ground
states. The low-temperature transport coefficients, eg. thermal conductivity,
are important because they reflect the low enrgy excitations associated with the
nodes of the gap. We believe that transport measurements on high quality single
crystals, such as we are able to grow, will be decisive in resolving the orbital
symmetry of the pairing state in heavy fermion superconductors, e.g. Upt3. %%%
It is proposed to solve key problems in heavy fermion superconductivity with
initial focus on the important compound Upt3. The results of this research will
have impact on understanding of superconductivity in other correlated fermion
superconductors, notably high temperature superconductors. That
superconductivity in Up t3 is unconventional, is evident in its complex phase
diagram and the power laws that are exhibited in the temperature dependence of
thermodynamic and transport properties, particularly at low temperatures. Yet it
is not yet known which of a number of likely possible candidates for
superconducting pairing state is the appropriate model for Upt3. Separating
intrinsic and extrinsic behavior is the key to solving this problem and is a
challenge for experimental and theoretical condensed matter physics in concert
with a materials program. Growing and characterizing the purest, most defect-
free crystals possible is essential to the success of research in this field and
we have developed facilities for this purpose. Interest has been expressed from
an international group of scientists to collaborate with us, working with the
materials produced in these facilities. The proposed work draws together four
principal investigators, Professors Bedzyk, Halperin, Sauls and Seidman from two
departments at Northwestern University: Materials Science and Engineering and
Physics and Astronomy. These researchers have expertise in materials science,
crystal growth and characterization, experimental low temperature physics, and
theoretical physics of correlated electron systems and superconductivity. The
expertise of the members of this group is at the forefront of their respective
disciplines. ***