* 9705433
* Thin Films, Heterostructures and Mesoscale Physics of       Quasi-One-Dimensional Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc Thorne 9705433 This experimental project focuses on
the properties of interfaces involving thin films of novel charge-density wave
(CDW) conductors, including Rb0.3MoO3. Materials of this class are among the
most remarkable conducting materials ever discovered, and have many novel and
potentially useful properties. In part the work will build upon the recent
demonstration by van der Zant et al at the Delft University of Technology, that
thin films of CDW conductors can be prepared, patterned and characterized, which
indeed demonstrate the novel and potentially useful CDW phenomena. Collaboration
with this group and the Buhrman group at Cornell will explore pulsed laser
depostion of these materials. Methods for patterning and for attaching contacts
to indvidual grains, and for preparing heterostructures with other materials
will be investigated. These films make possible a broad variety of experiments
to probe mesoscale aspects of CDW physics, and several such experiments are
planned. In addition, memory devices based on metastable CDW states will be
fabricated and characterized. Mesoscopic structures will be used to study CDW
phase slip and vortex dynamics. MOSFET-like heterostructures will allow
modulation of the CDW wavevector, gap and collective conductance. Such devices
may be useful as detectors and mixers. CDW-superconductor heterostructures will
be used to explore proximity effects due to the competing pairing interactions
in these two ground states. Preliminary efforts to test predictions for the
properties of mesoscale CDW-insulator-CDW and normal metal-insulator-CDW
heterostructures will also be undertaken. This research project is
interdisciplinary in nature and will involve graduate and undergraduate students
who will be excellently trained for careers in industry, government and a
cademia. %%% This experimental project is based on novel and potentially useful
electronic conducting films of "charge-density-wave" conductors. In these
materials, which are typically very anisotropic, often needle-like in their
shape, electrical conduction occurs in a completely different way than in common
metals such as copper and aluminum. In these conductors a cooperative motion of
charge-carrying "domains" provides conduction, with many novel and potentially
useful properties. In this project, thin films of such materials, suitable for
incorporation into electronic device configurations, such as "mixers" of use in
high frequency communication equipment, will be fabricated and studied.
Heterojunctions of such films will resemble in some cases the "MOSFET"
structures well known in the silicon device technology, and will be explored for
their novel properties. This work will lead to a much better understanding of
the electrical behavior of interfaces between conventional metals and insulators
and the novel charge-density-wave conductors, and will possibly lead to new
applications in electronics. This research project is interdisciplinary in
nature and will involve undergraduate and graduate students who will be
excellently trained for positions in industry, government and academia. ***