* 9705059
* Electron Energy Levels in Magnetic Nanoparticles
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Daniel Ralph, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

W:\awards\awards97 9705059 Ralph This is a new project to study electrons
confined within metal particles less than 10 nm in diameter such that the
discrete "electrons-in-a-box" energy levels become resolvable at low
temperatures. We have developed techniques for fabricating single-electron
tunneling transistors containing an individual, nm-scale metal particle, and we
have used these devices to make detailed measurements of the electronic spectrum
within the nanoparticle. This new capability is a powerful probe of electronic
structure, because all the forces which act on the electrons can be studied
through their separate effects on the eigenstate spectrum. In this proposal, we
will apply these techniques to study magnetic particles. We will (a) manipulate
single quantum levels to study spin-polarized electron tunneling, (b) examine
the electronic spectrum in magnetic particles to understand exchange forces and
the correlated states which they produce, and (c) use time-dependent studies of
level spectra as a probe of the dynamics of the nanoparticle's magnetic moment.
%%% This is a new project to study electrons confined in very small metal
particles. When a piece of metal is so small that it contains fewer than 10,000
atoms, the mobile electrons inside the metal cannot have any arbitrary energy,
but are limited to a resolvably discrete set of states. Because of the level
discreteness, electronic devices on these small length scales can be thought of
as "artificial atoms". We have recently developed techniques for producing
transistor devices by connecting wires to individual metal nanoparticles, and
then using these devices to measure the spectrum of allowed energy levels inside
the metal particle for the first time. In this proposal, we will apply these new
techniques to study magnetic particles. We will examine (a) under what
conditions electrons can h op on and off a magnetic particle without flipping
their spin, (b) how magnetic forces alter the spectrum of electron energy
levels, and (c) the mechanisms by which the magnetism of the particle may switch
direction under the influence of an applied magnetic field. ***