* 9705101
* Dynamics and Phase Equilibra of Polymers:  Finite Size      Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Peter Green, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2001
* USD 287,722.00

Green 9705101 The overall goal of this study is the development of a microscopic
understanding of the effects of confinement and of surfaces and interfaces on
the dynamics and phase stability of polymeric thin film mixtures. The strategy
is to use information about the interface as a probe to understand the phase
stability and dynamics. A critical aspect of this strategy is focused at
independently "tuning" the molecular parameters of the substrate and of the
polymers in mrder to have control over the molecular interactions. This will
involve novel synthesis of new norborene-like polymers with varying
functionalities, synthesis of novel inorganic tellurium dioxide-based glasses
whose reactivity can be tailored and surface treatments of a silicon substrate.
The proposed study is divided into two parts, the first of which involves using
a combination of variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) and forward
recoil spectrometry (FRES) to study the development of the interfacial thickness
between homopolymer bilayers of varying thickness, L. Information learned from
the equilibrium interfacial thickness from this aspect of the study will give
insight into the effect of copolymers (random and diblock) on the phase
stability of the mixtures. The second phase of this proposal involves a related
study of the formation of wetting layers and coexistence phases in mixtures of
these polymers in contact with the substrates of varying characteristics in
order to gain insight into the role of the "interfacial" fields on the formation
and growth of the wetting layer in homopolymer mixtures. An additional aspect of
this work is to use information about the wetting layer to develop new insights
into the effect of copolymers on the phase stability of the thin film mixtures.
%%% Interest in this area is motivated by technological need since thin film
polymers serve "active" and "passive" roles in many technologies. For example,
they serve "active" roles in microsen sors, large area light emitting displays
and selective membrane applications. "Passive" applications include use as
protective coatings and lubricants for magnetic storage media, biocompatibility
and use as thin film adhesives. Because information about bulk properties
provides limited guidance, it is critical to develop a fundamental understanding
of polymeric properties under these conditions. ***