* 9705650
* Component Architectures for Software in Education: Planning for Systemic Impact
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Jeremy Roschelle, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,990.00

9705650 Kaput Using technology to advance education will require attention to
the interplay between local and systemic factors in design. In some sense, all
learning is local: students construct knowledge in response to the problem and
resources at hand. Yet if technology design addresses only these local factors,
the result is often systemic failure: software that is fragmentary, poorly
supported, and easily marginalized. For broad educational improvement, we must
be willing to address factors that will enable local successes to serve larger
agendas, scale up to widespread audiences, and evolve to meet new challenges. To
address these factors, the educational research and development community must
begin to attend to implementation strategies and software architectures.
Emerging industry standards for component software architecture such as
JavaBeans, OpenDoc and ActiveX will soon provide a powerful new substrate for
educational technology design-supporting rapid prototyping, plug and play
interoperability, and distributed authoring. However, industry solutions are
aimed at business productivity, rather than learning processes. Due to
historically low profits in educational technology, public sector investment
will be needed to develop commercial infrastructures into powerful educational
platforms. This project will engage researchers, policy makers, and publishers
in a series of electronic discussions and regional meetings organized around
three broad questions: 1. What extensions to industry-standard component
architectures are needed to support educational needs such as linked multiple
representations, publishable student portfolios, and interactive instructional
aides? 2. What sorts of design frameworks, both conceptual and technological,
will enable educators to smoothly integrate diverse layers and objects to fully
meet the needs of their students? 3. What organizational, funding, and
distribution arrangements will enable the growth of a distributed educational
researc h and development community to produce suites of math and scientific
components that interoperate, integrate, and scale to the needs of the
educational reform movements? These planning meetings will provide the
Foundation and the community with detailed, concise reports about the promising
directions and critical obstacles for component architecture in educational
technology. Both organizational (i.e. intellectual property, project management)
and technological (i.e. interoperability, standards) issues will be considered.
Following the planning work, one or more multi-institutional consortia for
educational component R&amp;D will be proposed. ***