* 9705799
* Student Travel for the International Conference on Soft     X-Rays in the 21st Century on January 8-11, 1997 in Midway, UT
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1997
* David Allred, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 06/30/1997
* USD 5,000.00

Proposal: ECS-9705799 Principal Investigator: Steven Turley (Congress Chair) The
International Conference on Soft X-Rays in the 21st Century, which will be held
in Midway, UT, on January 8-11, 1996, has been organized to promote progress in
this field by disseminating current research results and by projecting where
these technologies will lead in the next century. Soft x-ray technology is
maturing to the point that it will facilitate breakthroughs in diverse fields.
Current and future applications of this technology will impact biology,
medicine, materials research, high density circuit fabrication, plasma
diagnostics, astronomy, and other areas. Student support for attendance at the
conference is provided in this grant. The supported students who attend this
conference will have an opportunity to interact with experts in soft x-ray
science and technology. They will become aware of research opportunities and
techniques to extend this technology as part of their graduate experience and
future careers. Student applicants will be ranked by the conference Scientific
Committee by the following criteria: first authorship versus co-authorship of an
oral or poster paper, capability and interest, geographical and institutional
diversity, and membership in any underrepresented group in science and
engineering. These selection criteria are very compatible with the NSF strategic
plan.