* 9705117
* Polaron-Induced Local Distortions in Correlated Electron    Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Frank Bridges, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 245,000.00

9705117 Bridges This is a new project which proposes X-Ray absorption fine
structure (XAFS) measurements on systems exhibiting metal- insulator transitions
and Colossal Magnetoresistance (CMR) effects, such as La1-xCaxMnO3. In these
oxides, the large magnetoresistance near the ferromagnetic transition
temperature, Tc, is now attributed to a novel coupling between magnetism, the
electron system and local lattice distortions and, in a recent paper, we have
shown that the transition from metallic to insulating behavior correlates well
with a rapid increase in the amplitude of the local distortions which are
believed to be polaronic in origin. However, the nature, symmetry and extent of
the atomic displacements are not yet known and are needed for modeling these
unusual transport effects. XAFS measurements as a function of temperature and
magnetic field will enable us to probe the details of the local structural
distortions about the metal atoms and provide this crucial information. %%% This
is a new project which proposes X-Ray absorption fine structure (XAFS)
measurements on systems such as La1-xCaxMnO3 which exhibit novel features in
their magnetic and electrical behavior that appear to be related to the atomic
structure of the material. Recent theoretical models suggest that the
arrangement of the atoms become distorted at the same temperature at which the
magnetic properties disappear and it is suggested that these distortions
contribute to the large observed increase in the resistance to the flow of
electrical current. Our initial study supports such a model, but details about
the arrangements of the atoms are not yet known. We will use x-ray absorption
techniques to investigate the distortions about a given atom at various
temperatures and magnetic fields. We need to determine which atoms are distorted
and the range and magnitude of the distortions to test and improve the models of
this unusual behavior. This novel connection between the microscopic atomic
arrangement and the electrical properties involves new physics and may lead to
new applications since such materials are potentially useful to make devices for
reading and writing information on computer disk. ***