* 9705610
* STTR Phase II:  Aerosol Mass Spectrometer for Size and      Composition Analysis of Sub-Micron Particles
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Jayne, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 349,610.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will develop an
aerosol sampling instrument that yields both size and chemical composition
information in real time for sub-micron sized particles. The instrument will
have application to airborne particle analysis where commercial instrumentation
is currently unavailable. The device combines proven technology for aerosol
sampling and size separation with a unique hot wire particle vaporization/mass
spectrometric detection scheme. This instrument is less complex compared to
current research systems utilizing high power lasers for particle vaporization
and, hence, will provide a significant cost reduction for particle analysis. The
particle mass spectrometer combines an aerodynamic aerosol sampling inlet and
charging system which generates a beam of charged particles whose size is
determined by its interaction with electric fields. The mass selected beam
impacts a hot wire where the particles vaporize and ionize. The resulting ions
are analyzed with a molecular time of flight (TOP) mass spectrometer. The Phase
I work has successfully coupled the particle mass spectrometer with the hot wire
vaporization technique using quadrupole mass spectrometric detection. The
initial work has demonstrated chemical composition detection for single
particles for a range of liquid and solid salt particles down to 0.1 1lm
diameter. The detection limit will be extended in the Phase II work to -0.03 1lm
diameter. The instrument will be useful for basic atmospheric aerosol research
and as a real time monitor for on-line particulate emissions from combustion
sources (coal-fired power plants, and exhaust from commercial aircraft and
automobiles).