* 9705045
* Collaborative Research between General Motors Corporation   and Iowa State University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Dean Isaacson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2000
* USD 66,954.00

The General Motors Corporation Technical Education Program and the Department
of Statistics at Iowa State University (ISU) have a partnership under which
General Motors (GM) employees can earn a non-thesis M.S. Degree in Statistics
taking regular courses from the department via video tape. The degree
requirements include a research component that results in a formal paper
(creative component). Students from GM will have co-major professors, a
statistician from GM and a statistician from ISU. The purpose of this proposal
is to create opportunities for visits and interactions that will help the GM
students with this creative component research and introduce ISU faculty to
research problems of interest to industry. This project will fund interactions
of two different but related types: 1) site visits by ISU personnel with GM
students and co-major professors and 2) collaborative research with scientists
at GM Research Labs. In the summer of 1997, one ISU statistician will visit GM
students and co-major professors, discussing company interests and areas for
collaboration, and identifying appropriate topics for creative component
research. In the summer of 1998, this person will spend 1 additional month doing
collaborative research with GM scientists. In the summer of 1998 a second
faculty member will spend two months engaged in visits and collaborative
research. As part of their visits with GM research scientists, these faculty
members will give seminars for GM statisticians and engineers on modern
statistical methods. This proposed interaction will produce topics for
publishable creative components, research ideas for ISU faculty members and
solutions for real industry problems. The educational experience of the students
at GM will be greatly enhanced through the proposed interaction. The GM students
will be exposed to both academic and industrial approaches to research. Ideally,
their creative components will both answer a particular q uestion for GM and
raise new questions for the ISU faculty members, that can serve as subsequent
topics for both personal research and for that of future ISU graduate students.
The end result will then be the advancement of knowledge in directions important
to industry practice. Since the projects at GM will likely combine statistics
and engineering, many will serve as focal points to bring together ISU faculty
members from Statistics and Engineering. Additional collaborative research at
ISU is thus likely to follow from this project. This GOALI project is jointly
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).