* 9705801
* Exploratory Research on the Fabrication of Specimens with   Embedded State-Colored Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Jerry Atwood, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 09/30/1998
* USD 42,200.00

9705801 Chen Existing, experimental techniques can not provide a quantitative
real-time measurement of the internal phase transition associated with
localization under different loading, rates. Since localization is usually
accompanied by local heating due to plastic work, an exploratory research
project is proposed here to fabricate the experimental specimens with embedded
state-colored cells to measure the real-time phase transition. It is proposed
that the state-colored cells be made of a certain kind of thermochromic (TC)
materials, the optical properties of which are able to chance reversibly upon
temperature. Uniaxial compressive tests are then performed with these specimens
to investigate the internal phase transition under different loading- rates.
Because of the gel state of TC materials at certain temperature, it is possible
that the ultimate cell for the proposed measurement may be composed of many
smaller cells with a diameter of less than I mm, each covering a range of
temperatures. With regard tot he actual measurement, it is anticipated that the
cell will be subjected to radiation of the appropriate wavelength(s) to monitor
the color change. The fabrication of the experimental specimens with embedded
state-colored cells involves interdisciplinary efforts from chemistry,
experimental mechanics, and material science. If the project is successful,
however, there will be a significant impact on the modeling of localization,
experimental mechanics and industrial applications.