* 9705224
* Investigation of Metal-C60 Interfaces and Layered Thin-Film Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Arthur Hebard, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/2001
* USD 240,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705224 Hebard This experimental project focuses on
the properties of interfaces involving thin films of C-60, including alkali-
metal-doped C-60 solids, and configurations which might be of interest in
electronic devices. In the work, C-60 will be deposited sequentially or
simultaneously with various metals, insulators or semiconductors. A variety of
deposition techniques will be used including thermal sublimation, ion-beam
sputtering and electron beam heating. In-situ characterization will primarily be
accomplished by electrical transport measurements during and after deposition.
These measurements involve not only in-plane transport but also tunneling and
electric field effect measurements. For air-stable or passivated samples,
additional characterization by x-rays, AFM, STM, magnetotransport, and optical
and infrared absorption will be made. The high electron affinity and the
relative ease of intercalation of C-60 will be aspects central to the research
projects. One project will involve electron tunneling in trilayer structures to
further understanding of superconductivity in the alkali-doped compounds and to
determine the interface-related vibrational and electronic states and the
expected relatively large Coulomb gap of molecules isolated in the tunnel
barrier. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and will involve
graduate and undergraduate students who will be excellently trained for careers
in industry, government and academia. %%% This experimental project is based on
novel and potentially very useful electronic conducting films based on carbon-
sixty molecules. Such molecules are like hollow spheres comprised of sixty
chemically bonded carbon atoms, resembling tiny soccer balls. These molecules
are relatively new and unexplored, especially in terms of their potential for
forming insulating, electrically conducting, and even superconducting thin
films. It has been possible to add alkali metals such as sodium or potassium to
carbon-sixty to provide "electrical doping" which fosters electrical conduction
and even superconductivity to temperatures up to about 30 Kelvin degrees. The
work in this experimental project will, in part, involve "sandwich structures"
which could perform functions which might be useful in electronic devices. This
work will lead to a much better understanding of the electrical behavior of
interfaces between conventional metals, insulators, and semiconductors, with
films of the carbon- sixty molecules, and will possibly lead to applications for
such interfaces. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and will
involve undergraduate and graduate students who will be excellently trained for
positions in industry, government and academia. ***