* 9705253
* "Get Real!" Science Strand
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Sheryl Nelson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1999
* USD 298,918.00

9705253 Nelson Over a period of three years, Wisconsin Public Television is
producing the science strand in the television series, Get Real!. This series,
which is broadcast on all public television stations and many commercial
stations in Wisconsin, presents children involved in and succeeding at a variety
of activities. The youth hosts introduce kids as heroes, problem-solvers,
thinkers, learners, and helpers. These stories present role models to help
enhance self-image and the sense of worth. The science strand runs through each
of the programs, delivering science as an integral ingredient of the wide-
ranging vignettes which are directly relevant to the audiences' world and
interests. The series is designed for at-home viewing. However, to ensure that
the science strand works within the context of the science curriculum used in
Wisconsin public schools, the project has developed partnerships with The
Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters through its Center for the
Advancement of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education (CASE) and the
Wisconsin Elementary and Middles Level Science Teachers (WEST) association. This
request is support continued production of the science strand, expand outreach,
and to extend carriage into neighboring states. Wisconsin Public Television has
made a commitment to include the science strand as a regular part of the series
and is developing a business plan to develop a steady source of revenue to
support its production. Therefore, this request is for declining support over
the three years of the grant.