* 9705637
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Late Cretaceous Vertebrates from   Madagascar:  Implications for Gondwanan Biogeography
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Joseph Hartman, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 21,680.00

9705637 Hartman NSF-funded fieldwork in the Maevarano Formation of the Mahajanga
Basin, northwestern Madagascar, has quadrupled the previously known diversity of
Late Cretaceous vertebrates from the island. The faunal list now includes a
minimum of 32 species of fishes, frogs, turtles, lizards, snakes,
crocodyliforms, dinosaurs, birds, and mammals. Several taxa are represented by
nearly complete, exquisitely preserved skeletons. The primary goal of the
present proposal is to expand upon this work through additional discoveries of
fossil vertebrates, phylogenetic analysis of the new samples, elucidation of the
stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and taphonomic context, and testing of various
biogeographic hypotheses related to the fragmentation of the southern
supercontinent, Gondwana. Gondwana fragmented into a number of isolated
landmasses during the Late Jurassic and Cretaceous, with dramatic consequences
for associated biotas. Reconstructions of this continental fragmentation are
based almost entirely on geophysical evidence, and remain poorly tested
paleontologically. According to recent models, Antarctica, Australia,
Madagascar, and the Indian subcontinent broke away as a single tectonic unit
from eastern Africa sometime in the Late Jurassic (150-160 Ma). Antarctica
likely retained physical connections with South America throughout the Mesozoic.
During the Early Cretaceous (125-130 Ma), Madagascar attained its current
position approximately 400 km off the east coast of Africa and, together with
the Indian subcontinent, separated from Antarcto-Australia. Madagascar and the
Indian subcontinent persisted as a distinct tectonic unit until ~88 Ma, well
before deposition of the Maevarano Fm. Several testable hypotheses relating to
the biogeographic history of Madagascar derive from this pattern of
fragmentation: 1) Late cretaceous terrestrial faunas from Madagascar will share
greater phylogenetic affinities not with coeval faunas from Africa, but with
those from the Indian subcontine nt and, secondarily, Antarctica, Australia, and
South America; 2) correspondingly, Late Cretaceous faunas from the Indian
subcontinent will show greatest phylogenetic similarities not with Asia, but
with Madagascar and other Gondwanan landmasses; and 3) Most of the major
elements of the highly endemic and imbalanced extant vertebrate fauna on
Madagascar (e.g., lemuriform primates) colonized the island after its isolation
in the Late Cretaceous. The present study will address these hypotheses through
rigorous phylogenetic (cladistic) analyses of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from
Madagascar and other Gondwanan landmasses. While the vertebrate remains recently
recovered from the Maevarano Formation of the Mahajanga Basin provide a crucial
foundation for these tests, additional materials are required. It is therefore
proposed that paleontological and geological fieldwork be continued in the
Maevarano Formation, and expanded to lower horizons in the Mahajanga Basin.
Thus, the significance of this project is two tiered. On a regional level, our
efforts will continue to provide important, baseline insights into the anatomy,
paleobiology, and phylogenetic relationships of Late Cretaceous vertebrates from
Madagascar, as well as place them in a detailed chronostratigraphic and
paleoenvironmental context. On a global level, this project will elucidate
larger-scale historical and biogeographic patterns among Mesozoic vertebrates
from Gondwana, and thereby provide independent means of testing geophysical
models of tectonic fragmentation.