* 9705439
* Experimental Investigation of Delocalization and Phase      Diagram in Quantum Hall Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Hong-Wen Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 246,000.00

9705439 Jiang This experimental research project focuses on the 2-D electron gas
in the quantum Hall effect regime, specifically on the phase diagram and a
localization-delocalization transition as afffected by disorder . Gated
GaAs/AlGaAs devices will be used to gain control of the effective disorder of
the experimental system. High magnetic field transport experiments will be
carried out to study the magnetic-field-induced delocalization transition and to
determine the phase diagram in the disorder-magnetic field plane. Edge-state
tunneling spectroscopy will be used to probe microscopic properties and low-
energy excitation of various electronic phases. %%% This experimental research
project is devoted to basic properties of a conducting electron system when
confined in a two-dimensional planar region. Such a confined set of electrons at
low temperatures and with high magnetic fields exhibits a very unusual set of
characteritics, which are of interest to theorists who wish to test and extend
the basic thoery of electrons in crystalline solids. An improved theory then can
be applied with more confidence to the wide range of metals and semiconductors
which are of importance in microelectronics and other technologies. The
experiments in this project are focusing on a "metal-insulator" transiton which
ahs been observed and in particular on how it appears in connection with
disorder in the environment of the electrons. On the one hand the experiments
will provide new basic information about electrons when they are in interaction
in confined layers at low temperatures. On the other hand the device structures
which are used in these experiments are similar to those used in advanced
microelectronic devices in the Gas technology. This research will involve
students who will be well trained in the area of physics and will also gain
familarity w ith semiconductor device technology, nd who will be excellently
trained for employment in industry, government, or education. ***