* 9705651
* Balancing Research and Practice, a Conference of NIE Principal Investigators and Practitioners
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Robert Carlitz, Information Renassaince
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,209.00

9705651 Carlitz The conference "Balancing Research and Practice" will bring
together principal investigators in the NSF's Networking Infrastnucture for
Education (NIE) program. The conference will take place from April 3-5, 1997,
preceded by a six-week on-line discussion of issues that will be addressed in
the conference. The overall conference theme will be the question of balancing
research and practice. The NIE program provides many examples of research
projects which have made substantial strides toward the incorporation of the
lessons reamed from this research into the daily practice of the school
districts involved in these projects. Another aspect of the NIE projects that
will be emphasized in the conference is the idea of infusing research values
into the classroom environment and thereby maintaining the freshness and dynamic
inherent in the research phases of these NSF-sponsored activities. Here, too,
the NIE program provides a number of good examples. These aspects of the NIE
program will be significant in several new NSF initiatives including Research on
Education Policy and Practice (REPP), Leaming and Intelligent Systems (LIS) and
other efforts aimed at technology integration in education. In this sense the
proposed conference will assist the Foundation in the launching of these new
initiatives. Attendees at the conference will indude principal investigators and
classroom prachboners from the various NIE projects, as well as the
representatives of other federal programs which impact upon school networking
programs. This group will interact on-line prior to the April 3-5 meeting. At
the conference there will be break-out sessions which continue the on-line
interactions and attempt to reach conclusions on the topics with which
individual break-out groups will be charged. The emphasis here will be upon
identifying problems and seeking to find solutions to these problems, rather
than simply to catalog the many successes of the NIE program. On-line resources
will be created in con junction with the conference, which will both highlight
successes of the NIE program and summarize the on-line and face-to-face
discussions which will take place as part of the conference. The conference
itself will be held in Pittsburgh, PA, allowing attendees to visit some of the
dozens of school and community sites involved in the Common Knowledge:
Pittsburgh project and its various extensions to community and municipal
networking. These site visits will provide a portion of the conference's focus
upon issues of practice. The site visits will be followed by the break-out
sessions, which will emphasize issues of research and the balance between
research and practice. A plenary session will pull together the various threads
that will have been explored in the break-out sessions and provide conference
attendees with an overall summary of the issues addressed by the conference and
an outlook for future activities in this area in the realms of research and
practice. ***