* 9705665
* Network Traffic Analysis and Multiresolution Schemes for    Homogenization
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Ronald Coifman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/1999
* USD 71,000.00

An NSF-Industrial Postdoctoral Fellow, Anna C. Gilbert, carries out research
jointly in the Department of Mathematics at Yale University and AT&amp;T Labs-
Research. The Faculty Mentor at Yale is Ronald Coifman, Professor of
Mathematics, and the supervisor at AT&amp;T is Dr. Walter Willinger. We envisage
two general areas of research, both of which are of direct interest to AT&amp;T:
(1) wavelet techniques for analysis and performance management of network
traffic, (2) wavelet techniques for homogenization of differential equations.
The common element of these two areas is the use of wavelets to decompose a
problem into many scales and to analyze which scales are crucial to solving the
problem. The research which will be conducted with Dr. Walter Willinger at
AT&amp;T will include using wavelets to investigate the physical model of
Willinger, et al, at a basic level. We want to model and to tune queues,
switches, and other component network components in wavelet terms and then to
derive the properties, in wavelet terms, of the corresponding self-similar
behavior. There are so many data sets available and in such detail that we want
to extract more detailed and more basic information than just the Hurst
parameter. We want to build a structural model of the data and the networks
which produce that data. The research which will be conducted with Prof. Ronald
Coifman at Yale University will include extending the methods developed in Anna
C. Gilbert's thesis. We will construct multiresolution methods for the reduction
and homogenization of partial differential equations. We envision using these
techniques in many different applications. In particular, we would like to use
these homogenization techniques to reconstruct a rough surface off which
electromagnetic waves are scattered. We would also compare the MRA
homogenization methods for n-dimensional elliptic PDEs with the classical
theory. Anna Gilbert completed her thesis under the supervision of I. Daubechies
at Princ eton University in June, 1997. In it she compares the wavelet
techniques for homogenization with classical analytical techniques, develops a
wavelet method for homogenizing nonlinear ordinary differential equations, and
applies these methods to a reaction-diffusion model. This GOALI project is
jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).