* 9705173
* Set-Membership Adaptive Filtering for High Performance Communication Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Yih-Fang Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2000
* USD 153,624.00

Due to the existence of fast fading and co-channel interference in wireless
communications systems, the problems of adaptive equalization and interference
suppression call for solutions that are beyond the reach of conventional
schemes, e.g., those based on least squares and least-mean-squares. This
research project is applying novel adaptive signal processing techniques,
referred to as Set- Membership Adaptive Recursive Techniques (SMART), to resolve
critical problems that arise in advanced communications systems. The novelty of
SMART stems from the following: (1) Their outcomes always satisfy a prescribed
instantaneous bound on the magnitude of the estimation error, which in adaptive
equalization, is the difference between the desired output and the filtered
output. (2) They are characterized through a feasible set of parameters, which
meet the specification without requiring the existence of a true parameter. (3)
They update parameter estimates selectively depending on the innovation of the
input data. This feature leads to an adaptor sharing paradigm that significantly
improves the cost-effectiveness and data usage efficiency in adaptive signal
processing. In simulation studies, SMART have exhibited superior performance and
lower computational complexity in applications such as adaptive equalization and
interference cancellation. More generally, this project will establish a sound
theoretical foundation for Set-Membership Adaptive Filtering (SMAF), and explore
the use of SMART in those applications where performance requirements may exceed
what traditional algorithms can offer, e.g., modern multiple access
communication systems. We anticipate that this research will advance the state-
of-the-art in adaptive filtering, both theoretically and practically, and
significantly enhance the performance of modern wireless communication systems.