* 9705343
* The Use of Biomolecules to Organize Metal Nanoclusters with Applications Toward Room Temperature Nanoelectronics
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Martin Wybourne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/2002
* USD 291,626.00

9705343 Wybourne This interdisciplinary research project will investigate the
chemical synthesis and electrical transport properties of ligand stabilized
nanocluster arrays. Both one- and two-dimensional systems will be investigated,
with the latter structures used primarily to develop the necessary chemistry for
the principal goal of fabricating highly ordered and electrically addressable
one-dimensional arrays of metal nanoclusters. The effects of polydispersity,
structural disorder and trapped charge will be investigated, and the long term
goal of incorporating molecular level contacts, such as gate electrodes,
directly to molecular scaffold structures using branched, helical polypeptides
will be addresed. %%% This project involves a well integrated education and
research effort aimed at using biomolecules to organize metal nanoclusters and
includes as a goal the creation of a room temperature Coulomb blockade device as
a possible replacement for CMOS memory devices. It involves a group of 2
graduate students, and a synthetic chemist and a physicist as PIs, both of whom
appear to work well together and have excellent established outstanding track
records in their various fields of expertise. The project will provide students
with interdisciplinary research experience and training in synthetic chemistry
and in condensed matter physics areas such as transport measurements. The
students will also be working within the Institute of Molecular Biology at the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute to characterize the cluster arrays using AFM and
STM. ***