* 9705312
* Trajectory Planning and Coordinated Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Clyde Martin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2001
* USD 226,411.00

The problems that will be proposed here have to do with one of the basic
problem of applied control theory: the problem of designing trajectories for
controlled systems. These problems, as are discussed here, arose in response to
the needs of air traffic control, but are more basic than any one application.
The most basic of the problems is to be given a controlled system, The
measurement y is to be thought of as measuring the position of the system. A set
of way-points in the form (yi, ti) that must be attained by the plant is assumed
to be given. The problem is to find a control law that will move the system in
such a way that y(ti)=yi. For most systems there is no unique way of solving
this problem so it is necessary to impose other conditions in order to ensure
uniqueness. For the air traffic control problem there are d/dt x=f(x)+ug(x) with
initial data x(O)=x-O and a measurement function y=h(x). obvious constraints
concerning the dynamics of the aircraft and passenger comfort. One obvious
condition that should be met is that the dynamics of x(t) be should be smooth.
For passengers abrupt changes in velocity or acceleration are very noticeable
and physically reality requires that x(t) be continuous. The additional
conditions that are imposed make a great deal of difference on the final
behavior of the system as does the nature of the system itself. The goal of this
research is to develop a tool that will allow the design of trajectories that
meet the needs within the context of general control design. In order to do this
we must reexamine the basic problem as posed above and extend it to other more
complicated tasks. The basic problem as posed here is intimately related to the
construction of numerical splines. To extend this to more general problems in
control theory it is necessary to enter the area of hybrid systems. Here the
problem is related to the more general mathematical problem of Birkhoff splines
and to a set of new problems which we choose to call problems of coordinated
control. in Section 2 the basic assumptions which we impose on the system will
be set forth and the solutions that have been obtained to the basic problem will
be described. Here is outlined an elementary, but important basic procedure for
solving this entire set of problems and will justify many of the assumptions
which have been made. Here will also be described the contents of the several
papers that have been published on this problem and they will be related to
other work that is ongoing on the problem of trajectory design. In Section 3
there will be presented a set of new problems that will be related to classical
problems of Birkhoff splines. These problems arise in aircraft control when it
is desired to be able to set commanded velocities, accelerations, angular
velocities etc. So in fact we have a set of measurements yk(t) and at various
points in time some, but not all, of these must have prescribed values and the
control must be designed in order to attain the required values. Here the
problem is more basic than uniqueness and is related to the most basic of
problems-existence. In Section 4 will be discussed what is really new ground. In
many complicated systems the movement of the system is governed by subsystems
that effect particular avenues of control. The basic example of this research is
the muscular control of the human body. For the most part muscles occur in
opposing pairs and only one of a pair can be active at any given time. In order
to execute a movement a muscle contracts and causes one particular movement. To
execute a complicated movement muscles are switched on and off in accordance
with some higher control law and the body makes a smooth coordinated movement.
One only need watch a professional gymnast to see the superb coordination that
must be maintained for the body to move smoothly and quickly through a
complicated maneuver as, for example, one would see on the pommel horse. There
are no current plans to develop a control strategy for such a complicated
maneuver, but control strategies will be developed that will perform other
simpler tasks. Finally in Section 5 it is shown that there are basic problems in
stability that must be considered with each of these problems. The problem of
stability for systems which are being switched is relatively new. Here is
discussed the current state of research and described a series of problems that
must be solved to insure that the controls schemes that are being proposed are
implementable.