* 9705639
* Mathematical Sciences:  Diffusion, Cross-Diffusion          and Spike Layers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Wei-Ming Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 104,262.00

9705639 Ni Professor Ni plans to continue his research in investigating various
diffusion related mechanisms mathematically. A thorough understanding of those
phenomena and effects of diffusions will enhance our ability in modelling more
complicated or realistic situations in applied sciences. It seems that
substantial progress has been made in the last ten years, and the stage is set
for even more exciting mathematical breakthroughs, especially in diffusion
related pattern formation. In this project, Professor Ni will study the
following three closely related aspects: (I) Systems of semilinear diffusion
equation (II) Systems of self-diffusion and cross-diffusion equations (III)
Spike-layers (point condensation solutions) in diffusion/cross-diffusion
systems. The purpose of this project is not only to separately develop these
directions further, but to synthesize the results obtained and to build a theory
to give a systematic point of view in understanding those "concentration"
phenomena in differential equations. In an attempt to understand segregation
phenomena in population dynamics, in 1979 several Japanese scientists at Kyoto
University incorporated the notions of "self-diffusion" and "cross- diffusion"
into the classical Lotka-Volterra model for the dynamics of two competing
species. In a slightly broader context, these "bio-diffusions" could also be
viewed as special cases of combinations of random diffusion and taxis (i.e.
directed movements). Chemotaxis would be another such example. These have
greatly enriched our diffusion-related models -- from the celebrated "diffusion-
driven instability" of A. Turing in 1952 to recently discovered "diffusion-
induced extinction" and "diffusion-induced blowup" -- and have therefore
enhanced our ability in modelling those biological and physical phenomena. The
research in this proposal would provide a first step toward the understanding,
in a mathematically rigorous manner, of t he concentration/segregation effect of
the various types of "bio-diffusions" (namely, random, repulsive, and
attractive) as well as "taxis" (namely, positive and negative).