* 9705470
* Post-Colonial Trajectories of Violence and Socia Control    Among Gebusi of Papua New Guinea
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Bruce Knauft, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1999
* USD 22,994.00

This project supports the research of a cultural anthropologist from Emory
University, studying changing patterns of violence, social control and
government influence among a traditional tribal society of Papua New Guinea.
Using a baseline of data collected by the investigator in 1980, the project
provides a rigorous longitudinal analysis of conflict and dispute mediation
across the transition to fully post-colonial conditions among a rainforest
population with an extremely high rate of violence. Observed changes in sorcery
inquests, village moots and court cases will be complemented by empirical data
based on current census information and long-term dispute profiles. Updating
genealogies from a 1982 sample of 300 persons will enable systematic analysis of
the causes and consequences of about 100 deaths projected to have occurred in
the past 15 years. These mortality data and the case histories drawn form them
will be used to calculate changes in homicide rate, the changing distribution of
violence by age, sex, perpetrator/victim relation, coresidence, and other causes
of violence. The research will illuminate processes of cultural and political
change that affect violence and attempts at social control in many post-colonial
contexts. The information to be gathered will advance our understanding of
larger issues about local compliance with, tacit subversion of, or active
resistance against post-colonial administrations. The general processes analyzed
here will also shed light on violence patterns in local neighborhoods in
industrialized countries.