* 9705105
* Free-Model Based Intelligent Control of Power Plants and    Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Kwang Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gwendolyn Owens
* 12/31/2001
* USD 236,807.00

ECS-9705105 Lee This project is to develop a Free-Model Based Intelligent
Control (FMBIC) system for power plants and power systems. Automation of normal
power plant operation is currently achieved in a simple and direct manner using
single-loop feedback and feedforward controls based on linearized models of
plant subsystems. In this environment, controlling a system is very difficult
when there are plant or controller failures or a significant variation in
operating conditions. The proposed free-model based intelligent control approach
offers an alternative in achieving highly autonomous power plants and power
systems. Current main streams for intelligent control are fuzzy logic and
artificial neural networks. Both attempt to emulate human control schemes by
incorporating human decision making and learning ability. However, they alone
can not emulate humans perfectly. Therefore, it is proposed to develop a new
approach based on the "free model" concept, which will help in modeling human
behavior more closely. The free model is defined only with input and output data
obtained from the system and consequently, no mathematical model is required for
control purposes. Thus, it can be used for any system which is complex, highly
nonlinear, and susceptible to disturbances, such as power plants and power
systems. By representing a system in terms of the free model, human control
schemes will be modeled in five different areas: (1) human learning ability will
be emulated on the premise of the free model using neural networks and fuzzy
systems; (2) a supervisory control system will be developed to emulate human
supervisory ability using a bank of controllers in parallel; (3) a decentralized
control scheme will be developed by partitioning a complex system into a number
of smaller subsystems which are coupled by interaction variables; (4) a
predictive control scheme will be developed by adding an optimizing feedforward
control; and (5) a fault-accommodating control system will be devel oped by
using the free-model based neuro or fuzzy identifier. This research an the Free-
Model Based Intelligent Control (FMBIC) will be conducted at Penn State
University as a regular project. In order to enrich the project and enhance the
progress of the research, it is also proposed to add an international dimension
by collaborating with Seoul National University (SNU), Seoul, Korea through the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research Program. This will enable the Principal
Investigator and a graduate student to visit SNU and exchange research results
and experiences with the Korean counterpart. The theoretical and implementation
aspects of this collaboration will be of benefit both to Penn State University
and Seoul National University, as well as to the U.S. and Korea power
industries, in general. The anticipated scientific and practical benefits are:
(1) sharing of laboratory facilities and theoretical developments in the Free-
Model Based Intelligent Control (FMBIC) system; (2) joining of complementary
skills: Penn State's experience in power plant intelligent distributed control
and SNU's experience in power system intelligent control; (3) providing new
insights and improvements to power engineering education in the U.S. and Korea;
and (4) development of intelligent control technology providing improved
efficiency, economy, and safety of power plants and power systems in the face of
future deregulation and plant construction difficulties in both countries.