* 9705718
* Magnetic Susceptibility Variations in Cave Sediments from   the Moravian Karst, Czech Republic:  A Record of            Environmental Change
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Jimmy Diehl, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 71,894.00

97-05718 Diehl Variations in mineral magnetic properties of iron from marine,
lake, and wind blown (loess) deposits have been shown to reflect changes in
Earth's orbit, climate, and human activity. Cave sediments have gone almost
unnoticed in these environmental magnetic studies and, in many instances, these
sediments contain a rich history of early man. The Czech Geological Survey and
Michigan Technological University have been studying the cave deposits of the
Moravian Karst over the last several years to reconstruct the
Pleistocene/Holocene paleoclimate record in which these sediments were
deposited. This proposed research concentrates on discovering the nature of
environmental and/or anthropogenic processes that may be causing variations in
magnetic susceptibility and other mileral magnetic parameters in two sequences
of cave sediments. The first sequence is from the floodwater deposits of
Spiralka Cave where the magnetic susceptibility variations recorded in the upper
part of this section appear to track the 10-year averaged winter temperature
anomalies determined from direct temperature measurements (over the last 200
years) at the Prague-Klementinum Observatory. The second sequence consists of
loess deposits from the entrance facies of Kulna Cave, a well-studied
archeological site. Preliminary work indicates magnetic susceptibility highs are
perhaps controlled by increased erosion of a pedogenic source material during
cold intervals rather than by in-situ pedogenic enhancement during warm
intervals. This work also has important implications for tying the cave
stratigraphy of Central Europe (and its record of man) to changes in the global
ice volume as Kulna Cave is the type locality for cave deposits in Central
Europe. ***