* 9705150
* A Novel Computational Approach to Combustion Modelling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Joseph Powers, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 06/30/2001
* USD 246,000.00

ABSTRACT-Paolucci CTS-9705150 Unsteady, multi-dimensional combustion processes
are modeled using a newly developed wavelet technique combined with a technique
to rationally reduce the relevant differential equations to lower dimensions.
The focus is on problems in which there is full coupling between fluid mechanics
and chemical kinetics; such problems are characterized by a multiplicity of
phenomena evolving over widely disparate length and time scales. The first
technique uses a multi-level wavelet collocation approximation. The multilevel
structure of the algorithm facilitates the computational adaptation of the grid
refinement according to the temporal evolution of the solution. The rational
reduction phase of the compu- tation applies intrinsic low-dimensional manifold
(ILDM) theory; those processes occurring on time scales faster than a physically
motivated cutoff time scale are allowed to relax to partial equilibrium while
the remaining processes are subject to time evolution. In brief, the wavelet
decomposition reduces the total number of unknowns and the rational reduction
then reduces the dimension of the manifold on which the system of differential
equations is solved resulting in a more efficient numerical method. This project
considers both general algorithmic development and application to specific
combustion problems well characterized by experiment and/or independent theory.
This work introduces wavelet techniques into combustion modelling and also has
applicability to other large-scale numerical simulations.