* 9705800
* High Pressure Experiments and Computer Modeling Studies of  Relaxation Mechanisms in Nonlinear Optical Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,09/30/2000
* L. Michael Hayden, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2000
* USD 194,900.00

9705800 Hayden Nonlinear optical (NLO) organic and polymeric materials have been
proposed for use in a variety of photonic systems. Successful implementation for
frequency doubling, electrooptic (EO) modulation, and photorefractive (PR)
applications requires a detailed knowledge of the connection between the
structures of these materials and their linear and nonlinear optical properties.
This work is focused on determining the mechanisms involved in relaxations in
polymers and their effects on the stability of the nonlinear optical properties
of these polymers. This work will utilize a new method to measure the pressure
dependence of the decay of the NLO coefficients at various temperatures in poled
NLO polymers by in-situ second harmonic generation (SHG) and dielectric
relaxation measurements on poled and unpoled materials. Previous studies found
that the relaxation of the second order NLO susceptibility in a guest-host
system is a function of the relative size of the dopant compared to the sizes of
the substituents or "beads" of the host. It was also found that below the glass
transition temperature, Tg, chromophore reorientation is coupled to secondary
relaxations in guest-host systems. The coupling varies according to the relative
size of the chromophore and the side groups of the host. This study will test
the generality of these earlier results in side-chain and main-chain NLO
polymers. The most technologically promising types will be studied: syndioregic
polymers, crosslinkable polymers, and high Tg guest-host systems based on
polyimides and polyquinolines. In addition, the pressure studies will be used to
investigate new processing techniques useful for achieving better stability. In
addition, detailed molecular dynamics simulations of dopant and pendant
chromophore orientational kinetics will be performed. The molecular modeling
will complement the experimental measurements in an attempt to determine what
the activation volume means on the mol ecular level and hence solidify its
usefulness as a parameter in the design of more stable systems. %%% As the
information age evolves, faster communication and computing resources will be
needed. Increasingly, these needs are being and will continue to be met through
the use and development of optical device technologies. The results of this work
will be useful in helping to design better materials for use in future optical
based communication, computing, and sensor systems. ***