* 9705284
* Permanent and Transient Refractive Index Gratings in        Rare-Earth Activated Silicate Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* George Dixon, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 375,000.00

9705284 Dixon This is a new project on the physics of rare earth doped silicate
glasses for the formation of permanent and transient refractive index gratings
in rare-earth activated silicate glasses. These studies will help develop a
pjysical basis for tailoring the photorefractive properties of these media for
frequency-selective switches, holographic memories, distributed feedback lasers,
and other applications in optical signal processing. Glasses are synthesized in-
house and characterized for properties of grating strength and kinetics. These
measurements are supported by theoretical studies and by experimental studies of
the phonon physics and transport properties of the glasses. The PI's expect to
demonstrate a prototype frequency-selective optical switch using transient
gratings. Such a device is important in order to increase the capacity of
optical communications networks. %%% This is a new project on the physics of
rare earth doped silicate glasses for the formation of permanent and transient
refractive index gratings in rare-earth activated silicate glasses. The capacity
of fiber optical telephone networks can be greatly increased, without installing
new cable, if messages carried by different light waves are transmitted
simultaneously along the same fiber. To do this, it is essential to be able to
switch and separate these different light waves so that the messages arrives at
the correct receiver. Light wavelength-selective filters and switches are an
interesting means of accomplishing this. The present research project is
directed toward understanding the physical processes and chemical compositions
that make rare earth containing silicate glasses a class of materials in which
to fabricate these switches and filters. The results of this research are
expected to provide a "road map" for tailoring the glass chemistry and
processing to produce efficient devices of this kind. One of the expected
outcome of this work will be a prototype wavelength. ***