* 9705072
* Inventory of the Lepidoptera Larvae and Their Parasitoids   from the Tropical Dry, Rain, and Cloud Forests of Costa Rica
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Daniel Janzen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 05/31/2001
* USD 427,788.00

9705072 Janzen This project is a 3-year portion of an ongoing biodiversity
inventory of the caterpillars of all species of butterflies and moths in the
Area de Conservacion Guanacaste in northwestern Costa Rica, and the
relationships these caterpillars have with their host-plants and their
parasitoids (flies, wasps, roundworms, fungi, gut microbes). The habitats from
which the caterpillars and other organisms will be collected include the
tropical dry forest, rain forest, and cloud forest. The immediate goal of the
study is to make basic information on the ecological (predator/prey, food-
source, life history, etc.) relationships of these organisms available for
studies in systematics, ecology, behavior, and physiology, and for use in
conservation, education, biodiversity prospecting, ecotourism, environmental
monitoring, and pest management. The long-term goal of the project is to
establish this biological system as a "known universe" to encourage the non-
destructive sustainable use of a complex tropical wildland by all sectors of
society. The results of the study will be placed on the WWW for direct user
access. This project represents international cooperation among the Costa Rican
National Biodiversity Institute (INBio), the Area de Conservacion Guanacaste
(ACG), other funding sources tapped by the PI, and the NSF. Costa Rican
nationals will participate in the activities of the project, which will result
in training that will contribute to the administrative, scientific, and
commercial potential of future INBio projects.