* 9705825
* Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Jerison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 96,000.00

Abstract Jerison The first goal of the research proposed is to describe level
sets of eigenfunctions and Green's function on regions in three or more
dimensions and on positively curved surfaces. Another goal is to prove a unique
continuation property which is the appropriate substitute for uniqueness in the
Cauchy problem for solutions to elliptic boundary value problems. The proposal
is to use an optimal hypothesis on the smoothness of the boundary, namely,
Lipschitz regularity. The optimal hypothesis makes this a fundamental issue in
harmonic analysis. A third goal is to solve two extremal problems for
eigenvalues, one related to regularity in the Neumann problem, the other aimed
at proving uniqueness in an inverse problem of finding a domain given the
density of the first variation of the eigenvalue as a function of normal
variation. Another main goal concerns three problems motivated by fluid
mechanics. The first problem is to show that infinitesimal control on vorticity
and compressibility implies some global control. The second problem relates the
first to measures of consistency of economic data. The third is a free boundary
problem related to constructing equilibrium fluid flows with vortex lines. The
final goal is to study certain oscillatory integrals with singular phases, with
an application to pattern recognition in camera images. The main project is to
understand how the shape of a region affects the distribution of heat in the
region or how the shape of an electrical conductor affects the distribution of
electrical charge on it. These problems are closely related mathematically, even
though they describe very different physical systems. The case of temperature
describes a refrigerator or building with insulated walls, but the case of
electrical charge describes electrical components like wires and cables. The
main issue addressed in the part of the project motivated by fluid mechanics is
how stretching and twisting at small scales leads to changes in the shape,
speed, and density of a fluid (or air) at large scales. This is a fundamental
question in the mechanics of solids, plastics, and elastic materials, as well as
fluids. A similar mathematical model is encountered in economic equilibrium
theories. The ultimate goal of the project in the economics context is to give
criteria for when a set of economic data about purchases can be combined into a
meaningful price index, despite errors and inconsistency. In other words, how
small must inconsistencies be in order that one can safely ignore them? The
camera image project will use Fourier analysis to design a computer program to
recognize the angle a building makes with the camera's line of sight based on a
single photograph of the building. The determination from a single image would
improve on existing techniques using two images and make computer vision less
subject to error.