* 9705292
* Wild World
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Susane Lee, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 11/30/2001
* USD 796,721.00

97-05292 Fred Kaufman ABSTRACT: Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET, NY)
is developing a multi-media environmental education project for youth aged 8 to
12. Wild World focuses on American children's everyday urban and suburban
surroundings - city streets, parks, backyards, vacant lots, the woods, and
similar environments easily and often accessible to the audience. The project
will educate young people about environmental and natural science topics and
issues in an entertaining, engaging way, and will encourage them to become more
aware of their immediate environment. Important goals are to showcase people who
are passionate about their work with, and in, natural surroundings, and to show
that our world is intriguing and well worth investigating. The science content
will reflect the recommendations of the National Science Education Standards and
Benchmarks for Science Literacy. Major components of the project include: * A
thirteen part series of half-hour television programs entitled Wild TV -- this
exciting and occasionally irreverent series is designed to attract viewers
indifferent to traditional nature documentary program. The format is also
intended to appeal to young people with little pre-disposition to science or
nature. * Wild Comix -- a comic book-styled educational print piece for young
people that includes activities that kids can try at home, puzzles, and other
thought-provoking exercises. * Wild Web -- a World Wide Web site featuring an
interactive version of the comic book, activities and puzzles, a chat room, a
bulletin board, and links to environmental groups. * A Home and Extracurricular
Settings: Activity Guide - intended for parents and informal educators, the
guide will include: enriching nature appreciation for the entire family;
improving the learning relationship between children and their parents; and
activities/directions for parents that are not prohibitive with regard to area,
income, and adults' educational background. * Classroom materia ls - a 12-page
guide designed as an introductory resource for classroom teachers who want to
incorporate environmental science activities into their teaching.