* 9705851
* Hankel-Type Operators on Banach Spaces of Analytic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,09/28/1998
* John McCarthy, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/28/1998
* USD 35,472.00

9705851 Saccone The investigator will study the linear topological structure of
a class of Banach spaces of continuous analytic functions and bounded analytic
functions. The primary tool is a relatively easily understood operator which
resembles a Hankel operator on a Hilbert space. It has been recently
demonstrated by the investigator and by other authors that these Hankel-type
operators often possess a wealth of information on the Banach space structure of
the function spaces they operate on. It seems likely that these methods could
yield solutions of some open problems concerning bounded analytic functions on
the unit ball in several complex variables and extend the solutions to strictly
pseudoconvex domains. Spaces of uniformly convergent Fourier series on the unit
circle and polydisk will also be studied. The goal of this project is to further
understand the relatively new techniques being used to solve difficult problems
in a variety of areas of the branch of pure mathematics known as analysis. These
new techniques involve the replacement of complex computational tools with
methods that are more abstract and theoretical in nature and are currently
becoming more and more popular due to the powerful results that can be achieved
with relatively little effort. The type of results we seek to obtain are less of
an exact, numerical nature, but deal more those problems that in all likelihood
could not be solved by computation. At the center of the research is a tool,
called a Hankel-type operator, developed by the investigator in his thesis which
has found an increasing number of applications since his doctoral work. One
target of these ideas would be problems in harmonic analysis, or Fourier series.
Fourier series are the building blocks for the theory of wavelets, a fast
growing area having applications to numerous types problems such as data
compression, voice recognition, and so on. Another important component of the
project will be problems of analytic func tions in one and several complex
variables. Otherwise known as complex analysis, this area of mathematics is
intimately connected to harmonic analysis, mentioned above. The key feature of
the results being sought after in this project is the generality in which they
work and also, once the tedious theoretical foundations have been laid, the ease
in which they can be applied.