* 9705271
* Novel Properties of Liquid Crystal/Coil Diblock Copolymers  via Tandem Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Edwin Thomas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 720,000.00

9705271 Thomas Liquid crystals hold great promise as materials in optical,
barrier and structural applications. In this GOALI/Group Award, supported
jointly by DMR and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the PIs will
exploit the unique tandem interplay of domain formation and alignment in the
block copolymer structure and self-organization of the mesophase by use of
liquid crystal block-coil block copolymers and homopolymers in special applied
processing fields. From their prior work, they have identified two general
applications which will act as vehicles to exploit and test fundamental
understanding of these tandem interactions: (1) to develop the knowledge and
engineering expertise to produce flexible plastic liquid crystalline displays
and switches and (2) to create new thermoplastic liquid crystalline polymer
materials with layered structures for transparent, highly impermeable barrier
film applications. To accomplish these goals they plan to exploit the
interactions of microphase separation, liquid crystallinity and applied fields.
A 3 year program is envisioned, with a team comprised of Superex Inc. and each
university PI with 1 graduate student and 2 undergraduate researchers.
Complimentary areas of expertise of the PIs will ensure a through approach to
the investigation: Thomas, characterization and properties; Ober, synthesis and
characterization; Muthukumar, theory and modeling. %%% Apart from the specific
scientific and engineering objectives of this program, the PIs plan to use this
inter- university focused research group collaboration to examine several new
approaches to graduate and undergraduate education of the students connected
with this program. Both graduate and undergraduate students will gain research
experience outside the normal university training: graduate students will mentor
undergraduates, and both groups will learn entrepreneurial skills through
exchanges with our industrial partner and by taking business cou rses.
Communication skills will be improved through joint seminars. Students from all
three university groups will participate in special retreat-style meetings,
traveling to a site chosen by the host univeristy. The location of all three
universities in the Northeast makes such exchanges and visits very feasible.
They will also encourage both the graduate and undergraduate students to carry
out exchanges with other university teams. Each institution and research group
carries with it a unique style and tradition that influences the way research is
approached. By experiencing these different cultures, students at both levels
(graduate and undergraduate) will benefit. The education approaches found to be
most successful will be expanded at MIT, UMass and Cornell into other
undergraduate programs. ***