* 9705513
* Correlations, Disorder, and the Anderson-Mott Transition in the Bose Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Kara Beauchamp, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/1998
* USD 15,000.00

9705513 Beauchamp This is a Research Planning Grant for a new female faculty to
study the Bose glass. The Bose glass is a system of superconducting vortices
localized in a disordered columnar defect lattice, is described by the same
Hamiltonian as the Coulomb glass, a system of localized charge carriers in a
doped. The ground state of these systems, which determines whether they are
conducting or insulating, depends in a complicated manner on the relative
strengths of the particle- particle and particle-potential interactions. In the
Bose glass, disorder can be controlled by creating the columnar defects in thin
superconducting films using electron-beam lithography, and particle interactions
can be controlled simply by changing the applied magnetic field. Using this
model Bose glass system, this proposed research aims to elucidate the effects of
independent variation of particle interactions and disorder on both the static
configuration and the dynamic motion of the particles. Since such control over
disorder and interaction is not possible in the Coulomb glass, the results of
this research will provide valuable feedback for the theoretical understanding
of these systems. Furthermore, the results of this research will deepen our
understanding of vortex pinning in those high temperature superconductors that
have disordered columnar defect lattices produced by heavy-ion bombardment. %%%
Although physicists have been successful in developing a detailed understanding
of electronic and magnetic properties of a wide range of materials, disorder and
strong interparticle interactions in some materials has encumbered such a
detailed understanding. The present research will focus on the role of disorder
and interparticle interactions in a system of magnetic flux tubes, called
vortices, in superconducting thin films with intentionally fabricated defects.
The defects will be created and controlled using electron-beam lithography, and
vortex interactions will be controlled simply by changing the applied magnetic
field. The effects of disorder and interparticle interactions on the vortex
configurations and vortex motion will be measured. Sincince such control over
disorder and interactions is not possible in other disordered, interacting
systems, the results of this research will provide valuable feedback for the
theoretical understanding of these systems. Furthermore, the results of this
research will deepen our understanding of vortex motion in high temperature
superconductors. This a Research Planning Grant. ***