* 9705792
* Inverse Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2001
* USD 143,428.00

9705792 Uhlmann The PI plans to consider several inverse boundary value problems
arising in applications. In these non-invasive methods one attempts to determine
the internal parameters of a body by making measurements at the boundary of the
body. An example of this is "Electrical Impedance Tomography". In this case the
measurements at the boundary are current and voltage measurements, and one would
like to determine the conductivity of the body. The PI plans to consider the
case of anisotropic conductivities and non-smooth isotropic conductivities.
Another important unsolved problem is whether one can effectively characterize
all the possible outcomes of voltage and current measurements for
conductivities. The proposer plans to investigate analog inverse problems
arising in the mechanics of materials. In particular one would like to determine
the elastic parameters of an elastic body by making measurements of
displacements and tractions at the boundary. The PI plans to consider the case
of transversally isotropic materials and also materials with residual stress.
The PI plans to consider several inverse boundary value problems arising in
applications. In these non-invasive methods one attempts to determine the
internal parameters of a body by making measurements at the boundary of the
body. For instance, electrical impedance imaging systems apply currents to the
outside surface of a body and record the voltages that result. This data is used
to reconstruct and display an approximation to the electrical conductivity
inside the body. The electrical conductivity of lung, air, blood, cardiac
muscle, breast tissue, and breast tumors are all different. For this reason
electrical impedance imaging is being tested as a method for monotoring heart
and lung function as well as screening for breast cancer. Other application of
this inverse method is non-destructive evaluation of materials, in particular in
the detection of internal cracks and corrosion in planes. T he design for these
imaging systems involve the analysis of forward and inverse problems for partial
differential equations.