* 9705108
* Infrared Studies of Cuprates, Superconductors, and          Correlated Metals
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,12/31/2000
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705108 Tanner This experimental research project
utilizes optical studies in the far-infrared through the ultraviolet wavelength
range to clarify properties of normal and superconducting states of high
temperature superconductors and related novel metals. An emphasis is on use of
the spectra to study the doping-induced and superfluid spectral weights and
their relationship to the transition temperature. Other issues include the non-
Drude midinfrared absorption, the scattering of charge carriers, the
superconducting energy gap and the effects of strong external magnetic fields.
%%% This experimental research project uses the absorption of light to study the
copper-oxide superconductors and related materials. The measurements, in effect,
count the number of mobile electrons per copper and determine how many of these
condense into the superfluid below the superconducting transition temperature.
This provides important direct information about the superconductivity. The
measurements are done over a wide wavelength and temperature range, and include
measurements while the sample is subjected to a strong magnetic field. Results
from this research may include unusual new effects or materials which may find
new application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in
nature and involves graduate students who will be excellently trained to enter
positions in industry, government or education. ***