* 9705233
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeology of Northern Rio Grande, New Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Timothy Kohler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 9,370.00

Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Kohler, MS Samantha Ruscavage-Barz will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct stylistic analysis
of ceramic materials excavated from sites in the northern Rio Grande region of
New Mexico and which date to the late 13th and early 14th centuries AD. In
addition, selected pieces will be thin sectioned and subjected to petrographic
analysis to determine raw material sources. With National Science Foundation
support MS Ruscavage-Barz will visit collections housed in Santa Fe, Tucson and
Los Angeles. Prior to the late 13th century population density in the northern
Rio Grande region was low and people lived in small widely dispersed
settlements. The picture rapidly changed however towards the end of this period
when significantly larger groups aggregated in the type of multiroom Pueblo
communities which still exist in the region today. Although archaeologists are
uncertain of the cause, many believe that immigration is responsible for this
rapid population rise. The basic question which MS Ruscavage-Barz wishes to
address concerns forms of social organization and integration processes. What
mechanisms do individuals and groups employ when they find themselves
incorporated into new large and more complex social units? To what extent to
they develop new sets of rules and demand compliance to promote uniformity? Some
theories suggest that exactly the opposite occurs and previously independent
entities act to emphasize their individuality in such changed and often charged
circumstances. `Style` serves, in many instances, as a marker of group and
individual identity. Different Southwest Native American groups decorated
pottery in distinctive ways and it is possible to look at contemporary pottery
and determine its point of origin. Complex decorations were likewise painted on
prehistoric ceramics and MS Ruscavage-Barz will analyze materials excavated in
well controlled contexts from a number of Rio Grande sites. In this way she will
be able to trace design changes from the early smaller through the succeeding
larger aggregated communities and determine to extent to which variation is
either emphasized or disappears. It is likely that patterns noted in this realm
would be reflected equally in other behavioral realms. This research is
important for several reasons. It will help to develop an analytic technique
which archaeologists may potentially employ in many regions of the world. It
will shed new light on mechanisms which underlie culture change and assist in
training a promising young scientist.