* 9705454
* Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and    Actinide Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 493,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705454 Maple This experimental research project
focuses on the unusual electronic properties of crystalline solids in which
localized inner shell f-electrons (present in rare earth and actinide elements)
lie in the same energy range as outer shell conduction electrons. Hybridization
of the localized and conduction electron systems leads to strongly correlated
behavior with several manifestations which remain incompletely understood. The
particular unusual effects of interest in this project are non- Fermi-liquid
behavior; superconductivity and magnetism in heavy fermion compounds; and the
formation of small energy gaps due to hybridization in small gap semiconductors
(Kondo insulators). These effects will be studied under changing composition,
magnetic field, temperature or pressure. Measurements to be performed include
thermal, transport and magnetic properties; additional measurements, in some
cases with collaborations, will include neutron scattering, photoemission,
electron tunneling, infrared spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance. %%%
This research project experimentally studies the unusual behavior of certain
types of compounds which combine heavy (rare earth or actinide elements) with
lighter elements, as for example in the intermetallic metal Uranium Beryllium
13. In this case deep core electrons from U remain localized on the U sites but
interact with free electrons from the Beryllium, an interaction that lends very
peculiar properties to the free or conduction electrons. This effect leads to
"correlated electron" behavior and to anomalies in "electronic" properties, such
as the electrical conductivity, the electronic portion of the thermal
conductivity, the magnetic susceptibility, and others. The conduction electrons
behave in many measurements as if their masses were greatly enhanc ed, by up to
three orders of magnitude (hence the name "heavy fermion compound"), relative to
the electronic mass in vacuum or in simple metals such as sodium, copper or
aluminum. The study of these materials and their effects is valuable as a
testing ground for theories of electrical and related properties of solids,
which can then be more confidently applied to other systems; and in the search
for novel properties and new compounds which may find new application in
technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves
both graduate and undergraduate students who will be excellently trained to
enter positions in industry, government or education. ***