* 9705134
* GOALI:  Defect Structure of Epitaxial Wide Gap III-V        Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2001
* USD 370,065.00

9705134 Wessels This GOALI proposal addresses doping induced defects in wide
bandgap III-V nitride semiconductors. Issues being investigated include the
structure and identity of defects in high conductivity materials, the structure
and identity of compensating acceptor and donor defects, their concentration,
and their stability. Studies of both atmospheric pressure MOVPE and flow
modulation epitaxy are an integral part of the project. Joint collaborative
activities include staff exchange with graduate students spending time at
Lucent, Motorola, and Emcore. The proposed research emphasizes understanding of
fundamental mechanisms and processes along with some practical aspects of
electronic/photonic materials and device technology. %%% The project addresses
forefront materials science research issues in a topical area of materials
science having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry, in general. Additionally,
the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected
to contribute to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits by
providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
improved materials. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***