* 9705411
* Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at the Quantum Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* John Worlock, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 195,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705411 Roukes Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at
the Quantum Limit. This new research program focuses on reduced-dimensional heat
flow and thermal equilibration in nanostructures. The investigators have
developed new techniques for the surface nanomachining of suspended
semiconductor structures that enable the construction of miniature, thermally-
isolated devices. These possess integral transducers permitting the local
introduction of heat, and local temperature measurements. Coupling these with
high sensitivity dc SQUID-based methods for electron thermometry at millikelvin
temperatures is ultimately expected to yield sensitivity sufficient for
exploration of energy exchange processes involving individual quanta. Single-
phonon phenomena, with analogs in classical and quantum optics, should become
observable. Intriguing possibilities include phonon shot noise, phonon bunching,
anticorrelated electron- phonon relaxation, and the phonon-by-phonon energy
decay of a quasi-isolated thermal reservoir. With this level of sensitivity,
calorimetry experiments elucidating processes involving individual atoms and
molecules are also possible. %%% Calorimetry and Thermal Transport at the
Quantum Limit. This new research program focuses on the question of how heat
flows in extremely small objects, i.e. nanostructures. Ultrasmall systems can
behave as if they are reduced- dimensional (i.e., less than 3D). At low
temperatures, for systems that are small enough, heat flow and thermal
equilibration will ultimately occur by the exchange of individual energy quanta.
This domain, where heat transfer is "granular" (delivered quanta-by-quanta
rather than as a steady flow) remains completely unexplored. A complete
understanding of these issues will become crucial with the continued miniaturi
zation of devices leading to nanotechnology. These studies are now possible
through new nanomachining techniques developed by the investigators, allowing
the creation of suspended, ultrasmall semiconductor structures with three-
dimensional relief -- with on-board electronic measurement circuitry. Among
possible applications of this research, these experiments should enable direct
observation of the heat evolved during chemical reactions involving *individual*
atoms and molecules. The devices developed should also offer unprecedented
sensitivity for measurement of optical and infrared radiation. ***