* 9705022
* Postdoc: ECS Postdoctoral Associate:  Design and Simulation of Algorithms and Mechanisms for Precision Assembly
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Ken Goldberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 46,119.00

9705022 Goldberg, Kenneth Y. University of California - Berkeley CISE
Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental CS: Design and Simulation of
Algorithms and Mechanisms for Precision Assembly (This award supports CES
associate Karl Bohringer.) Progress in miniaturization of mass-produced
commercial products requires improvements and innovation in precision assembly.
Products such as magnetic storage systems, palmtop and wearable computers, or
telecommunications devices often require submicron-level assembly operations.
Increasingly, the components for such assemblies are batch-fabricated in MEMS
(micro electro mechanical system) technology, often yielding thousands of
components in one parallel fabrication run. In contrast to the highly automated
fabrication of MEMS components, current assembly techniques are rather limited.
Conventional, sequential pick-and-place assembly is extremely inefficient or
impractical for such applications, because of the small size of the components
and the high accuracy required. Instead, novel techniques are proposed for
parallel self-assembly. Active surfaces (i.e., surfaces that can generate two-
dimensional force vector fields) permit the precise positioning, orienting, and
sorting of small parts with little or no sensor feedback. Vibration and fluidic
agitation can generate a motive force for parallel assembly. Mechanical
compliance, using micro-chamfers and latches, can be exploited to reduce the
degrees of freedom of the components. Detailed models are developed to describe
precision parallel assembly using three techniques: mechanical vibration,
fluidic agitation, and active surfaces. The motive force response for each of
these techniques is analyzed, and simulations with a modeling system are
performed. Physical experiments are performed to confirm that our models
accurately reflect measured behavior.