* 9705380
* Nonlinear Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Jonathan Goodman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2001
* USD 212,724.00

9705380 Jonathan Goodman ABSTRACT OF PROPOSAL BY JONATHAN GOODMAN APPLIED
ANALYSIS AND COMPUTATION This proposal covers several areas of applied
mathematics, applied analysis, and computational science. One area is the
mathematical analysis of nonlinear waves and fronts, particularly
multidimensional shocks. Another area is control of systems governed by
hyperbolic partial differential equations (wave propagation equations) and
discrete ``lumped parameter'' approximations to them that would be used in
numerical computation of optimal controls. Two main computational areas are: 1:
anisotropic adaptive refinement methods for multidimensional approximation and
finite element computation, and 2: Monte Carlo methods for computing quantum
mechanical properties of systems of interacting electrons. Several other areas,
including the research of graduate students under my supervision are discussed.
There are several projects described here, most involving collaborations with
colleagues, postdoctoral trainees, or graduate students. The project on control
of systems governed by hyperbolic differential equations is about methods for
removing acoustic noise from structures. This has applications in aircraft and
submarine technology and in other places. It fits in with a larger effort to
design "smart materials" and "smart structures". Modern sensors, actuators, and
computers are fast enough to react to individual sound waves. The mathematical
problem is to design good computational "control strategies" that use this
ability effectively. The existing mathematical theory of control was developed
with smaller, simpler systems in mind and does not apply directly to control of
systems where acoustic waves (sound waves) are propagating. We hope that our
theory of control will apply to such problems. A more computational project is
the attempt to compute the "electronic structure" of molecules from quantum
mechanics. The equation to be solved (the Schrodin ger equation) has been known
since 1926. Still in 1997, there is no reliable way to solve the Schrodinger
equation for systems involving more than one electron (an oxygen atom has 8).
The ability to do this would have enormous scientific and technological impact,
with applications ranging from superconductivity to drug design.