* 9705781
* Dissertation Research:  Ceramic Use in an Agrarian Society: Ethnoarchaeology among the Gamo of Southwestern Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Steven Brandt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1999
* USD 11,827.00

Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, Mr. John Arthur will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct extended ethnographic fieldwork among
the Gamo people in Southwestern Ethiopia and supplement this with library
research in Addis Ababa. The goal of this work is to study ceramic use among
these traditional agriculturists and extract information which will be of
archaeological value. Given the widespread penetration of western markets, there
are very few places in the world today where groups still produce pottery on a
local level by traditional techniques and rely on the products. The Gamo are
interesting because they span an altitudinal gradient and the crops they grow
are divided into several complexes which are segregated by height above sea
level. Thus, within the context of a single `culture` significant clearly
patterned variation in behavior can be observed. Mr. Arthur will focus on
ceramic production, use and discard and to accomplish his goal he will conduct
extensive research in three villages. He will collect basic demographic and
social data and within this context carry out detailed observation on vessel
context and use-alteration changes. He will observe daily ceramic use such as
cooking practices. He will also conduct laboratory analyses on a sample of used
ceramic vessels and abraders to gain insight into the structural nature of these
materials and the alterations they undergo through repeated use. Because pottery
was widely used by prehistoric people in many parts of the world and because it
is well and abundantly preserved in archaeological sites, it has provided a
focus for scientific investigation. Archaeologists often recover large numbers
of broken potsherds in their excavations and they attempt, through analysis, to
reconstruct numerous aspects of the makers' and users' lifestyles. To do this
effectively, it is important to understand how ceramics reflect human behavior
and what analytic techniques can most effectively elucidate this relationship.
It is extremely useful to examine these interactions in societies which still
produce pottery by traditional methods and Mr. Arthur has located an ideal
situation to do this. This research is important for several reasons. It will
help develop analytic techniques of potential use in many archaeological
situations. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.