* 9705861
* Complexity and Self-Organization in Soil-Atmosphere         Interaction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,03/02/1999
* Ignacio Rodriguez-Iturbe, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/02/1999
* USD 143,701.00

9705861 Rodriquez Soil moisture has been identified as the key variable to
characterize the impact of the landscape in its relationship with the
atmosphere. Recent studies have addressed the basic mechanisms of the phenomena
and thus are constrained to very simple situations which do not incorporate the
complex interactions which develop when there are different soil types with
random spatial geometries evolving in time their degree of wetness (or dryness).
We propose to implement a water balance dynamics which will incorporate only the
main characteristics of infiltration and evapotranspiration. The dynamics is
driven by rainfall which may be of two origins: one from external forcing which
takes place randomly in time and space and another which takes place randomly
over drier regions whenever soil moisture gradient above a critical threshold
exist between neighboring areas. The modeling, although simple, will incorporate
the main physical signatures of the processes involved. This kind of dynamics
may drive the system toward a critical state where the evolution is a fratal in
space and time. This type of complex systems tend to self-organize producing
global characteristics product of solely local dynamics. We also plan to compare
the results of the model with the space-time signatures of rainfall and soil
moisture. Thus, a detailed analysis of the space-time structure of a mesoscale
rainfall in regions of Kansas, Texas, and Oklahoma will be carried out and
compared with the model. The structure of the soil moisture data from the
Washita experiment will also be compared with the one obtained from the modeling
scheme.