* 9705289
* Late Cenozoic Invertebrates, Protists and Fish of the       Tropical Eastern Pacific Ocean:  Database for Comparisons   with Caribbean Taxa Through Time
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Laurel Collins, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 08/31/2002
* USD 208,905.00

9705289 COLLINS The emergence of the Isthmus of Panama split apart a single
tropical ocean, an event which had a profound impact on organismal evolution,
ecologic systems and oceanic circulation. Fossils preserved in Eastern Pacific
and Caribbean deposits comprise successive tropical American biotas that changed
dramatically through the last 15 million years in response to the constriction
and closure of the great Caribbean - Pacific seaway. Research based on Pacific
and Caribbean collections of fossils will address these changes. The main goal
of this project is a paleobiotic survey of shallow-water fossil faunas of
coastal Ecuador, for comparison with Caribbean faunas of similar age and
environment that were collected previously. This project, by Laurel Collins and
colleagues, involves collecting Neogene marine fossils in Ecuador, preparing and
identifying these collections, determining the ages and paleoenvironments of
their stratigraphic sequences, designing a new database for the data, making the
project's data available on the Internet, and using the collections in research.
The identified faunas will include calcareous nannoplankton, foraminifera,
ahermatypic corals, bryozoans, echinoderms, mollusks, ostracods and fish. The
new model for the database will track the progress of preparing collections and
identifying taxa, aid in dating samples and correlating strata, and serve as the
repository for all faunal occurrence data, maps, stratigraphic sections, and
locality information. Research based on these data will result in the most
accurate assessment to date of the long-term effects of environmental change and
isolation on marine biotas, and the data model will set the standard for field-
based paleobiotic surveys.