* 9705695
* Phase Coherence and Dynamics in Superconductor Arrays and   Unconventional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9705695 Van Harlingen This experimental research
project focuses on the role of long- range phase coherence in superconductor
materials and devices. The work is based on the SQUID interferometry techniques
the PI has developed to detect the phase of the order parameter in single
crystal superconductor samples; and on the use of a scanning SQUID microscope
(SSM). Three areas of proposed research include: (1) Use of the SSM to study
vortex configurations and dynamics in superconductor arrays. (2) Application of
the SQUID interferometry methods to identify the order parameter symmetry in
heavy fermion superconductors and in organic superconductors, both types of
material showing indications of unconventional pairing. (3) Magnetic imaging of
hybrid systems consisting, e.g.,of alternating arrays of d-wave and s-wave
islands. %%% This experimental research project, at the forefront of research in
unconventional types of superconductivity, focuses on the "phase coherence"
property of superconductors and superfluids in general. The most useful
properties of superconductors: the superfluid (lossless) electrical conduction,
and the Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetic field
sensors and fast logic elements, all arise from phase coherence. It has recently
been found with high probability that the phase-coherent properties of the high
Tc cuprate superconductors are strikingly different from those of conventional
superconductors, like lead and NbTi. This research project is devoted in part to
the phase properties of additional types of superconductors, organic metals and
"heavy fermion" superconductors, which may also exhibit unconventional phase
behavior. Portions of this research will utilize a Scanning Squid Microscope,
which can measure local m agnetic fields at the level of one billionth of an
Oersted (1/2 Oersted is about the level of the earth's magnetic field) with a
spatial resolution of about 100 micrometers. Results from this research may
include unusual new effects or structures which may find application in
technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and involves
graduate students who will be excellently trained to enter positions in
industry, government or education. ***