* 9705780
* Multiple Time Scales in Neuronal Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 128,000.00

Guckenheimer 9705780 The investigator studies dynamical systems with multiple
time scales as models of neural systems. Data and models from a small
invertebrate neural network, the stomatogastric ganglion of lobsters, guide the
work and provide case studies. Phenomena observed in the stomatogastric
ganglion, such as bursting oscillations and spike frequency adaptation, can best
be modeled as dynamical systems with multiple time scales. Previous mathematical
analyses of qualitative properties of multiple time scale dynamical systems have
dealt mainly with local phenomena that occur in low dimensions. The dynamics of
neural systems raise questions that are not addressed by existing theories of
multiple time scale systems. The aim here is to extend the theory by classifying
qualitative features of the global dynamics and bifurcations for systems with
two time scales. This is an ambitious endeavor to extend theories of nonlinear
dynamical systems and singularly perturbed systems of ordinary differential
equations that have been developed over the past thirty years. Using numerical
investigations as a guide, the dictionary of patterns that occur in this setting
is described and their analytical properties are characterized. This work draws
heavily upon the theories of bifurcations of dynamical systems and models of
hybrid dynamical systems that combine continuous and discrete components. As
needed, numerical algorithms are developed that facilitate the simulation and
analysis of multiple time scale systems. The initial emphasis of the
mathematical work is upon systems that have two slow variables and two fast
variables. Numerical investigations of conductance-based models for the
stomatogastric ganglion also are performed. The results of these studies are
compared with data and used to guide the refinement of the models. Nervous
systems of animals regulate and control muscular activi ty such as locomotion.
Well developed theories enable the construction of models for the electrical
properties of nerve membranes in these processes, but there is little
understanding of the dynamical principles used by organisms. This project
investigates dynamical models of a small neural system consisting of fourteen
neurons that control rhythmic motions of the foregut of lobsters. This system is
used because it is small enough that unique properties of each neuron within the
system have been identified, but large enough that the network architecture of
the interactions among neurons is also important. The system displays a rich
repertoire of rhythmic behavior. The focus of this project is on features of the
behavior that involve different time scales. Mathematical theories have been
successful at describing universal properties of the dynamics observed in an
astounding array of physical and natural systems, but these theories need to be
extended to systems with more than one time scale. The goal is to construct
classifications of dynamical patterns that are the components from which the
complex behaviors of neural systems are formed. Models of these systems are also
complex. Computational investigations are required to predict their dynamical
behavior. This project seeks to implement algorithms that improve our ability to
extract useful information from the models and guide the improvement of their
fidelity. Both the theoretical analysis and the numerical methods that are
developed encompass all models of dynamical systems with multiple time scales
and can be used far beyond the context of the neural system that is the focus of
this study.