* 9705507
* Halogen Geochemistry and Cl Isotopes of the Stillwater      and Bushveld Complexes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* A. Boudreau, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9705507 Boudreau The Bushveld complex in South Africa is among the few
intrusions that contain extensive stratigraphic sections in which halogen-
bearing minerals are unusually rich in chlorine. This study has three major
objectives: 1) Because halogen geochemistry of the platiniferous Merensky Reef
of the Bushveld complex and associated marginal sills are still poorly known, we
propose to sample these rocks more completely to investigate the compositions of
halogen-bearing minerals using electron microprobe. The associated sills are of
particular interest as their compositions may preserve evidence of the original
halogen concentrations of Bushveld magma(s). 2) We propose to analyze and
compare stable Cl isotopic characteristics with existing data for Sr, O and H
isotopic trends for the Bushveld complex, their country rocks and associated
contemporaneous sills and dikes. Along with petrographic and field evidence,
this data should allow us to constrain models suggesting that high Cl is due to
a mantle fluxing event, contamination or metamorphic fluid infiltration from the
country rocks. 3) We will investigate possible correlations between PGE
(Platinum Group Elements) and halogens. Evolution of Cl-rich fluids from
intercumulus liquids could be a potentially useful transport mechanism for the
platinum-group elements (PGE). We will determine to what extent of background
PGE (to be analyzed by ICP-MS) , S , base metals and Cl are correlated. These
data will be combined with petrographic and geochemical studies, augmented with
quantitative modeling of degassing, PGE transport and mineral-liquid-fluid
equilibria, to test models of PGE transport and concentration.