* 9705264
* Notharctid Phylogeny:  Transitional Wasatchian-Bridgerian   Notharctines and the Relationships of Notharctus and        Smilodectes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Gregg Gunnell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2000
* USD 29,995.00

Non-human primates were once common in North America during the early and middle
Eocene (55 to 48 million years ago). One North American Eocene primate family is
the Notharctidae, animals similar to living lemurs now only found on Madagascar.
Three early Eocene genera and two common middle Eocene genera of notharctines
are presently known from North American. This proposal addresses a major issue
concerning the history of these animals, the relationships of the middle Eocene
genera Notharctus and Smilodectes. Despite being represented by some of the most
complete skeletons of fossil primates known, no consensus has developed
regarding the origin of these genera nor have their relationships ever been
fully established, either with one another or with other North American
notharctines. In order to more fully understand the relationships of Smilodectes
and Notharctus it is necessary to document changes in transitional notharctines
across the early to middle Eocene boundary. A careful analysis of the
relationships of these notharctines with the Asian primate Pondaungia (once
considered an anthropoid, now a potential notharctine) and with the more
recently described possible anthropoid Siamopithecus from Thailand may shed
light on notharctid relationships with anthropoids, the group that includes all
living monkeys, apes, and humans.