* 9705017
* Singular and Boundary Control of Multidimensional Diffusion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Michael Taksar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 140,988.00

9705017 Taksar The proposed research lies within the area of optimal stochastic
control. It deals with optimal control of diffusion processes by means of a free
boundary as well as optimal control at a reflection boundary of the stochastic
process. This type of control naturally appears in the problems in which there
is no natural restriction on the rates of control and the optimal control rates
are infinite. (This type of control model serves also as a good approximation
for the situations when the rates are bounded but very large.) The optimal
policy is then to reflect the process from an a priori unknown boundary. Natural
models where such type of action arises are related to the problems with
additive input, where there are no a priori limits on the control rates or as an
approximation for the problems with optimal policy of a "bang-bang" type. The
proposed research consists of developing the theory of the related PDE with
gradient constraints, studying optimal reflecting barriers in multidimensional
cases, and applying the results to different mechanical, manufacturing and
financial models. This research should provide a sound theoretical base for
developing optimal control algorithms for an automatic cruise control of a
missile subject to uncertain wind conditions or a space vehicle subject to small
perturbations in mechanical units. The developed technique will enable one to
calculate the position when the maximal correction force should be applied as
well as the optimal direction of this force. At the "ground level" this theory
will give a tool to derive optimal inventory levels for complex flexible
manufacturing systems as well as optimal timings for changes in the
manufacturing processes. In the financial world this theory will provide a
method for finding optimal levels of funds for financial companies whose assets
are subject to random fluctuations. For example, in the case of a large
insurance company whose liquid assets are constantly fluctuating due to
uncertainty in the times and amounts of incoming claims, it will be possible to
calculate the optimal level of the reserve which should be maintained in order
to have the optimal balance between the risk and profit potential.