* 9706057
* Multiple Recurrence and Convergence Along Polynomials in    Ergodic Ramsey Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 173,800.00

Abstract 9706057 Bergelson/Leibman This project will investigate problems of
multiple recurrence and convergence with the emphasis on the behavior of
dynamical systems along polynomials. The recurrence problems considered are tied
to problems in combinatorial number theory and set theory and the results can be
used to prove the existence of patterns with the conventional methods of
classical analysis, combinatorics and number theory fail to discern. The PIs
recently proved that the ergodic polynomial Szemeredi theorem extends to
operators generating a nilpotent group. This naturally leads to more general
questions and conjectures about multiple recurrence for nilpotent group actions.
This grant is to fund the study of the long term behavior of dynamical systems
and stochastic processes. Many important physical phenomena, as varied as the
behavior of the stock market, lines in the supermarket, and data being received
from a distant transmission source, exhibit locally erratic behavior which can
be understood better by looking at the long term average behavior instead. The
study of such stochastic processes and their connections with one another, as
well as their connections in terms of their fine structure with other less
random processes, is a central one in modern mathematics. It is only through
such studies that we will be able to understand better and thus be able to
control or predict the evolution of the physical phenomena which this
mathematics can model.