* 9706053
* Workshop:  The Frontiers of Applications of Photospectral   Holeburning to be held on February 16-19, l997 in Big Sky,  Montana
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Zameer Hasan, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 01/31/1998
* USD 8,000.00

9706053 Hasan A workshop entitled "The Frontiers of Applications of
Photospectral Holeburning" is proposed to discuss issues related to both, the
state of the applications of PSHB, as well as future directions in research,
education, and training required for the marketing of PSHB based technology. The
demonstrations of photospectral holeburning (PSHB) applications such as several
gigabits per square inch memory storage and fast page oriented image storage
with random frame access have established a definite superiority of this
emerging technology over the existing ones. There is now, more than ever, a need
to coordinate the activities of science, engineering, and technology community
to systematically approach well defined goals in order to bring the PSHB
technology to the marketplace. The proposed workshop is expected to foster an
atmosphere of collective and coordinated effort between system engineers,
optical scientists, material scientists, researchers and the end users at an
international level to form a strategy to develop and exploit the PSHB based
technology. In order to meet these goals selected 30-40 scientist and engineers
will be invited to this workshop to be convened in Big Sky, Montana, Feb.
16-19,1997. The meeting has been organized with a view to encourage
participation and to stimulate the interest of graduate students in the PSHB
research and technology to meet the future demand of a well educated and trained
research and development community. Several travel grants will be awarded to the
students participating in the workshop on a competitive basis. The workshop is
co-sponsored by NSF and AFOSR.