* 9706753
* Wavelets:  Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ingrid Daubechies, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2001
* USD 129,000.00

Daubechies ABSTRACT Daubechies will concentrate on several aspects of wavelet
algorithms and their applications: a) Riesz bases of wavelets on the sphere:
Recent constructions of wavelet algorithms on the sphere lead to good numerical
performance; so far no proof exists that they correspond to Riesz bases for the
square integrable functions on the sphere. Traditional methods for planar
constructions exploit translational invariance, absent for triangulations on the
sphere. b) Irregular subdivision schemes construct curves or surfaces from
irregular grids, placing new grid points in positions that are not equally
spaced (even locally) as the grids are refined. Similar to the equally spaced
case, preservation of polynomial behavior plays an important role in determining
the smoothness of the limit curve or surface. Such irregular subdivision schemes
are being explored. c) Approaches to decompose wavelet filters into elementary
matrices in an efficient manner, and possibly using only integers. d) Frames of
wavelets can be used for multiplexing of signals, similar to CDMA, as well as
for sending information efficiently over multiple channels. e) The role of smart
coding strategies in realizing the full potential of wavelet-based nonlinear
approximation theorems. Wavelets are a mathematical technique that allows us to
view a complex structure as consisting of several, increasingly detailed layers.
This "multi-resolution analysis" is analogous to viewing a painting from a
distance, where only large features can be distinguished, and then, as we
approach closer, perceiving more detailed, smaller features, until, when we are
very close, we can detect even individual brush strokes. As a mathematical tool
that has this potential to "fill in" detail at increasingly small scales, and
only where needed, wavelets have turned out to be useful in computer aided
graphic design, in image and data compression, and in mathematical analysis and
numerical computation, in particular for composite materials. Several of the
mathematical problems in this proposal are inspired by such applications of
wavelets, and their solutions will widen the scope of settings in which we can
use multi-resolution analysis.