* 9706954
* Mathematical Sciences:  Asymptotic Theory of Difference     Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Saber Elaydi, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 82,000.00

Elaydi Abstract Poincar -Perron's Theorem marks the beginning of the asymptotic
theory of scalar nonautonomous difference equations. However, this theorem is of
limited use due to two reasons. The first is the requirement that all
characteristic roots of the limiting equation have distinct moduli. The second
reason is that the theorem does not provide explicit asymptotic representations
of solutions of difference equations. Levinson's Theorem or rather its discrete
analogue addressed the second deficiency by providing the desirable asymptotic
representation of solutions of difference equations. However, Levinson's Theorem
puts a severe restriction on the coefficients of the difference equation in
question since it requires that they are summable. The latter condition makes
the applicability of the the theorem rather limited, particulaply in orthogonal
polynomials, combinatorics, special functions, and continued fractions. The
proposed research is directed toward addressing the deficiencies in the above
two important theorems. It will attempt to complete and unify asymptotic theory
using a unified approach via the theory of dichotomy. Difference equations are
one of the basic mathematical tools of computation. There is hardly a
computational task which does not rely on recursive techniques, at one time or
another. The widespread use of difference equations can be ascribed to their
intrinsic constructive quality, and the great ease with which they are amenable
to mechanization. On the other hand, like most recursive processes, difference
equations are susceptible to error growth. If conditions are unfavorable, the
resulting propagation of error may or will be disastrous. Hence the need to
investigate the asymptotic and qualitative behavior of solutions of difference
equations. This is of paramount importance since difference equations occur
prominently in many branches of applied mathematics, Economics, population
dynamics, Chaos Theory, mathematical physics, etc. Asymptotics is even more
important in Computer Science where it is used to rate algorithms and how fast
and accurate they are.