* 9706847
* Efficient, High Resolution, Numerical Methods for           Free-boundry Problems with Surface Tension
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/26/1999
* Elbridge Puckett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/26/1999
* USD 67,603.00

9706847 Sussman This research concerns the analysis and development of numerical
techniques for modeling solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations for two-phase
incompressible flow. This methodology is specifically targeted at problems
characterized by large density and viscosity jumps (e.g. air/water) and stiff,
singular source terms, such as those due to the surface tension force. Problems
with these features are extremely important in science and industry. Casting,
mold filling, thin film processes, extrusion, spray deposition and jets are just
a few examples. These problems present considerable challenges. Standard finite
difference methods can either be too dissipative or too oscillatory near regions
of large density variations. The resulting elliptic equation for enforcing the
divergence free condition on the velocity field (projection step) has
coefficients that exhibit a large jump at material interfaces. The resulting
elliptic equation will also have a widely varying source term at material
interfaces, since the divergence of the surface tension term will appear as a
singular source term for the projection equation. In this research, the
proposers plan to work in close collaboration with Dr. John Andrews of Xerox and
David Wallace of Microfab technologies in developing numerical methods for
modeling jetting devices. In an ink-jet device, it is important to study the
characteristics of droplet formation. Because surface tension plays a large role
in the droplet formation process, it is important for a numerical method to
accurately model the surface tension effects during break-up of a droplet. It is
also important for a numerical method to accurately predict the size of emitted
droplets. Currently an adaptive level set method and a second order volume-of-
fluid method have been developed for computing two-phase flows as characterized
above. Objectives of the proposed research include improved numerical modeling
of the interface between material boundaries and improved mo deling of surface
tension, especially at points of droplet break-up. In the process of this study,
the proposers will compare the behavior of the levelset method to that of the
volume of fluid method which use a very similar formulation for the surface
tension force. The proposers will also compare numerical solutions to solutions
obtained via asymptotic methods and drop experiments conducted by Xerox. This
research concerns the analysis and development of numerical techniques for
modeling incompressible two-phase flow (such as air and water). Problems in two-
phase flow are extremely important in science and industry. Casting, mold
filling, thin film processes, extrusion, spray deposition and jets are just a
few examples. In this research, the proposers plan to work in close
collaboration with Dr. John Andrews of Xerox and David Wallace of Microfab
technologies in developing numerical methods for modeling jetting devices. These
companies develop jetting devices used in ink-jet printers, solder deposition
and the fabrication of micro-optical elements. In a jetting device, it is
important to study the characteristics of droplet formation. Because surface
tension plays a large role in the droplet formation process, it is important for
a numerical method to accurately model the surface tension effects during break-
up of a droplet. It is also important for a numerical method to accurately
predict the size of emitted droplets. Objectives of the proposed research
include improved numerical modeling of the interface between material boundaries
and improved modeling of surface tension, especially at points of droplet break-
up. In the process of this study, the proposers will compare the behavior of the
computational method with drop experiments conducted by Xerox.