* 9706290
* Noble Gas Isotopes and the Origin of HIMU
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Alexander Halliday, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

9706290 Ballentine This study involves a detailed characterization of both the
noble gas and radiogenic isotopic composition of basalts from the classic HIMU
Cameroon volcanic chain. The radiogenic isotopic compositions (Pb, Sr, Nd, Hf)
in mantle-derived materials are encompassed by four end member compositions. One
of these, HIMU, is characterized by Pb isotopic values which are much more
radiogenic (higher time integrated U/Pb ratio) than any other mantle end member.
Models of terrestrial mantle evolution proposed to account for the origin of
HIMU include recycling of oceanic lithosphere, intramantle metasomatism and
delamination of lithospheric mantle. Resolving which of these models is correct
will profoundly affect our understanding of the evolution of the terrestrial
mantle. A key component in this resolution is the noble gas isotopic composition
of the HIMU source. In the simplest case the 3He/4He ratio of a degassed and U
enriched (relative to upper mantle) recycled portion of oceanic crust will
rapidly become very much lower than portions of the mantle enriched in U by
metasomatism. The distinction between subducted oceanic crust and intramantle
sources however, may become blurred by either mixing of ambient upper mantle
with HIMU basalts, or diffusive equilibration of He within the protolith. By
relating the 3He/4He composition with the radiogenic isotopes we hope to
constrain these processes. The Cameroon line samples will therefore enable us to
characterize the noble gas composition and hence the origin of this HIMU source.