* 9706011
* Plio-Pleistocene History of River Incision and Catchment    Erosion From Cosmogenic 26 AL and 10 BE in Cave Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Darryl Granger, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2000
* USD 170,000.00

9706011 Granger The rate and pattern of river incision through bedrock
determines how landscapes evolve in response to their tectonic and climatic
environment. Understanding long-term river incision processes is important for
understanding landform evolution, patterns of tectonic uplift, the geomorphic
record of climate change, and the environmental impacts of land use and dam
construction. However, because long-term river incision rates have previously
been very difficult to measure, river downcutting rates remain poorly
constrained, and theoretical models of river incision remain largely untested.
Recently, cosmogenic nuclide techniques have provided new tools for estimating
both long-term river incision rates and catchment erosion rates. It is now
possible to infer detailed histories of river incision and catchment erosion
rate over timescales relevant to river profile evolution. This project uses
comogenic 26Al and 10Be in river sediments preserved in caves alongside the
Green River, Kentucky, to infer the history of river incision and catchment
erosion over the past 5 million years. Because caves provide an environment
protected from erosion, cave sediments may be left undisturbed for millions of
years. The Green River flows alongside numerous caves, including the Mammoth
Cave system, by far the world's largest cave system with over 500 km of surveyed
passage. These caves are a vast repository of river sediment, recording the
river's incision history over the past 5-10 million years. Intense sampling of
the Mammoth Cave system sediments will allow a detailed reconstruction of river
incision and catchment erosion over the past 5 million years, a timespan which
includes several major climate changes. Additional sampling along the length of
the Green River will allow a study of the river's longitudinal profile evolution
over the same timespan. These data will provide a record of river incision and
catchment erosion unprecedented in its scope and detail. This research is des
igned to explore the influence of sediment supply on river incision, by
simultaneously measuring both catchment erosion (the source of river sediment)
and river downcutting rates. It should also help clarify the influence of
climate change on river downcutting and landscape evolution. This study should
provide much-needed data to test and constrain the most fundamental hypotheses
of river incision through bedrock.