* 9706695
* Mathematical Sciences:  Studies in Orthogonal Polynomials   and Approximation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Paul Nevai, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2001
* USD 126,000.00

Nevai Abstract Nevai plans to continue his research in approximation theory,
orthogonal polynomials, and related areas of analysis involving various extremal
problems, ordinary and generalized polynomial inequalities, difference and
differential equations, spectral theory of real, complex, and matrix-valued
Jacobi, Hessenberg, and banded matrices, Toeplitz and Hankel forms, and Hilbert
space operators. In addition, he will continue working on his "Orthogonal
Polynomials" software project in Mathematica and on numerical aspects of
orthogonal polynomials. The primary focus of his research will be concentrated
on three areas: orthogonal polynomials on the unit circle and on arcs of the
unit circle, generalized polynomials and polynomial inequalities, and linear
difference equations and growth of their solutions. Approximation theory and
orthogonal polynomials form an essential part of mathematical analysis in the
sense that (i) they provide theoretical foundations for real life applications
of various results in "pure" mathematics, and that (ii) they yield a natural
bridge between theory and practice. The extraordinary usefulness of orthogonal
polynomials stems from the facts that among others (i) they are easily
computable by a stable three term recursion formula, (ii) they are a natural
medium for expanding "general" functions into well behaved series, and that
(iii) their zeros are especially suitable for interplation and quadrature
processes. Quadrature processes enable one to evaluate very complicated
expressions involving integrals with high degree of precision. The primary
subject of this proposal, that is, extensions of Szego's theory of orthogonal
polynomials, is especially useful for theses purposes. The proposer hopes to
find efficient methods with solid theoretical foundations.