* 9706982
* Mathematical Sciences:  Operator Algebras and               Noncommutative Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Alexander Kumjian, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 90,000.00

Abstract Blackadar The investigators propose to continue work on a range of
problems concerning the structure of operator algebras and noncommutative
algebraic topology. Specific topics to be studied are: structure of inductive
limits of C*-algebras, structure of groupoids and their C*-algebras, nonstable
K-theory and the fundamental comparability question, and existence and
properties of cohomology theories on C*-algebras. If one takes the point of view
that a space may be studied via the commutative C*-algebra of complex-valued
continuous functions on the space, then the study of noncommutative C*-algebras
is a natural generalization. Furthermore, there are numerous situations in
ordinary geometry and topology where the natural object of study is a "singular
space" which often cannot be studied directly in purely topological terms, but
where there is a noncommutative C*-algebra which plays the exact role of the
algebra of functions, and where C*-algebra theory has been a crucial tool in
advancing the understanding of the topological situation. There has been
extensive work in recent years in generalizing notions of algebraic topology,
and more recently related notions of differential geometry, to C*-algebras. This
work has already paid off spectacularly with fundamental advances in the
understanding of the structure of C*-algebras, as well as the beautiful and deep
applications in geometry, topology, and mathematical physics. Perhaps the most
important result, though, is simply the bridge which has been constructed
between operator algebras and topology, and the broad new level of understanding
of the interconnections. Virtually all of the research the proposers have done
in recent years fits into this general picture of noncommutative topology. The
specific projects proposed are continuations or natural outgrowths of previous
work, taking into account the way the subject as a whole has developed.