* 9706842
* I. Stability of Waves in Viscous Conservation Laws.         II.  Phase Transitions and Minimal Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Kevin Zumbrun, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 80,644.00

9107990 Zumbrun Kevin Zumbrun proposes several projects originating from fluid
dynamics. These concern structure and stability of interfacial solutions arising
in singular limit problems, specifically SHOCK WAVES and PHASE BOUNDARIES.
Stability is a central topic in shock wave theory, connected with such issues as
physical admissibility of hyperbolic waves, convergence of difference schemes,
and the inviscid limit problem. Zumbrun proposes to study a variety of related
questions, from stability of multidimensional viscous shock waves in
compressible Navier-Stokes equations to physical significance of oscillatory
shock layers in a nonlocal, dispersive sedimentation model. The planned methods
of analysis include, among others, pointwise, Green's function techniques which
have proved to be useful in other situations of delicate stability, spectral
analysis using matrix perturbation theory, and Evans function techniques
borrowed from the study of reaction diffusion fronts. Likewise, structure of
phase boundaries is a central topic in the study of phase transitions. In the
limit of zero transition layer thickness, Cahn-Hilliard models for phase
transition reduce to idealized minimal surface problems, and the phase
boundaries to minimal surfaces. This link is a rich source of intuition,
suggesting new problems in both the geometry and pde setting. Zumbrun proposes
several of these for study, most notably the regularity of "Neumann" solutions
for the minimal surface problem. The planned method of analysis is by a
combination of pde and geometric measure theory techniques. The behavior and
structure of interfaces is a topic of basic physical interest, as the organizing
principle for a variety of effects seen in nature. For example, soap bubbles are
well known to form minimum interfacial energy structures identified by the
property that they have minimal surface area. These are also STABLE under small
perturbations , by the principle that systems move always toward lower-energy
states, in this case back toward the minimal energy configuration. At the same
time, the large-scale distribution of matter in the visible universe seems to
have a similar structure, with vast voids surrounded by thin layers of galaxies.
Apparently, we live on an interface--evidently, also, the minimization of quite
different energies can lead to similar structure through a common mathematical
mechanism. The examples given above are just two instances of the interfaces
known as PHASE BOUNDARIES. Other important interfaces are SHOCK WAVES, or moving
boundaries separating substances of very different properties (most usually, a
"front" separating air of very different temperature or pressure). Like phase
boundaries, these are ubiquitous in nature, from sonic booms to "waves" of
concentration in a chemical reaction. Again, it is stability or instability that
determines whether a particular shock structure will persist or break up. The
mathematics governing stability of interfaces is rather subtle and is by no
means completely understood. Indeed, the projects proposed by Zumbrun concern
basic theoretical questions that must be answered before we can confidently
pursue practical applications such as computer modeling of these phenomena in
the variety of settings to which they pertain.