* 9706621
* (SGER) Small Grant for Exploratory Research on Mixed Matrix Reactively Intercalated Composite Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1998
* William Koros, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ
* 03/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9706621 Proposal Type: SGER Principal Investigator:
William J. Koros Affiliation: University of Texas at Austin This grant is
awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the
Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. William Koros of the
University of Texas at Austin. The objective of the proposal is to develop
composite membranes containing a molecular sieving material ( zeolites) embedded
in polymeric media. While zeolites have the shape and size selectivity potential
to separate gases, they are inorganic materials and hard to fabricate into
flexible membranes. Incorporating them into polymeric materials allows
fabrication of various membrane configurations including the hollow-fiber
configuration the PI proposes to use. However, a new problem comes in, as
defects and voids between the zeolite crystallites and the polymer matrix lead
to species bypass of the selective medium. The PI proposes to repair these
membranes by caulking these voids by carrying out a post membrane fabrication
treatment, where a monomer is allowed to diffuse into the voids and then a
polymer is generated to seal the voids. It is hypothesized that once these voids
are caulked, the only route for gas transport is through the zeolite channels,
thereby imposing the required selectivity. The project entails high risk, but
the potential benefits are tremendous. Composite membranes containing zeolites
have tremendous potential in gas separations. There is a need for flexible
zeolite based membranes. The PI's work on incorporating zeolites in polymer
matrices and modifying the membrane so that transport occurs only in the zeolite
micropores is interesting both from a scientific and an industrial perspective.
The question of membrane optimization through post-treatment is an important
one.