* 9706835
* Probabilistic Approach in the Local Theory of Banach Spaces and Convex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Mark Rudelson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 46,811.00

9706835 Rudelson Probabilistic methods constitute a very rapidly developing
field of Convex Geometry and Local Theory of Banach spaces. Recent results in
this area are connected in particular to the majorizing measure approach,
introduced by Talagrand. This method enabled the solution of several deep
problems in Combinatorics, Harmonic Analysis, and Convex Geometry. This work
will continue investigation of constructions of majorizing measures as well as
study possible applications of this method to concrete problems of Local Theory
and Harmonic Analysis. Another direction is related to the study of convex
bodies which are not necessary symmetric. This is a new project inspired by
recent progress in generalization of the results of the Local Theory to star-
shaped bodies. It turned out to be possible to prove the most important results
of the Local Theory, including inverse Santalo and Brunn-Minkowski inequalities,
for p-convex bodies. Unlike p-convex symmetric bodies, in the case of general
convex bodies almost nothing is known. The basic technical tools, which work for
convex and p-convex symmetric bodies, do not work any more if general convex
bodies are considered. Moreover, the known facts about non-symmetric convex
bodies suggest that there might be a significant difference between their
properties and the properties of symmetric bodies.The aim of the project is to
construct a theory of general convex bodies which is parallel to the existing
theory of convex symmetric bodies. Convex Geometry is a field of Mathematics
which studies the properties of convex bodies of high dimension. This includes
finding sections of a given body with certain nice properties, computing the
volume of a body, approximating a convex body by another one having a better
structure, etc. While these problems cannot be solved in general by an explicit
construction, it is often possible to show that a randomly chosen section or a
random modification of a body has the desired prop erties. This approach enables
the reduction of the analytic and geometric problems to the investigation of the
behavior of a certain random process. The project will concentrate on developing
a method to analyze such processes and on the investigation of the structure of
general convex bodies. The results obtained in this direction are applicable to
various problems in Harmonic Analysis and Banach Space theory as well as in
Computer Science, like construction of effective optimization algorithms and
fast computation of the volumes of convex bodies.