* 9706082
* An Experimental Study of River Incision Into Bedrock:  The  Role of Sediment Supply
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 150,001.00

9706082 Dietrich River incision into bedrock is the crucial process linking
tectonic and geomorphic processes, yet our understanding of the controls on
incision rates is very limited. Few field studies have been conducted and no
experimental observations have been systematically collected. Most studies
assume that incision rate is proportional to a stream power or boundary shear
stress, and implicitly assume that sediment supply influence on incision rate is
simply proportional to drainage area. Gilbert (1877) proposed, however, that
with increasing sediment supply there is an erosion optimum for a given
transport capacity above which incision rates decline due to increasing
shielding of the bed by particles. We present a quasi-mechanistic model for
abrasion by saltation which supports the Gilbert hypothesis, but which also
identifies another erosion optimum. As the transport capacity increases for a
given sediment supply, the mode of particle movement shifts towards suspension.
If bed particles are sufficiently fine, high transport capacity may lead to
reduced incision due to reduced contact with the bed. We propose to conduct a
set of three experiments using two unique flumes built specifically for the
purpose of exploring the role of abrasion on river incision. The first two
experiments will use a 8.5 m long, 12cm wide, 1.3 m deep flume filled with
highly erodable artificial bedrock made of weak concrete. The first experiment
will address the question of what controls the extent of alluvial cover over a
channel underlain by bedrock. A series of experimental runs will be conducted
with unerodable and erodable beds to identify under what combinations of
sediment load and transport capacity the bed turns fully or partially alluvial.
This is a necessary first experiment to understand sediment supply effects on
incision rate, but it also should provide critical insight about what sets the
pattern of bedrock, mixed bedrock and alluvial, and fully alluvial beds in
rivers. The secon d experiment will test the Gilbert erosion optimum hypothesis
and the optimum transport capacity hypothesis. A large number of short
experimental runs will be conducted in which sediment supply, discharge, slope,
particle size and bed resistance to abrasion are systematically varied and
bedrock erosion rate is quantified. Numerous runs are necessary because of the
expected parabolic relationships between erosion rate and sediment transport for
a given transport capacity and between erosion rate and transport capacity for a
given sediment supply. The third experiment, which will run simultaneously with
the other two, will test whether abrasion rate of natural and artificial river
beds varies with compressive strength. We will use two 35 cm diameter
cylindrical abrasion mills to test at least 24 samples obtained from the field
and from the first two laboratory experiments. If abrasion correlates with
compressive strength across a broad range of values then we can extrapolate our
experimental results to field scales more successfully, and field measurements
of compressive strength can be compared quantitatively to rates of bedrock
abrasion. If these experiments prove successful they will form the foundation
for further experiments directed at the role of channel width, tributary
additions of sediment load, and variable rates of base-level lowering on bedrock
channel longitudinal development. More importantly, they would provide the first
quantitative evidence for the role of sediment supply in river incision, give
insight for a more mechanistic erosion law, provide guidance for quantitative
field studies of river incision, and offer a tool for relating field
measurements of rock strength to rates of incision.