* 9706385
* Geophysical Surveys of an Emerging Polity on the Euphrates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Anne Porter, Euphrates Archaeology Inc
* Fixed Amount Award
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 22,232.00

The Tell Banat settlement complex is located on the left bank of the Euphrates
river in Syria and will soon be inundated by the flood waters of a recently
constructed dam. The site dates to the first half of the third millennium BC and
has been the focus of excavation by Dr. McClellan and his team for five field
seasons. Over the course of this work the team has discovered two `monuments`-
features which are extremely rare in the Near east. The first is a single man-
made mound approximately 20 meters high and conical in shape. Its corrugated
surface has a step-like appearance. The top of a second structure was found in
the middle of the site beneath an extensive public complex. While the purpose of
these monuments is still unclear it is likely that they operated as high places
or loci for cultic activities, similar to later temples in Mesopotamia or as
grave markers. It is quite likely that they served the function of dolmen or
burial mound and that further excavation will reveal interior burial chambers of
megalithic construction. With NSF support Dr. McClellan and collaborators will
conduct a geophysical survey in an attempt to locate such underground
structures. Both conductivity and magnetometer surveys will be conducted. The
prime goal is to locate underground earthen and stone features and the two
techniques compliment each other. Conductivity survey is particularly good at
locating contrasts between different soil types and some structures are
constructed of materials significantly different from the surrounding earth.
Magnetic survey is excellent for locating fired earth features such as ceramic
kilns or rooms which have been destroyed by fire. Given the imminent destruction
of the site such survey is necessary to focus the limited time left for
excavation. The underlying goal of the project is to gain insight into the
processes which gave rise to civilization in the Near East. Archaeological
evidence has indicated that both settled agriculturists and nomadic or semi-
nomadic pastoralists were present throughout this period. Because settled
peoples usually leave more permanent and visible remains prehistorians have
focused primarily on their role in the civilization process and pastoralists
have been generally ignored. Evidence indicates that Tell Banat was primarily a
pastoral site and the monuments may in fact reflect the same process evidenced
in agricultural regions. McMlellan postulates that the dynamic which led to
civilization in the Near East is more complicated than most archaeologists
realize and that the pastoralist input has been underestimated. The information
collected at Tell Banat is directly relevant to this question. This research is
important because it will increase our understanding of how complex
civilizations arise. It will rescue from imminent destruction important
archaeological information.