* 9706871
* CREST:  Center for Innovative Manufacturing of Advanced     Materials
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2004
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Cooperative Agreement
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 02/29/2004
* USD 4,103,230.00

Tuskegee University proposes to establish a Center for Innovative Manufacturing
of High Performance Materials based on a strong foundation in materials research
developed over two decades. The activities of the proposed NSF/CREST Center will
be directed towards achieving the following objectives: Diversify existing
research in high performance composite materials. Provide additional training in
mathematics and science and exposure to the areas of materials science and
engineering to minority middle and high school students by involving them in
various pre-college programs. Increase the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students in the research of high performance materials. Launch a
doctoral program in Materials Science and Engineering. Advanced Materials
Research: The proposed Center will address the critical issues related to the
manufacturing of affordable, high performance, and rapidly fabricated liquid
molded composites. These composite materials and structures are primary
candidates for defense and commercial applications. The research is divided into
four major components: 1. Chemical synthesis and analysis of resins for liquid
molding; 2. Innovative resin transfer/resin infusion molding and non-destructive
evaluation; 3. Performance modeling and simulation, and 4. Static and dynamic
performance evaluation and failure analysis. The researchers involved with the
proposed Center will actively collaborate with their counterparts from several
research universities, industry, and national laboratories. An extensive
collaboration already exists as part of on- going research efforts and the
research activities of the proposed Center is expected to further strengthen
them. Undergraduate students will take part in the research activities through
the research experience for undergraduates (REU) program built into the research
components. Pre-College Programs: The proposed Center will recruit, m otivate
and train minority students in the field of science and engineering starting at
an early age. The pre-college programs that will be offered with support from
this grant and matching funds from industry include Saturday Academy (for 8th
-12th graders during the academic year), Pre- Freshman Enrichment Program (six
week summer program for 8th - 10th graders), Minority Introduction to
engineering (one week summer program for 11th graders), Research Apprenticeship
for Disadvantaged High Schoolers (eight week summer program for 11th graders)
and Analytical Chemistry Program (eight week summer program for 10th and 11th
graders). A one week summer institute for teachers will also be held as part of
these programs. Doctoral Program: The development and implementation of Ph.D.
programs represents one of the key strategic directions authorized recently by
the Board of Trustees of Tuskegee University. The establishment of a Ph.D.
program in Materials Science and Engineering at Tuskegee University will be
spearheaded by the proposed Center. The Center's role in the Ph.D. Program is
primarily to provide access to the students to the state-of-the-art research in
materials science and engineering. This will be the first doctoral program
offered at Tuskegee University.