* 9706259
* Extreme Flood-Producing Storms:  Case Studies Using         the WSR-88D Radar Network
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2000
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2000
* USD 140,000.00

9706259 Smith Hydrologic and hydrometeorolgical analyses will be carried out for
12 storms and their associated floods. Analyses will be modeled after studies of
the Rapidan Storm flooding of June 27, 1995 along the east slope of the Virginia
Blue Ridge (see Smith et al., Catastrophic rainfall from an upslope thunderstorm
in the central Appalachians, Water Resources Research, 1996). In particular,
hydrometeorological analyses for each event will be based on volume scan
reflectivity and Doppler observations from the network of WSR-88D (Weather
Surveillance Radar-1988 Doppler) radars. For each event, rain gage and
streamflow data sets will be compiled and used, together with radar and
conventional meteorological observations, to construct atmospheric and land
surface water budgets. Lagrangian analyses of storm structure, motion and
evolution will also be carried out for each of the 12 storms. These analyses
will be used to examine the dominant storm-scale properties for heavy rain-fall
production. Drainage basin characteristics for the regions affected by extreme
flooding exhibit striking contrasts for the events to be studied, ranging from
the low-gradient environment of southeastern Texas, to the high-gradient central
Appalachian region, to heavily urbanized catchments. Events include the Dallas
Hailstorm, which resulted in 16 flash flood deaths during a period of
approximately 1 hour, Hurricane Fran, which produced 500 year magnitude flood
peaks in high-gradient basins of the central Appalachians, and the southeastern
Texas storms of October 1994 that produced catastrophic flooding in Kickapoo
Creek and downstream sections of the Trinity River basin.