* 9706116
* Outcrop Characterization of Heterogeneity: Explicit         Linkage of Hydrological and Sedimentological Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Michael Campana, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2001
* USD 119,991.00

9706116 Smith Field sedimentological and hydrological studies of outcrop analogs
for heterogeneous aquifers provide conceptualizations of heterogeneity
unrealized by subsurface information and provide a means for assessing the
validity and performance of popular stochastic models based on interpolation of
well data. The approach, widely used for decades in the hydrocarbon industry,
has seen little application to hydrological problems. Sedimentological studies
of well-exposed rift-basin alluvium will be complemented by in-situ measurements
of permeability, thus permitting designation of hydrofacies with defined
hydraulic conductivity, shape, and boundaries that are linked with lithofacies
whose distribution is related to depositional processes that formed the aquifer
material. Outcrop data will be used to formulate a three-dimensional model of
heterogeneity at the scale of typical subsurface-contaminant-migration
scenarios. The study-site stratigraphy will also be simulated by geostatistical
techniques using measured sections as conditioning data in much the same way as
well data are used to condition subsurface models. The predictive ability of the
simulation will be gauged by comparison to the outcrop data. The outcrop model
will be subjected to flow simulations for varying scales (meters to tens of
meters) of outcrop-defined heterogeneity to evaluate the quantity and type of
data required for high-resolution prediction of flow paths and rates. The
depositional environment selected for outcrop characterization is especially
important for understanding aquifer heterogeneity in extensional basins of the
southwestern United States, where studies to date have not adequately described
the sedimentological characteristics that are of hydrogeological importance. The
largest volume of clastic detritus deposited in asymmetric extensional basins is
delivered from the hanging wall to the master fault. These alluvial-slope facies
are the least well known deposits in rift basins. This projec t will produce the
first outcrop analog for aquifer characteristics of alluvial-slope deposits by
providing detailed three dimensional documentation of hydrofacies permeability,
shape, and boundaries within an extraordinarily well exposed basin-fill sequence
in the northern Rio Grande rift of New Mexico.