* 9706330
* Collaborative Research:  The History of Degassing and       Differentiation of the Bishop Tuff Rhyolitic Magna
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Andrew Davis, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 123,500.00

9706330 Anderson This study aims to document the physical and chemical evolution
of a large body of silica-rich magma (Bishop Tuff) that erupted about 0.76
million years ago in east-central California. New field work provides a
stratigraphical framework that permits evaluation of space-time relations
between differentiation, ascent, crystallization and eruption of the magma. The
collaborators will analyze submillimeter-sized glass and hourglass inclusions
(eruptively quenched melt) in volcanic phenocrysts for major, minor, and trace
elements in addition to volatile species H2O and CO2 and isotopes of argon,
strontium and neodymium. They will also analyze feldspar crystals paying
particular attention to trace element and isotopic zonations so as to associate
age of crystallization with pressure of crystallization, melt and magma
composition as well as time and sequence of eruption. A main goal is to test the
idea that argon and CO2 correlate as a result of degassing and reveal
interaction of magma with meteoric water that contained dissolved air.
Undergraduate students and young scientists will participate in the project and
gain experience in research and collaboration. The results will constrain
concepts regarding how such large bodies of silicic magma form, develop density
and composition gradients, and erupt. The results will have significant
implications for the role of silicic magmatism in the degassing and evolution of
continental crust.