* 9706980
* Fitness and Function of Oxygen Saturation Genotypes in Tibet
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Cynthia Beall, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2003
* USD 270,201.00

Human populations inhabit a broad range of environments. Certainly one of the
most challenging of these environments is the high altitude region of the
world's highest mountain ranges. It has been of considerable scientific interest
to determine if populations long residing at these high altitudes have
accommodated the stress of reduced oxygen pressure biologically during their
sojourn in these regions. While many previous studies have evaluated the
biological variation and adaptation of populations living at high altitude, the
question of whether these groups are characterizied by genetic adaptations to
the stresses of altitude has proven difficult to resolve. Recent research
indicates that among the Tibetan population of the Autonomous Region of China
residing in villages above 4,000m, a single major gene may act to enhance oxygen
saturation of arterial hemoglobin in carriers. Moreover, preliminary data also
suggest that individuals possessing this gene not only exhibit greater oxygen
saturation of blood, but are characterized by greater reproductive fitness. This
research project is aimed at testing the hypothesis that Tibetan women from high
altitude populations who possess at least one copy of the putative high oxygen
saturation gene also exhibit higher reproductive rates than those who do not.
The project will also test the hypothesis of better adaptive integration of
oxygen transport, immune and endocrine system function in Tibetan populations
living at different high altitude elevations. This research expands the focus on
oxygen transport at high altitude to measure the consequences of genetically
influenced variation in physiological response to lowered oxygen pressure in
terms of demographic and biological outcomes. It will provide the first detailed
profile of the immune, endocrine, and cardiorespiratory systems and their
integration from adolescence through old age among people living under hypoxic
stress. The proposed research also broadens the study of human genetic
adaptation by using formal analytic models for quantitative adaptive traits. The
application of statistical genetic analytical techniques analyzes a
hypothetically adaptive trait by decomposing its underlying genetic determinants
and formally testing its association with fitness and function.