* 9706467
* ESH - Completion of a North-South Transect of Glacial       Paleotemperatures Along the Americas Derived from Noble     Gases Dissolved in Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2001
* USD 325,729.00

9706467 Stute One of the key questions in paleoclimate research is the degree of
symmetry and the mechanisms of climate change on both hemispheres. We plan to
address this issue by improving the continental climate record for the last
glacial period in South America. We will primarily use the concentrations of
atmospheric noble gases dissolved in 14C dated groundwater which is used as
archive of climate change. We request funds for collection and evaluation of
geochemical data (He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, 14C, 13C, D, 18O, 34S, 3H and major
dissolved ions) from two groundwater flow systems in South America, the Botucatu
aquifer in Brazil, and the Bahia Blanca aquifer in Argentina. Noble gas
paleotemperature records from these aquifers will provide quantitative
reconstruction of paleotemperatures for South America covering the past 35,000
years. These two records will complete a glacial paleotemperature north-south
transect along the Americas based on 'noble gas temperatures' archived in
groundwater flow systems. The transect will (1) allow us to address the
interhemipheric symmetry of long-term climate change, (2) provide a firmer
footing for presently used paleoclimatic proxies, and (3) help us to better
understand the coupling of climate change between the northern and southern
hemispheres. This work contributes directly to the goals of IGBP through PEP I,
a subprogram of PAGES. Additionally, we request funds for studies of some new
methodological aspects of noble gas thermometry which were documented in the
framework of our previous paleoclimate studies.