* 9706825
* Maximal Averages Over Hypersurfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/04/1999
* Alex Iosevich, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/04/1999
* USD 51,528.00

ABSTRACT Iosevich The purpose of this project is to analyze various operators
that arise in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations associated
with the convex finite type hypersurfaces. The main focus of the project is the
study of the maximal averaging operators introduced by E. M. Stein, and the
averaging convolution operators originally studied by Littman and Strichartz.
Iosevich proposes a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for the Lp
boundedness of maximal averaging operators, and a set of necessary and
sufficient conditions for the (Lp, Lq) boundedness of the averaging convolution
operators. Both sets of conditions are expressed in terms of the integrability
of the negative powers of the distance functions to the tangent planes to the
hypersurface. Iosevich will also work on the problem of Lp boundedness of the
maximal Bochner-Riesz means associated with the smooth convex bodies in Rn. It
has been conjectured that these operators should have the same mapping
properties as the standard maximal Bochner-Riesz means associated with the ball.
The study of the maximal averaging operators and other similar operators in
harmonic analysis is partially motivated by the following interesting question:
How close can we come to recovering a set of data from the various kinds of
averages of that data? The question is of potential practical value since
scientists are often called upon to make predictions based on average
information. For example, meteorologists make predictions about the rainfall in
the particular location based on the average rainfall in the years past in the
nearby towns. Seismologists make earthquake predictions based on the pattern of
shocks in the surrounding area. The tradeoff involved in the study of these
phenomena is, roughly speaking, the following. If the data is very precise, then
it can, generally speaking, be recovered from any kind of a reasonable average.
If the data is less pre cise, then we have to make sure that the averaging
process compensates the deficiencies of the data. The main thrust of this
project is to study the averaging phenomenon when the data is given by a certain
kind of a mathematical function, and the average is taken over a curved surface.