* 9706951
* Dynamic Control and Parametric Resonance in Hydrodynamic    Systems:  A Theoretical, Computational, and Experimental    Investigation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Juan Lopez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2000
* USD 94,000.00

9706961 Lopez and Shen This project is to study dynamic control and parametric
excitations in hydrodynamic systems and to examine the interplay between
parametric resonance and stabilization/destabilization of
transitions/bifurcations, through an integrated program of analysis, computation
and experiment. Two basic flow sets, namely the Taylor-Couette flow and vortex
breakdown flow, have been chosen in order to develop a general understanding of
the complex hydrodynamics and control strategies. These generic flows are
attractive because the degree of complexity can be precisely controlled by
relatively simple changes in the flow state or boundary conditions, and at the
same time they possess rich dynamics which are representative of a wide class of
general hydrodynamic systems that may respond to dynamic control in a complex
manner. In particular, these classes of flows may respond resonantly to the
parametric excitation of the applied control. An investigation of the behavior
of these generic flows will help to form a better understanding of more general
time-dependent hydrodynamic systems. The interplay between dynamic control
mechanisms and parametric resonance will be investigated using (linear) Floquet
theory as a first step in understanding the dynamics at the point of transition
or bifurcation. Flows beyond the validity of the Floquet analysis will be
studied using three different nonlinear computational approaches, each with
distinct advantages and limitations. Their combined implementation is capable of
resolving a wide range of problems and addressing distinct issues within each
problem. The results from the experiment will be used to refine the analysis and
control implementation. This research will not only result in a deeper
understanding of the complex spatio-temporal dynamics of hydrodynamic systems,
but will also make a significant practical impact. For example, in the
aerodynamics industry, the control strategies will aid in drag reduction a nd
reduced fatigue due to aero-acoustic structural resonances; in fact, parametric
excitation in the form of span-wise oscillations of the boundary has recently
been demonstrated experimentally to reduce drag in turbulent boundary layers by
researchers at the University of Texas and others. In the materials and chemical
processing industries, many of the manufacturing processes rely on an effective
control of transitions and instabilities. The new fundamental and practical
insights on control dynamics of complex systems anticipated from this research
can provide U.S. industry with a competitive edge.