* 9706836
* Mathematical Sciences:  Complex Integral Geometry           and Analysis at Flag Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Simon Gindikin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 83,001.00

Absract Gindikin At the focus of the project there are 2 aspects of integral
geometry. First, it is the analysis in flag domains which extends the analysis
in noncompact Hermitian symmetric spaces. The first step is the definition of
analogs of elementary functions which we call the determinant functions. The
well known examples of such functions are the norm-functions for symmetric
domains (or Jordan algebras), but for flag domains there is a richer collection
of new functions. Using these functions we hope to obtain several explicit
formulas and results: descriptions of Stein neighborhood of Riemann symmetric
spaces where it might be possible to holomorphically extend solutions of the
Schmid equations, parametrizations of complex cycles in flag domains,
generalizations of the Hua - Poisson integrals and the Hua equations for them,
their computations on the language of integral geometry and multidimensional
residues, the generalized Penrose transform etc. The essential role in these
constructions are played by the boundary values of the cohomology in nonconvex
tube domains. Another direction in this project is an axiomatic of the method of
horospheres and its applications. Several years ago in the process of solving
the Gelfand problem I gave some axiomatic conditions on a family of submanifolds
of a complex manifold providing an explicit local inversion formula of the
corresponding problem of integral geometry. These conditions are satisfied for
the horospheres on complex semisimple Lie groups, and it is the way to invert
the horospherical transform without using group structures. Now we extend this
axiomatic in such a way that it becomes possible to invert the horospherical
transform for some nonsymmetric homogeneous manifold. The integral geometry is a
direction of geometric analysis which connects analysis on manifolds with
geometrical structures on them. The philosophy of integral geometry is that
there are geometrical structures more general than group invariance which give a
base for the development of a rich multidimensional analysis with important
applications to analysis on homogeneous manifolds, complex analysis, nonlinear
differential equations , mathematical physics, etc. Integral geometry is a
theoretical base of computer tomography.