* 9706883
* Oscillatory Sums and Radon - Fourier Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Konstantin Oskolkov, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 86,574.00

Oskolkov will continue his investigations of oscillatory sums and integrals
involving imaginary exponentials of real algebraic polynomials. The coefficients
of the polynomials are considered as independent real variables. These sums and
integrals establish interconnections between such apparently distant fields as
Harmonic Analysis, Analytic Number Theory and Partial Differential Equations. He
will also elaboratee on Radon-Fourier analysis for functions of several
variables. Special emphasis will be made on associated problems of ridge
approximation, which consist in selection of best fit linear combinations of
planar wave type functions. These problems are of highly non-linear nature,
especially with respect to optimal selection of wave vectors. Immediate
ramifications of such research include neural network models that have found
wide applications in industry, engineering, computer science, finance and
medicine. The Radon transform is an acknowledged powerful tool in several
applied areas ranging from classical quantum mechanics and optics to X-ray
tomography. In computational X-ray tomography, ridge approximation can be
interpreted as reconstruction of images of non-homogeneities such as tumors.
Another extremely different field is recognition of main trends in evolution of
large systems such as bacteria populations or the stock market, where an
enormous number of variables must be modeled.