* 9706018
* Complex Dynamics and Classification of Algebraic Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Gregery Buzzard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract Buzzard 9706018 This project has three components. The first component
is the study of the dynamics of polynomial maps of two variables. The primary
goal of this component is to show that the topological notion of Omega stability
is equivalent to the analytic notion of hyperbolicity. Similar programs have led
to a great deal of activity and many new results in the fields of one complex
variable dynamics and real dynamics. The second component is the study of
polynomial mappings of three variables using techniques of pluripotential
theory. Pluripotential theory has been an effective tool in the study of the
dynamics of polynomial mappings of one and two variables. The main goal of this
component is to determine the extent to which this tool can be applied to higher
dimensional polynomial diffeomorphisms, whose dynamics have been studied very
little. The third component is the classification of algebraic surfaces in terms
of a weak notion of hyperbolicity. The main goal of this component is to show
that the existence of a rank-two holomorphic map from complex 2-space to an
algebraic surface is equivalent to the existence of a Zariski dense image of the
complex plane. The main focus of this project is the study of iterated maps,
which are mathematical abstractions for processes which are repeated many times.
Such repeated processes are commonly found in many diverse fields. For instance,
many biological processes, such as DNA replication, are simple procedures which
are repeated many times. More directly related to the current project is the
notion of a genetic algorithm, which is an attempt to use some of the features
of biological reproduction, such as genetic crossover and competition, to
produce effective computer algorithms. The crossover part of this procedure can
be modeled by iterated maps very similar to those under study in the current
project. An important feature of repeated processes is that many times, a slight
change in the parameters of a process which is repeated many times can lead to a
drastic change in the final outcome. While this may be desirable behavior in
some cases, it is more common to prefer systems which are reliable and
relatively unaffected by small errors or changes in conditions. Hence it is
natural to ask which processes are stable in the sense that a small change in
parameters leads to a small change in the final outcome. Resolving this question
for some systems is the primary aim of the current project.