* 9706284
* Compression, Classification and Image Segmentation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Robert Gray, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2000
* USD 375,655.00

Data compression aims at producing an efficient representation for storage or
transmission in order to communicate or store the smallest possible number of
bits while retaining high quality in the reconstructed image. Statistical
classification and segmentation are both concerned with labeling parts of an
image as being of a certain type or class, such as tumor or normal tissue in a
medical image or text, graphics, or photographs in a document page.
Classification and segmentation can be used to assist human users of images, as
in highlighting suspicious tissue in a medical image or defects in an imaged
circuit, or they can be used for the automatic extraction of features in
intelligent browsing of large databases. All three operations have in common the
goal of efficiently representing an image as a whole, by optimally trading off
quality and cost or distortion, an din decomposing the image into useful
components. Most of the systems involving these operations, however, focus on
each separate operation rather than on combining them into common algorithms
with multiple goals. This project is devoted to the development of theory and
algorithms for jointly performing these operations and related signal processing
such as the estimation of probability distributions or models from observed
data. The approach involves optimizing single combined systems subject to
possibly conflicting combined goals, such as maximizing signal-to-noise ratios
and minimizing bit rates and Bayes risk. Theory will be reinforced by
simulations for both artificial sources, where theoretical performance bounds
can be used for comparison, and real-world examples drawn from medical and
document applications.