* 9706985
* New Mathematics and Innovative Numerical Methods for the    Valuation of Options
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* William Rundell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9706985 Junping Wang Five important aspects on the valuation of options will be
addressed. First, we propose a new mathematical formulation for the free
boundary value problem. Second, we investigate the uniqueness and existence of
the solution. Third, we use finite element methods to compute the option price
based on our proposed formulas. Fourth, we provide iterative schemes to
effectively solve the system of nonlinear algebraic equations arising from the
finite element method. Fifth, we will develop a code package that is
computationally efficient and robust. The proposed new mathematics features a
weak variational approach to the time value of the option by using a Hilbert
space method. The weak form for the valuation of options opens a door to the use
of finite element methods together with grid local refinement in the
approximation of the option pricing function and the free boundary by efficient
numerical techniques such as domain decomposition and multigrid methods. In
particular, this approach provides a very promising future for the computation
of financial products involving multi-assets and securities, as the
computational domain will be of multi-dimension in those applications. Financial
derivatives are a major and fast growing area in modern financial markets. For
example, according to the Swaps Monitor, the size of swaps alone, a particular
kind of derivatives, was approximately $9 trillion in 1993,almost the size of
the annual gross national income of the United States. The valuation of these
derivatives is practically useful, important, and mathematically challenging.
Advanced techniques in mathematics have been playing an important role in the
understanding and valuation of various derivative securities ever since the
first trading of these financial products. With increasing complexity of new and
exotic financial products, the demand for new and efficient techniques in
mathematics and computation becomes greater type derivatives, but also has far-
reaching im pact on derivative valuations in general. The methods can be
extended to currency options, interest rate options and exotic options such as
Asian options and lookback options which have added difficulties due to the
path-dependence of the payoff function. In particular, the methods can yield the
value of various bonds based on the new and empirically relevant interest rate
diffusions, resulting in the value of swaps and various mortgage-backed
securities.