* 9706864
* On a Fourth Order PDE - Some Analytic and Geometric Aspects
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Alice Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2002
* USD 213,162.00

9706864 Chang In this project, Chang proposes to continue her study of a fourth
order differential operator called the Paneitz operator. This operator, which
arises naturally from consideration in conformal geometry, is the standard bi-
Laplacian operator when restricted to domains in the Euclidean spaces. Four
problems are proposed to study the geometric and analytic properties of the
operator. The first is to investigate the geometric content of some best
constant in the sharp Sobolev imbedding result associated with the operator, the
second and the third are to study uniqueness and regularity of some non-linear
PDE naturally related to the operator. The fourth is to study general conformal
covariant operators which Paneitz operator is a special example. Mooers proposes
to continue her work on analysis on incomplete manifolds, specifically to
investigate the behavior of the heat kernel on manifolds with isolated metric
singularities and to describe the relationship between the heat kernel of these
spaces and their geometry. One of the most important topic in mathematics today
is the study of 4-dimensional metric spaces (3-dimensional space plus one-
dimensional time variable). Such spaces arise naturally as the state space of
physical systems, and these systems can often be described mathematically as
solutions to differential equations. The behavior of solutions is used to study
and classify the geometry of metric spaces, and thus possible physical systems.
Chang propose to study the geometry of 4-manifolds, metric spaces that look
locally like Euclidean space, via some analytic tool--namely via a fourth order
differential operator which leads to interesting and challenging open questions
both in geometry and analysis. Mooers proposes to use the heat equation to study
metric spaces with isolated metric singularities, spaces that are manifolds away
from an isolated point, and with behavior at the point similar to a black hole
type anoma ly in space.