* 9706388
* Topics in Degenerate and/or Singular Evolution and Applied  Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2001
* Emmanuele DiBenedetto, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2001
* USD 103,107.00

9706388 DiBenedetto The main issues of this investigation concern the local and
global structure of solutions of some classes of degenerate and/or singular
evolution equations, including those (Buckley--Leverett system) bearing lower
order terms with critical (Hadamard) growth conditions. Special issues include
the local regularity of the solutions, intrinsic Harnack estimates, the boundary
behavior, and Quasi--Minima in the Calculus of Variations. For evolution
equations bearing logarithmic singularities the solvability of the Cauchy
problem will be studied. In space-dimensions higher than two, this hinges upon a
preliminary description of the asymptotic behavior permitted by the possible
solutions, as well as the solvability of the corresponding elliptic equation.
This is a severely ill-posed problem, as, for example, compactly supported data
do not generate a solution. Solvability depends on the possibility of generating
uniform lower bounds for approximating solutions at one single point. Then the
global Harnack estimate we have developed would yield a lower bound in the whole
space. The main difficulty in this process is that there is not a natural
topology by which to approximate the data. The flow of two immiscible fluids in
a porous medium (Buckley--Leverett model) is modeled by evolutions equations
bearing singular terms. One asks whether, despite the jump in internal energy,
the saturation remains continuous. This would amount to say that the interface
of contact of the two fluids occurs in such a way that the mass is locally
conserved. A class of singular equations arises in the slow evolution of thin
colloidal films spread over a flat surface. The singularities are logarithmic
and are due to the van der Waals forces. As the film spreads, it may undergo a
spontaneous rupture. Since the film is applied as a coating to protect metal
surfaces, one is interested in the evolution of such a process and possibly in
some sort of understanding of the phenomenon of rupture. The solvability of
these equations, their structure, and possibly an understanding of the rupture
phenomenon will be investigated.