* 9706021
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Ecology of the Ordovician       Radiation:  Evidence From the Basin and Range Province of   the Western U.S.A.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Mary Droser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 126,462.00

9706021 Droser T'he Ordovician radiation was one of the largest radiations in
the history of life. Current understanding of the Ordovician radiation is based
largely on taxonomic studies of 'individual groups and on synthetic literature
compilations. This project will be the first field-based examination of the
ecology of the Ordovician radiation. During the Ordovician radiation the
Cambrian Evolutionary Fauna was replaced by the Paleozoic Evolutionary Fauna.
Groups, such as brachiopods, bryozoans, rugose and tabulate corals, echinoderms,
stromatoporaids, and cephalopods rose to dominance. Marine family diversity
tripled, reflecting vastly increased morphological diversity in the oceans.
Community complexity increased significantly as many new guilds were
established. In this study, four basic questions will be addressed: 1) How do
the communities develop? Are community level changes gradual, sudden
(geologically), stepped, or some combination? 2) Do different clades expand in
concert within communities or do they just appear to be related when viewed in
compilations on large-time scales? 3 ) Is the Cambrian fauna actually displaced
during community development? Or is it still present m the communities and
simply diluted (Westrop et al., 1995)? 4) How did community complexity increase?
For example, are new communities added to the ecosystem or are clades simply
added to existing communities? This project will examine carbonate platform
deposits preserved in the Great Basin. This region has one of the finest records
of shallow marine faunas in the Ordovician anywhere in the world, making it an
ideal locale to conduct this study. The Pls have conducted preliminary work for
this proposal and also have extensive experience studying Ordovician rocks and
faunas of this region Field work will be conducted in the Cherry Creek Range,
the southern Egan Range, and the southern Hot Creek Range in Nevada and 'm the
Bear River Range and the Ibex region in Utah. T'he focus wi ll be on shallow-
marine soft-substrate communities preserved in wackestone and limemudstone
facies. This environment has been chosen for several reasons. Reworking of
shells is minimal in these facies. By confining the study to one general
environment, rather than a complete bathymetric transect, the complications that
would result from onshore-offshore changes that took place during the radiation
can be avoided. Preliminary work suggests that communities were reorganized at
least 5 times during the Ordovician. Six stratigraphic intervals, lower, middle
and upper Ibexian, lower and middle Whiterockian, and Mohawkian-Cincinnatian
appear to have distinctive community-types that are increasingly diverse and
complex. Preliminary evidence also suggests that the reorganizations of
communities may have occurred quickly at the beginning of each interval. If
reorganizations were rapid, communities may have been stable with little change
occurring during the bulk of these five intervals.