* 9706408
* Analytic Self Maps of the Disk and Related Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,09/01/1998
* Pietro Poggi-Corradini, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/01/1998
* USD 51,331.00

ABSTRACT Pietro Poggi-Corradini. The research of Professor Pietro Poggi-
Corradini stretches across the fields of complex analysis and functional
analysis. The objects of study are on the one hand the analytic maps defined on
the unit disk that are bounded by one in modulus, and on the other hand, the
composition operators that these maps induce on classical function spaces of the
disk. The motivations and the questions come from the theory of operators, but
the tools used are drawn from complex analysis (harmonic measure, extremal
distance, hyperbolic metric, etc...). The results, at least in the case when the
map is one-to-one and has the origin as an attracting fixed point, are twofold.
While describing properties of the associated composition operator, such as the
spectrum and the essential spectral radius, new properties of the analytic map,
such as the dynamical behavior near the boundary of the unit disk, were
discovered. The link between the map and the operator is given by the
linearization map near the fixed point provided by iteration theory, i.e. the
Koenigs map. Properties of the Koenigs maps which had not been considered
before, such as their Hardy class, are determined and these in turn shed light
on the inner workings of the subject. P. Poggi-Corradini intends to continue his
study in three different directions. The first consists in dropping the
requirement that the maps be one-to-one. A second topic of inquiry is to ask
similar questions on the Bergman spaces instead of the Hardy spaces. Many
fundamental aspects of the theory of Bergman spaces have received much attention
lately. A third line of research deals with the general problem of describing
the spectrum of composition operators. It is clear that the properties of the
spectrum and the linearization theory both depend on the location of the Denjoy-
Wolff point. The results mentioned above only dealt with the case when this
point does not have modulus one and the multiplier there is non-vanishing. So
ther e is space for generalizing the techniques used to new situations. Finally,
this study might help answer a question of M. Heins about generalizations of the
Denjoy-Wolff Theorem to arbitrary Riemann surfaces and some questions of J. Cima
about Cauchy-Stieltjes integrals. On a wider level, since, in recent years, both
composition operators and complex dynamics have been studied intensively in the
context of several complex variables, it would be interesting to see if the
interplay between spectral theory of composition operators and the dynamics of
analytic maps at the boundary of the disk carries over to self-maps of the ball
or the polydisk. More generally, the research of P. Poggi-Corradini tackles
fundamental issues in a classical mathematical field known as function theory,
which has many applications to engineering and the applied sciences (e.g.
iterative methods, aerodynamics, control theory, etc...). Much of the classical
theory is devoted to the study of a single function or transformation. The
innovative point of view is to extract information about a single transformation
by iterating it repeatedly and analyzing the behavior "in the limit" of the
ensuing dynamical system.