* 9706855
* Regularity, Convergence, and Uniqueness Problems for        Harmonic Map Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,11/17/1999
* Changyou Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/17/1999
* USD 35,221.00

9706855 Wang Work on this project concerns several analytic problems arising
from the area of geometric variational calculus: weakly harmonic maps, weak
flows of harmonic maps into general Riemannian manifolds, p-harmonic maps.
Smoothness of solutions to such problems often breaks down. Of particular
interest are the partial regularity and uniqueness of weak flows of harmonic
maps in suitable classes, sequential compactness of the solution space including
weakly harmonic maps and weak flows of harmonic maps, relationships between
flows of Ginzburg-Landau type and harmonic maps, behavior of solutions near
singular points, and existence and geometric properties of self-similar
solutions to harmonic map flows. This work will involve geometric measure theory
and PDE methods in geometric fashion. The PI also proposes to formulate heat
flow of harmonic maps between Alexandrov spaces. Partial differential equations
are the basic tools to describe physical problems. Harmonic maps model extremal
(or optimal) objects with respect to physically natural energy functionals in
families of objects satisfying common constraints. The heat flow of harmonic
maps studies the long-time dynamical behavior of objects in such families. The
study will enhance our understanding of these maps, improve methods to control
the singular sets, and predict singular behavior of solutions to these problems.
The results will have applications to material science including liquid crystals
and elasticity/plasticity.