* 9706912
* Mathematical Models of Geographic and Phenotypic Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Thomas Nagylaki, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2002
* USD 129,984.00

9706912 Nagylaki The goal of this work is to contribute to the understanding of
the genetic structure and evolution of natural populations. The mathematical
knowledge of the amount and pattern of genetic diversity under various
conditions is essential for the motivation, design, and interpretation of
experiments and field studies and for the investigation by computer of very
complex systems. Comparison of models with observations yields information about
particular populations, and many such comparisons indicate the relative
importance and conditions of action of the basic evolutionary forces. The latter
include natural selection, mutation, migration, and random fluctuations in the
proportions of various genes. All of these will be studied in this project. The
evolution of repeated DNA sequences under gene conversion (the non-reciprocal
transfer of information between genes) will also be investigated. In addition to
its intrinsic interest and direct influence on empirical research, theoretical
work suggests and assists less mathematical, more immediately data-oriented
studies. In the long run, studies of genetic variability of the type proposed
here provide information that helps to preserve and manage wild animals and
plants. They also advance areas of the genetics of human populations that
concern the frequency of genetic diseases, which are of immense medical
importance.