* 9706909
* Supramolecular Chemistry with Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Harry Gibson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

9706909 Gibson A roxatane consists of a cyclic molecule physically threaded onto
a linear molecule with no covalent bonds between the cyclic and the linear
species; a catenane consists of interlocked cyclic molecules. The concepts of
supramolecular chemistry will be employed to synthesize new polymeric roxatanes
and catenanes. Microcalorimetry will provide fundamental data on the threading
of cyclic molecules by linear species with respect to factors such as the nature
of the two components (size, rigidity, structure), the solvent and temperature.
Building on this thermodynamic data base for small molecules, these building
blocks will be used to produce new polymeric materials. Three prototypical
supramolecular systems that possess high association constants will be utilized
to construct entirely new polyrotaxanes, including main chain and graft systems.
A new class of hyperbranched and dendritic macromolecules whose structural
integrity is based on rotaxane repeat units will be synthesized from
psuedorotaxanes (without stoppers) having AB2 functionalities; the repeat units
will consist of a linear species with macrocyclic end groups, the linear portion
being threaded through the macrocycle of another unit. Another new class of
macromolecules, slip link polymers, consisting of a rotaxane repeat unit in a
linear structure will be prepared by polymerization of standard BB monomers with
novel pseudorotaxane, AA topological monomers in which one functionality resides
on the linear guest portion and one on the cyclic or host portion and the linear
portion bears a bulky blocking group; such materials are expected to show novel
behavior under longitudinal tension and compression because of the compliance of
the rotaxane structure. Since the complexation processes can reversed under
suitable conditions the properties (light absorption, viscosity, solid state
structure, solubility, mechanical properties, etc.) of these systems are
expected to be sensitive the thei r environments, e.g., temperature, solvent,
redox conditions, the presence or absence of metal ions or the acidity of the
medium. Finally the oldest method of rotaxane and catenane formation, the so-
called chemical conversion method, will be applied for the first time to prepare
polyrotaxanes and polycatenanes. This method involves reaction of molecules that
possess linear components threaded intramolecularly through a macrocycle
attached via a "temporary bond". Polymerization via terminal functionalities on
the linear thread will yield polyrotaxanes after the temporary bond is broken.
On the other hand, cyclization of the self threaded system will be employed to
make a series of functionalized 2 catenanes of the AA, AB, and AB2 types, which
will be polymerized to form a variety of new linear, hyperbranched and dendritic
poly 2 catenanes. %%% The principles of supramolecular chemistry will be applied
to the construction of several new families of polymeric materials which contain
units that are mechanically rather than chemically linked together. Because of
their novel topological structures the physical properties of these new
materials are expected to be unusually responsive to their environments and
external stimuli. Thus these systems offer entirely new design principles for
controlling physical and chemical properties that could enable new sensors,
smart or adaptable materials and electronic devices. ***