* 9706991
* Dissertation Research:  Gross Morphology and Bone Density   Patterns in the Knees of Catarrhine Primates with Differing Locomotor Behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Jack Stern, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/1999
* USD 11,701.00

This project examines differences in the bone density patterns at the knee joint
in monkeys, apes, and humans with the goal of correlating such differences with
locomotion and hindlimb anatomy. It is predicted that primates living in
different habitats (trees-dwelling vs. ground-dwelling), or adapted to different
locomotor modes (e.g., four-legged vs. two-legged), will subject their knees to
different loading patterns. It has been previously determined that patterns of
bone density on a joint surface, based on grey scale patterns in CT scans, are
correlated with patterns of loading at that joint. This technique will be used
to create bone density contour maps of the upper portion of the tibia (shin
bone) in an attempt to gain insight into different loading patterns of the
primate knee. Once correlations between locomotor behavior, knee anatomy, and CT
density patterns are discovered, they will enable the reconstruction of extinct
locomotor behaviors. By examining humans and their closest relatives, this
research can also benefit studies on the origin of modern pathologies of the
human knee and their potential corrections. Lastly, the methods used here can be
adapted for conducting similar studies on a variety of joint surfaces in the
primate skeleton, thereby expanding our knowledge of the effects of locomotion
on the force distribution in joints.