* 9706743
* Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Joel Anderson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 103,000.00

Abstract Anderson The principal investigator will continue to develop a
geometric spectral theory for n-tuples of self-adjoint operators in finite von
Neumann algebras. One goal is to use this new approach to try to develop a
coherent theory of the joint spectrum of such operators. Another aim is to use
it to deepen our understanding of the structure of such operator algebras as
irrational rotation algebras and von Neumann algebras determined by free groups.
This project is concerned with the study of certain aspects of operator
algebras. These objects have proved fruitful in the study of a wide variety of
questions, including problems in such fields as mathematical physics, quantum
mechanics and knot theory. The principal investigator and his coworkers have
discovered a new way to view certain analytic data (eigenvalues of matrices and
their infinite dimensional analogues - spectra of operators). A major goal of
the project is to solve a difficult problem (joint spectrum for non-commuting
operators), which thus far has withstood repeated vigorous attacks. It is well
known that eigenvalues and other spectral data are essential in understanding
many real world problems in engineering and science. Thus, it is possible that
this project could produce methods for attacking questions in applied
mathematics that have not been previously accessible.