* 9706682
* RUI:  Petrologic Evolution and Tectonic Setting in the      Sutter Buttes Volcano, California
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Brian Hausback, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2002
* USD 95,000.00

9706682 Hausback This project aims at studying the poorly known Sutter Buttes,
an isolated volcano that contain the only indigenous mag matic rock exposures in
the entire Central Valley of California. The volcano is composed of a central
core of volcanic domes surrounded by a large fragmental apron that record a
lengthy evolution of explosive volcanism in this area. The volcanic rocks of
Sutter Buttes represent a diverse sub-alkalic suite ranging from rhyolite to
mafic andesite that erupted in early Pleistocene time, during the profound
tectonic transition from subduction to transform faulting, of the western North
America plate boundary. This unique tectonic setting of the Sutter Buttes
provides an unprecedent opportunity to understand magma production during this
type of transition. It is proposed to establish a framework of integrated
geological mapping, petrographic documentation, microprobe mineral analyses, and
40Ar/39Ar geochronologic studies of the volcanic rocks and their basement. At
this stage, it is unclear if the Sutter Buttes are related to any other magmatic
feature, such as the Cascades or to the young volcanic activity in the Sonoma
and Clear Lakes areas. The results of this work should constrain some of the
genetic features of this unique volcano and help put its magmatism into the
regional tectonic framework.