* 9706652
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Isotopic Composition of Equus Tooth Enamel and Its Relationship to Diet
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,06/30/2002
* John Pascoe, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2002
* USD 82,219.00

9706652 Pascoe The C and O isotope composition of structural carbonate ( and
phosphate) in the tooth enamel of fossil Equids has become widely used in
Cenozoic paleoenvironmental studies in south Asia, Africa, and North America.
Yet, with respect to modern horse (Equus), there is insufficient knowledge of
(1) what portion of the surrounding ecosystem the horses utilize for their diet,
(2) the relationship of the isotopic composition of dietary intake to the
isotopic composition of body water and dissolved CO2 in blood, and (3) the
inter-and intra-tooth isotopic variability in a given individual. A better
understanding of these uncertainties is important to decipher the environmental
significance of the C and O isotope composition of enamel. We propose to conduct
a two pronged study to answer these questions through: (1) controlled dietary
studies on experimental horses at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine and
(2) a two year study of two feral horse herds in which we (a) isotopically
characterize the surrounding ecosystem, (b) monitor the monthly plant species
composition, and isotopic composition, of the horse diet, (C ) monitor the O
isotope composition of body water, (d) examine inter-tooth isotopic variability
in selected individuals, and (e) examine intra-tooth morphological and isotopic
variations. One impetus for this research are the observations reported in the
animal science and paleontological literature (as well as recent findings by
isotope chemists) that Equus teeth form over a significant period of an
individual's life. While the exact chronology is somewhat uncertain, we believe
that teeth may potentially record both annual and seasonal variations in the
isotopic composition of diet and water intake. If this is true, Equid teeth may
provide a more detailed isotopic record of the past than previously recognized.
Equally important, potential isotopic variations within an individual caused by
physiology, rather than dietary intake, must be recognized for adequ ate
interpretation of this isotopic proxy. This research builds on pioneering
studies of the relationship between environmental water and the O isotope
composition of enamel phosphate, and on recent studies of in-tooth isotopic
variability in fossil and modern organisms. Our purpose here is to consolidate
this existing knowledge into a cohesive experimental design that will adequately
answer the question that remains about Equus tooth enamel and its relevance as
an isotopic proxy for environmental conditions.