* 9706887
* Second Order Nonlinear Elliptic Equations and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Yanyan Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 104,237.00

9706887 Li This research is on geometric problems in three related areas, all
based on solving nonlinear second order partial differential equations of
various types. The first concerns an analogue of the Yamabe problem on manifolds
with boundaries: To study, for a given compact Riemannian manifold with boundary
(M,g), the existence and compactness of metrics conformal to g that have
constant scalar curvature and constant boundary mean curvature. This is
equivalent to the study of the existence and compactness of positive solutions
to a certain semilinear elliptic equation with critical exponent satisfying
certain nonlinear Neuman boundary conditions. The second concerns the problem of
prescribing scalar curvature on the n-sphere. The problem is better understood
in dimension n=2,3,4. The goal here is to search for good existence criterion in
dimension n &gt;= 5 that allow the prescribed curvature functions K to be Morse
functions. The third concerns the study of degenerate Monge-Ampere equations,
especially those arising from geometry. Partial differential equations arise
naturally from physics, geometry, and many other fields and form a basis for
mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis
is not so much to create the equations as it is to create qualitative and
quantitative information about the solutions. This may include answers to
questions about existence, uniqueness, smoothness, and growth. In addition,
analysis often develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on
the accuracy of these approximations.