* 9706970
* Mathematical Sciences:  Polynomially Convex Hulls and       Evolution of Pseudoconvex Sets by Levi Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Zbigniew Slodkowski, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

ABSTRACT Slodkowski Slodkowski will continue working on polynomial hulls
improving on understanding the structure of hulls of families of Jordan arcs
under low regularity assumptions. The first part of the proposal concentrates on
a series of problems generated by the crucial question when is such a hull a
topological hypersurface. Slodkowski plans to investigate them under regularity
assumptions formulated in terms of quasiconformal geometry. Realization of this
program will yield applications to holomorphic motions, among others. The second
part of the proposal concerns the evolution of subsets in higher-dimensional
space, defined in terms of weak solutions of certain degenerate nonlinear PDE's
involving the Levi curvature. The main focus is on analyzing the evolution of
pseudoconvex hypersufaces and of pseudoconcave sets, in order to understand the
structure of weakly pseudoconvex domains and of polynomial hulls. A successful
completion of this proposal would solve, among other things, important problems
on holomorphic motions, which would have significant applications to the theory
of dynamical systems and to Teichmuller theory. The theory of the dynamical
systems, which is developing very rapidly at present, has important applications
to to many applied problems. The Teichmuller theory has not only fundamental
implications for geometry, but it is also an important tool for string theory,
one of the newest theories of the elementary particles' physics. Zbigniew
Slodkowski