* 9706051
* Variable Hillslope Processes and Sediment Delivery to Tectonically-Quiescent Basins: A Late Miocene to Quaternary Record of Buried, Relict, and Modern Hillslopes and their Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Gary Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/1999
* USD 99,960.00

9706051 Smith Siliciclastic detritus in a sedimentary basin follows a path from
a weathering profile, to the hillslope system, to the fluvial system, and
finally to the basin depositional environment. The stratigraphy and
sedimentology of a sedimentary basin are the net result of the complex steps
along this path and they record the effects of exogenic forces including
climate, tectonics, and rock type on surficial processes. The sedimentological
literature is rich with interpretations of the stratigraphic record in terms of
tectonic processes. In contrast, Quaternary scientists generally interpret
Quaternary stratigraphy in terms of climatically-driven hydrologic changes.
Resolution of the relative roles of tectonics and of tectonics and climate in
the stratigraphic record can only be addressed if the climatically-induced
variability in the hillslope processes that produce and deliver detritus to the
sedimentary basin are understood. The proposed research has been stimulated by
unprecedented field observations, in a tectonically quiesent setting, of
hillslope deposits that can be traced with confidence laterally into Neogene
lacustrine deposits or remain as relict Pliocene and Pleistocene features on the
landscape. We propose to combine sedimentologic and geomorphic approaches in the
study of these deposits with the hypothesis that significant climatically-
controlled variations in the production and transport of hillslope sediment are
evident and that the Neogene and Quaternary records of hillslope sedimentation
can be compared and contrasted. This will be accomplished through detailed
analysis of the stratigraphy, sedimentary petrology, and sedimentary structure
of buried and relict hillslope deposits and their correlative proximal piedmont
deposits, along with the study of Quaternary stratigraphy and soil-landscape
associations. Results will significantly bridge and benefit both disciplines and
fill a gap in our understanding of how hillslope and fluvial systems have been
linked and have varied with climate over the past 12 million years.