* 9706911
* Mathematical Sciences:  Trace Extensions, Commutator Spaces and Single Commutators with Applications to the Homology,   Determinants and K-Theory of Operator Ideals
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Gary Weiss, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 52,940.00

Abstract Weiss The commutator structure of operator ideals (e.g., the class of
single commutators, AB-BA, with A, B from two two-sided operator ideals,
respectively, along with commutator ideals (their linear span)) and related
trace extension problems will be investigated and exploited to determine the
Hochschild and cyclic homology for two-sided ideals in B(H), the class of
bounded linear operators acting on a separable, infinite-dimensional, complex
Hilbert space. A close connection between certain algebraic K-groups has been
found for a wide class of two-sided ideals in B(H). Recent important advances
have been made in characterizing those ideals which have zero homology (i.e.,
those commutator ideals which are the ideals themselves and hence have no trace)
and in generalizing N. J. Kalton's characterization of the commutator ideal of
the Hilbert-Schmidt class, and also the commutator ideal of the trace class
(with B(H)), to arbitrary ideals. A natural generalization is a characterization
of those ideals whose commutator ideal (with B(H)) contains T for a given
compact operator T. A question arising in this context is: Which normed ideals
admit a continuous or positive trace? The answer to this question for
symmetrically normed ideals with a dense finitely generated subideal is already
settled. Techniques under development involve exploiting recently found
obstructions preventing certain ideals from having a trace extension beyond
certain smaller ideals, and are related to the associated commutator classes and
commutator ideals. The study of operator algebras and operator ideals (i.e.,
special classes of operators each operator of which may be viewed as an infinite
matrix (a square, infinite array of numbers)) involves the investigation of
operations between their operators, especially addition and multiplication.
Operator algebras with these operations play an indispensable roll throughout
mathematics, science, business, computer science and many of their applications
to other f ields. The well-known commutative law of multiplication is that AB =
BA for all numbers A and B, i.e., one always obtains the same result no matter
which order one multiplies numbers. Algebras whose elements have this property
are called commutative algebras. But most algebras are not commutative and
studying the structure of their non-zero commutators, AB-BA, becomes central in
understanding the algebras and their relation to the more easily understood
commutative algebras, inside which AB-BA is always zero. The famous Heisenberg
Uncertainly Principle in physics provides an early example of the relevance of
commutators. This proposal is to expand our knowledge of the commutator
structure of a number of important operator algebras and to use the new
information towards developing techniques to settle some old and new open
problems in commutator theory and in operator algebras and ideals.