* 9706098
* Effects of Tropical Mesoscale Convective Systems on the     Boundary Layer and the Larger  Scale
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Sharon Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 81,071.00

9706098 Lewis TOGA-COARE (for Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere Coupled Ocean-
Atmosphere Response Experiment) was a observational field project conducted in
the warm pool area of the western tropical Pacific Ocean. Some of the
observations span several years in the early 1990s. Most are derived from an
intensive observing period of 4 months in winter, 1993. It was a joint
ocean/atmosphere project with the focused goal of collecting the observations
relevant to air-sea interactions and the physical processes that couple the
ocean and atmosphere in the region of the world. One of the objectives of the
TOGA-COARE is to determine the principal atmospheric processes that organize
convection in the Western Pacific warm pool region. To accomplish this
objective, the Principal Investigator will derive vertical motions, momentum
transports, and heat budgets for different types of oceanic mesoscale convective
systems (MCSs). She will relate these physical quantities to different
characteristics of mesoscale convective systems (MCS) including the modes of
convection, evolution and boundary layer modification. The research will focus
on the combined use of in situ and Doppler radar measurements from multiple
aircraft including the use of a relatively new Doppler synthesis technique,
quad- Doppler. Four distinct cases (Feb. 6, Feb. 9, Feb. 20, Feb. 22) have been
chosen for comparison. Each of the four systems represent different types of MCS
organizational structure. The exceptional quality of the winds, due to the quad-
Doppler technique, will be an asset for calculating the heat flux. The impact of
the different types of MCSs on the larger scale structure will be examined. ***