* 9706902
* Dynamic Control and Parametric Resonance in Hydrodynamic    Systems:  A Theoretical, Computational and Experimental     Investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* C. F. Chen
* 09/30/2001
* USD 250,000.00

This grant and a companion grant in DMS (DMS-9706951) will support an
interdisciplinary group drawn from the mathematics and engineering communities
to study dynamic control and parametric excitations in hydrodynamic systems and
to examine the interplay between parametric resonance and
stabilization/destabilization of transitions/bifurcations, through an integrated
program of analysis, computation and experiment. The diverse combination of the
investigators' expertise offers an exceptional opportunity to develop a broadly
based and innovative research program of research in dynamics and control in
hydrodynamics. Two basic flow sets have been chosen in order to develop a
general understanding of the complex hydrodynamics and control strategies. The
two flows are variations on Taylor-Couette flow and on vortex breakdown flow.
These generic flows are attractive because the degree of complexity can be
precisely controlled by relatively simple changes in the flow state or boundary
conditions, and at the same time they possess rich dynamics which are
representative of a wide class of general hydrodynamic systems that may respond
to dynamic control in a complex manner. In particular, these classes of flows
may respond resonantly to the parametric excitation of the applied control. An
investigation of the behavior of these generic flows will help to form a better
understanding of more general time-dependent hydrodynamic systems. The interplay
between dynamic control mechanisms and parametric resonance will be investigated
using the (linear) Floquet theory as a first step in understanding the dynamics
at the point of transition or bifurcation. Flows beyond the validity of the
Floquet analysis will be studied using three different nonlinear computational
approaches, each with distinct advantages and limitations. Their combined
implementation is capable of resolving a wide range of problems and addressing
distinct issues within each problem. The results from the experiment will be
used to ref ine the analysis and control implementation. The impact of this
research will not only be of a fundamental nature, resulting in a deeper
understanding of the complex spatio-temporal dynamics of hydrodynamic systems,
but it will also make a significant impact on several problems of practical
importance, such as drag reduction and reduced fatigue due to aeroacoustic
structural resonances in aeronautics, and effective control of transitions and
instabilities in the materials and chemical processing industries. The new
fundamental and practical insights on control dynamics of complex systems
anticipated from this research can provide US industry with a competitive edge.