* 9706903
* Approximation of the Global Attractors of Evolution         Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Michael Jolly, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2001
* USD 182,145.00

9706903 M. Jolly Abstract This project concerns the long time behavior of
certain dissipative physical systems. One major component seeks to locate global
attractors by interpolatory means rather than by direct numerical solution of
initial value problems. It would extend our previous work which used a Taylor
expansion in complexified time at a single point in phase space. The new
approach will use several points, typically those on solutions provided either
by independent computations or from experimental data. The main mathematical
tool in this effort will be Nevalinna-Pick interpolation. The systems on which
this will be tested include the 2-D Navier-Stokes (NS), Kuramoto-Sivashinsky
(KS) Lorenz equations as well as simple geostrophic models. Another major
component is to compute invariant manifolds to arbitrary accuracy. We will use
the visualization of 2-D (un)stable manifolds to help understand the geometric
mechanisms behind certain global bifurcations in 3-D phase space. This involves
computing a major portion of global manifolds. Other applications require only
that the manifold be computed along particular trajectories. In one case a
center manifold will be treated in this way to compute bounded solutions to an
elliptic partial differential equation (PDE) in an infinite cylinder. In
another, the dimension of phase space for the KS equation will be effectively
reduced to three dimensions by restricting the flow to an inertial manifold of
that dimension. Such a reduction will allow us to study global bifurcations as
described above. The algorithms developed to compute these manifolds will also
be applied to the sets (conjectured to be manifolds) of a prescribed exponential
growth rate backward in time for the NS equation. In fact we will construct such
sets as stable "manifolds" for an inverted form of the NS equation in which
infinity and the origin of phase space are swapped. These sets play a role in
the interpolatory approach to locating global attractors, and thus bring our
research full circle. The main purpose of this work is to develop reliable
methods to determine whether certain dynamic behavior in physical systems is
permanent, or merely temporary. The ultimate application will be to climatology.
Since the earth's weather system has been evolving for millions of years, one
would expect that unless sudden external events take place, the patterns we are
living through now will more or less continue for a reasonable period of time.
This is not about accurate long time forecasting, rather it is about confirming
basic assumptions regarding the mathematical models used in making those
predictions. The scientific community makes a tremendous effort in deriving
appropriate mathematical equations, and discretizing them so they can be solved
on a computer, all to produce a function of time, which should describe some
aspect of the weather. We all know how often this computed function of time
deviates from the actual weather after a relatively short time period. The major
source of this error is not clear. Is it in the model itself? Is it from the
numerical approximation in the computer solution? Or is it that both the model
and the approximation are valid, but the actual solution is very sensitive to
small changes in the initial data, and we simply need to tighten the tolerance
of error in that data and in the algorithm used at each time step. Our work is
directed at distinguishing between the first two cases and the third. Indeed we
seek to validate the model-algorithm pair which produces the forecast, as
producing a pattern which is of a permanent nature, even if it is not the
particular pattern we are experiencing after several days time. The failure of
such a test will indicate that either the model and/or the method of solution
are faulty. This approach can be applied to other physical problems. Indeed the
initial testing of the methods will be done on systems less invol ved than that
of the weather, but which are nevertheless of current scientific interest. In
particular we consider fundamental models of combustion, fluid flow, and
turbulence.