* 9706121
* Finding Principles of Large Scale Hydrologic Response:      Linking Hydroclimatology and River Basin Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Praveen Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2001
* USD 157,464.00

Kumar The objective of the proposed research is to develop principles of large
scale hydrologic response in different hydroclimatological regimes by coupling
hydroclimatology and river basin dynamics. This objective will be accomplished
via three tasks: Through joint analysis of the atmospheric-hydrologic cycle and
streamflow develop parameterizations to link hydroclimatology and basin response
characteristics. In this task we will: (I) Classify the entire US into
homogeneous hydroclimatic regimes using a combination of atmospheric dynamics,
and analysis of atmospheric moisture, wind velocity and temperature fields, and
stramflow observations. This also involves identifying parameters that describe
the similarities and differences between these regimes. (ii) Develop
relationships between parameters characterizing the climatology and the basin
response in each homogeneous regime. Develop a non-dimensional formulation of
large-scale basin response which explicitly incorporates the hydrolimatological
influence and self-similarity of the three dimensional river networks. In this
task we will (I) Incorporate hydroclimatological influence and the self-
similarity of three dimensional river networks into the notion of hydrologic
similarity and develop formulation of basin response in non-dimensional
framework. (ii) Identify the important parameters that control the similarities
and differences in responses of two basins within and across hydroclimatogically
homogeneous regimes, respectively, and examine the scales of their applicability
Using high resolution digital elevation and streamflow data, perform validation
studies in different hydrolimatic regimes.In this task we will: (i) Compare the
basin response generated from the above formulations with the observed
streamflows in the different regimes . (ii) Study the scales of applicability of
the non-dimensional formulations by using basins of various sizes (iii) Analyze
the effectiveness of the identified parameters that characterize the
similarities between responses within homogeneous regimes and differences across
them. Model development and testing will be limited to basins in two to three
homogeneous regimes for the duration of the proposal.