* 9706522
* Isotope Paleohydrology of Lakes Albert, Edward and          Victoria, East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Kerry Kelts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 141,000.00

9706522 The large lakes of East Africa are sensitive monitors of continental-
scale tropical hydrology that provide long continuous decadal-scale archives of
water balance and temperature to test evolving models of tropical ocean moisture
transport. Our problems is to read and quantify such signatures. Prior studies
in the region have lacked the tools necessary to unequivocally separate
temperature and precipitation effects. In contrast, this study proposes to apply
new techniques of oxygen and hydrogen isotopic analyses of aquatic cellulose and
lipids that will allow us to differentiate the precipitation signal. The
objectives are to quantify the magnitude and timing of shifts in the water
balances of Lakes Albert, Edward, and Victoria over the last 15,000 years and
determine their implications for the local and regional biosphere. The time-
series of water dynamics in these lakes will also be compared with the history
of vegetation and civilization along the Nile. The workplan includes compilation
of a modern terrestrial and aquatic cellulose/ 18O database to confirm the
temperature-independent and species-independent oxygen isotopic biochemical
fractionation factor of aquatic cellulose. This database will be used to
constrain paleohydrologic interpretations. Analyses of available core samples
from all three lakes at less than 300 year increments will provide aquatic
cellulose and hence lake water oxygen isotopic time-series profiles over the
last 15,000 years. These primary oxygen isotopic signals of the lake waters will
derive from shifts in P:E ratios and residence times with negligible groundwater
and high mountain water effects. Additional analyses in aquatic lipids are
expected to reflect D values of the lake water. Careful consideration of
interactions between the watershed and lake water hydrologies as well as of past
ocean isotopic values may allow testing for the history of moisture sources
(Atlantic vs. Indian Ocean) to these basin. This study should provide sensi tive
new approaches to the study of paleohydrology in tropical regions and help
constrain paleoclimate model predictions.