* 9706701
* Experimental and Numerical Analysis of Cavitation Inception in Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* C. F. Chen
* 07/31/2001
* USD 305,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9706701 Principal Investigator: Katz The present
study is an integrated experimental and numerical effort to determine and
explain the conditions for the onset of cavitation in high-Reynolds-number jets.
Experimentally, high resolution PIV will be used to measure the unsteady
velocity distribution within primary vortices, from which one can extract the
vorticity and strain. Holography and video photography will be used to determine
the motion of artificially-introduced microscopic seed bubbles. The pressure
field within the primary eddies will be determined using microscopic bubbles as
pressure sensors. The conditions for cavitation inception within observed
secondary vortices (ribs) will be used to estimate the corresponding pressure
minima. Computationally, Lagrangian simulations of primary structures will be
conducted, with initial and boundary conditions provided by the experiments. The
simulations will be first validated by comparison with the experimental results,
and then used to analyze the impact of slenderness ratio on the pressure field
within primary vortices and the strain field that they induce. The measured
strain field will be used in direct numerical simulation of the rollup of
streamwise vorticity perturbations in the braids. The experimentally-determined
pressure minima within the ribs can then be used to select the appropriate
streamwise vorticity perturbation levels. This combined approach will enable a
mapping the pressure distribution within the near field of the jet.