* 9706142
* Sulfur Oxyanions as Indicators of Magmatic-Hydrothermal     and Volcanic Processes Involving Sulfur
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Martin Schoonen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 85,092.00

9706142 Schoonen The goal of this project is to use the sulfur oxyanion
speciation of hydrothermal solutions and acid crater lakes as indicators of
magmatic-hydrothermal and volcanic processes. The effort will focus on two
processes: 1) sulfur hydrolysis and 2) the changes in S-speciation in acid
crater lakes due to the discharge of H2S and SO2 gas. Sulfur hydrolysis may be
important in (1) hydrothermal systems as a source of sulfate where native sulfur
occurs in the subsurface (e.g., as buried solfataras); and (2) in crater lakes
where the sulfur oxyanion speciation during quiescent times is likely to be
controlled by colloidal sulfur or pools of molten sulfur. Upon increased
activity, crater lakes act as a scrubber of magmatic S-bearing gases. The influx
of these gases changes the sulfur oxyanion speciation in crater lakes
drastically (polythionates, SnO62- , are lost from solution), but details are
not understood. The research strategy is based on a combination of field work
and experimental work. The goal of the field work is to develop a sampling and
preservation protocol for sulfur oxyanions based on the notion that these anions
can be retained on a resin. A protocol in which columns with this resin are used
to preserve the speciation would allow for the study of crater lakes and
hydrothermal systems around the world. Experiments will be conducted to simulate
sulfur hydrolysis and condensation of sulfur gases in crater lakes.