* 9706048
* Multi-Fractal Scaling of Hydraulic Conductivity             Distributions and the Effect on Plume-Scale                 Contaminant Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Hui Hai Liu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2000
* USD 210,212.00

9706048 Molz From a contaminant transport viewpoint, hydraulic conductivity (K)
is the single most important property function. K is highly heterogeneous, and
quantifying the K distribution is a prerequisite to understanding contaminant
migration. Over the past decade an increasing number of studies have documented
the existence of fractal scaling in K distributions. However, the scaling
appears to be of a variable nature that is characterized by a special family of
PDF's known as Levy-stable processes. Different sets of increments display
properties of different members of the Levy-stable class, which suggests a type
of fractal known as a universal multi-fractal. It has been shown recently that
the universal multi-fractal paradigm, which includes monofractals as a special
case, is successful in modeling the fractal scaling in most K data sets, and the
desire to exploit this observation fully is the motivation of the present
proposal. The 3 objectives are: I) Develop procedures for the generation and
data conditioning of 3-D multi-fractal structures; II) Evaluate multi-fractal
effects on solute transport by simulating tracer tests conducted at the highly
heterogeneous MADE site; and III) Determine the behavior of plume-scale apparent
dispersivity involving multi-fractal scaling and compare the results to that
derived from conventional statistical theories. Meeting these 3 objectives will
increase understanding significantly of fractal scaling in porous media and the
effect on contaminant transport.