* 9706580
* Direct Observation of the Mechanics of Friction at a Single Asperity on Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/1999
* USD 74,668.00

9706580 Kohlstedt The PI proposes a study that will contribute to our
understanding of the frictional behavior of rocks, particularly the deformation
processes occurring at asperities between sliding rock surfaces. Insight into
this process will be elucidated from an experimental investigation of the
deformation mechanisms and rheology at a single asperity sliding on the surface
of the same or a different mineral. By examining the frictional response at a
single asperity, the PI can directly interpret the measured mechanical
properties in terms of the observed microstructural damage. Experiments will be
performed on a suite of minerals including olivine, calcite and halite surfaces
which exhibit a range of brittleness versus plasticity at room temperature. Both
static indentation and dynamic scratch experiments will be carried out using two
unique micro/nanomechanical testing apparatuses that have been recently
developed. The partitioning of strain between brittle fracture and plastic flow
processes and the dependence of this partitioning on slip rate, penetration rate
and humidity will be determined. The coefficient of friction in slide-hold-slide
tests and velocity-step tests to constrain its evolution will also be measured.
Microstructures will be characterized using optical, scanning electron,
transmission electron, and atomic force microscopy techniques. ***