* 9706960
* Mathematical Sciences:  Coarse Geometry of Homogeneous      Spaces, Quantization and Asymptotic Homomorphisms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,12/08/1998
* Erik Guentner, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/08/1998
* USD 51,393.00

Abstract Guentner The proposed research comprises three distinct projects;
coarse geometry and index theory of elliptic operators on homogeneous spaces,
topological invariants of quantum mechanical systems, and the construction of an
equivariant version of the E-theory groups defined by A. Connes and N. Higson.
All three involve the notion of asymptotic homomorphisms of C*-algebras which
provide an elegant realization of K-homology, the generalized homology theory
dual to K-theory. The first is motivated by work of P. Baum, R. Douglas and M.
Taylor calculating the image of the K-homology class of a first order, elliptic
differential operator on a manifold with boundary under the boundary map in
K-homology. The second is based on the observation that a quantization of a
classical mechanical system based on a continuous parameter of Planck's constant
may be used to construct an asymptotic morphism and hence an element of a
K-homology group. The third is a joint project with N. Higson and J. Trout. Our
equivariant groups will prove useful in a number of contexts. In particular they
have applications to the Baum-Connes conjecture. The proposed research deals
with index theory on non-compact, complex manifolds possessing a large number of
symmetries. The geometric structure of the boundary of these manifolds plays an
important role in index theory. I propose to study its precise relationship to
the analytic properties of elliptic differential operators on the manifolds
themselves using the techniques of coarse geometry and the newly developed
E-theory. The second project is based on the close relationship between elliptic
differential operators on these manifolds to certain quantum mechanical systems.
My methods can be used to obtain new topological invariants of these systems and
relate them to index theory. The research should lead to a better understanding
of a number of quantum mechanical systems from mathematical physics and also has
bearing on a number of outstanding problems in index theory including the Baum-
Connes Conjectupe.