* 9706040
* Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Taxonomic and Ecologic Diversity of Marine Triassic Bivalve Molluscs of Western North       America
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Christopher McRoberts, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 12/31/1997
* USD 59,975.00

9706040 McRoberts I propose a species-level analysis of Triassic bivalve mollusc
faunas of western North America to document spatio-temporal changes in taxonomic
and ecologic diversity and to test hypotheses regarding the structure and causal
factors leading to the Early Mesozoic bivalve radiation. Specifically, I aim to
assemble a multidimensional database of bivalve mollusc species based on
literature, museum, and field collections. Each species occurrence will be
assigned to various temporal, taphonomic, environmental, ecological, and
geographical classes based on it's guild membership, facies occurrence,
location, and age. Construction of a literature-based database is underway, yet
needs strengthening by assessing species variability in large samples available
in museum collections coupled with additional material associated with
paleoenvironmental and taphonomic data which can best be collected in the field.
I am proposing museum visits to important repositories of Triassic bivalve
collections (US Geological Survey, Geological Survey of Canada, National Museum
of Natural History, American Museum of Natural History, and the University of
Montana) and field investigations at several key sites in the western United
States and Canada (Nevada, Idaho, and northeastern British Columbia) where
bivalves occur abundantly in nearly continuous sequences. The proposed project
will build upon a foundation of prior research on the Early Mesozoic bivalve
expansion, and will specifically address the questions: (1) is there a
latitudinal gradient in North American bivalve faunas through all or part of the
interval, and if so, to what degree are originations, extinctions, and ecologic
structure of the faunas controlled by latitude? (2) is there a onshore-offshore
trend in extinctions and originations among all bivalve groups with different
autecology or is the pattern restricted to just a few clades with similar living
habits? And (3) to what degree has differing bivalve ecology played a role in
origination and extinction metrics and is there evidence for selective
speciation or selective survivorship? Resolving these issues bear significant
implications not only for the early Mesozoic faunal expansion, but in
determining the processes of diversification and extinction that can be applied
to other time periods.