* 9706090
* Heirarchical Basis Multigrid/ILU Algorithms for Solving     Finite Element Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 07/31/2001
* USD 174,036.00

9706090 Bank Hierarchical Basis Multigrid/ILU Algorithms for Solving Finite
Element Equations Randolph E. Bank Department of Mathematics University of
California at San Diego La Jolla, CA 92093 This proposal has two main
components. First, we will study algebraic hierarchical basis multigrid
algorithms (HBMG/ILU). These methods solve sparse sets of linear equations
arising from finite difference, finite volume and finite element discretizations
of partial differential equations. They are differentiated from classical HBMG
and MG methods in that they do not require a coarse grid and sequence of mesh
refinements. This allows application to problems with geometrically complex
domains that require many elements just for the geometric definition, and
problems where the adaptivity comes from moving the mesh points rather than from
refinement. Preliminary numerical experiments indicate that the methods are
potentially very powerful and robust. The second component of the of proposal
concerns the continuing software development of the finite element program
PLTMG. Various versions of this program have been in the public domain since the
late 1970's, and it is widely used in education and research environments. PLTMG
solves scalar, parameter dependent, nonlinear elliptic PDE's in general regions
of the plane. The principle features are adaptive mesh generation, a posteriori
error estimation, HBMG (soon to be HBMG/ILU) iteration for linear systems of
equations, Newton's method for nonlinearities, and continuation for parameter
dependencies. The code also includes an initial mesh generator, a skeleton
generator, and several graphics routines. Although the name PLTMG has remained
the same, typically 80% or more of the package is revised with each new release.
In many systems modeled by partial differential equations, the critical
phenomena occur only in a small part of the physical domain, and may move as a
function of time ( e.g. as a flame front). Even with the great advances in
hardware, it is not adequate to address difficult grand-challenge class problems
of this type using software based on simple uniform meshes; the demands of the
problem require that computing resources be focused on the regions of most
interest. The motivation for adaptive mesh algorithms is that the algorithm
itself can and should identify these critical regions and respond with an
appropriate mesh with little or no human intervention. The ``brains'' of
adaptive algorithms are a posterior error indicators, which both estimate the
current error, and indicate where additional resources should be focused. The
very nonuniform and unstructured meshes resulting from adaptive algorithms
require sophisticated methods, such as multigrid or the proposed HBMG/ILU, to
efficiently and reliably solve the resulting systems of equations. Overall, this
field provides a mosaic of important and interrelated scientific questions
ranging from difficult problems in mathematical analysis to difficult
computational challenges in implementing these procedures on modern computer
architectures.