* 9706215
* Reduced-Rank Adaptive Filtering for Spread Spectrum         Communications, Array Processing and Detection
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Gagliardi, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2000
* USD 480,000.00

This research develops new fast adaptive filtering algorithms and structures,
which are characterized by a low computational complexity, and is applying them
to a broad class of applications, including modern communications systems and
advanced sensor array processing. For the communications application, this study
demonstrates that such adaptive signal processing can effectively mitigate
interference in satellite and terrestrial CDMA spread spectrum wireless
communications as well as provide cross-talk cancellation in dense WDM
fiberoptic links. The benefits of this new technology include power savings and
increased data throughput, leading to newer generations of receiver processing
hardware that are being developed from this study. In the sensor array
processing application, it is demonstrated that low-complexity, reduced-
dimension adaptive CFAR detectors are capable of outperforming all existing
detectors for modern radar systems. The technology developed from this research
permits space-time adaptive processing on platforms which are limited in terms
of size, weight and power; such as airborne and space-segment surveillance
systems. The key underlying innovation in all of these applications is the use
of transform domain adaptive signal processing utilizing the cross-spectral
metric and low-complexity filtering structures. This metric permits a lower-
order adaptive filter to converge to a solution which is either identical or
very close to the optimal solution. Since this filter has a smaller number of
adaptive weights, it converges faster and requires a lower computational
complexity. This new technology represents a generalization of multiresolution
and time-frequency basis representations. The full-dimensional transform domain
representation (realized using a filterbank, DFT/DCT, or wavelet) is then
compressed to keep only the most important information as selected by the cross-
spectral metric.