* 9706373
* U-Series Isotope Systematics of Continental Rift Basalts:   The Rio Grande Rift, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2000
* USD 127,580.00

9706373 Asmerom Rifts are unique tectonic settings where magmas derived from
both the deep mantle and the old lithospheric continental mantle occur. Chemical
and isotopic studies of continental basalts erupted in rifts can provide us with
information on the mantle composition under the continents. In contrast to long-
lived isotope systems, short-lived nuclides, such as the U-series isotopes,
allow us to trace dynamical and compositional aspects of the present-day crust-
mantle system. The study area, the Rio Grande Rift and its cratonic margins, is
one of the best characterized continental rift systems in the US. It contains
contemporaneous young alkali and tholeiitic basalts of presumed asthenospheric
and lithospheric mantle origin in close spatial proximity. The U-series isotopic
data in conjunction with Pb, Sr and Nd isotopic compositions of these basalts
will contribute to our understanding of: 1) controls on the variation of Th
enrichment in continental basalts such as differences in degree and rate of
melting, and depth (source) of mantle melting. Information on the variation of
mantle sources with time provides constrains for models of continental rifting.
2) Th-U compositional variability of the mantle under continents, and in
particular the variability in the 232Th/238U ratio (k-value) of the continental
lithospheric mantle. Information on the k-value is important with respect to
global mass balance and as indicator of processes such as recycling and
metasomatism in the mantle. 3) the role of continental crust in modifying the
chemistry of rift magmas.