* 9706901
* New Ligands and Reaction Pathways for Metal Templated       Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Tom Livinghouse, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2000
* USD 302,400.00

With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor Tom Livinghouse, of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry of Montana State University, is studying new ligands and reaction
pathways for metal-templated synthesis. Professor Livinghouse explores the
photopromoted Pauson-Khand reaction, with particular emphasis given to the
elucidation of those factors which contribute to ligand control of the relative
and absolute stereochemical outcome of ring formation. He is also developing
catalytic uses of cobalt complexes for the stereocontrolled synthesis of methano
PGI1 and megellaneone. Synthesis of new C-chiral diphosphines containing
conformational restriction elements as well as an array of structurally
differentiated P-chiral diphosphines is followed by evaluation of these
prospective controller ligands in asymmetric bond forming reactions. The design
and synthesis of a new class of enantiomerically pure C2-symmetric
bis(cyclopentadiene) controller ligands for early d-block metals is also under
investigation. Many of the organic molecules demonstrated or expected to display
important physiological activity have the unique property of having different
chemical properties from their mirror images. Although compounds of this sort
can not infrequently be obtained by separation techniques, many such processes
are inefficient in terms of time and their reliance on the use of additional
quantities of chemical reagents and solvents. As a result, development of
methods for the control of the three-dimensional structure (stereochemistry) of
organic molecules remains an important goal. Professor Tom Livinghouse, of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry of Montana State University, is
developing such methods with the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate. His investigations focus on the design and synthesis of
new groups which introduce stereochemical control elements into reactions
mediated by various metal-containing compounds. These studies help to elucidate
certain factors critical to the design of successful catalysts for `asymmetric`
synthesis and additionally offer access to specific target molecules, including
a potent inhibitor of platelet aggregation in plasma.