* 9706094
* Collaborative Research: Colorado Plateau/Rio Grande Rift/Great Plains Seismic Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1999,12/31/2003
* James Ni, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 171,197.00

9706094&lt;br/&gt;Ni &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
seismological investigation of the crust and mantle beneath a transect extending
from the Great Plains of western Texas through the Rio Grande rift and well into
the Colorado Plateau. By means of PASSCAL portable seismographs, scientists from
four institutes (University of Texas at Austin, New Mexico State University, New
Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, and the Los Alamos National
Laboratory) will occupy an 1100-km line for 10-12 months recording naturally
occurring earthquakes. Seismic body-wave (P and S) and surface-wave data will be
collected to enable the construction of detailed two-dimensional maps of P and S
velocities beneath this portion of the southwestern United States. This mapping
will be used to address questions such as the cause of the uplift of the
Colorado Plateau, the depth of mantle processes that control surface tectonics,
the connection between mantle and crustal strain beneath the Rio Grande Rift,
and the location of the subducted Farallon plate. Integration of surface
geological information with the deep structure images will result in a more
complete regional tectonic model and a better understanding of the causes of the
dramatic tectonic events that have occurred during the last 40 million years in
this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;