* 9706180
* RPG: Toward a Model of Inorganic and Organic Carbon         Fluxes Through a Cycle of Glacier Advance and Retreat
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Suzanne Anderson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/29/2000
* USD 17,922.00

9706180 Anderson Glaciers profoundly impact the landscapes they invade. They
reshape fluvial valleys into broad U-shaped valleys. They produce milky streams
and brilliant turquoise blue lakes laden with very fine suspended rock flour.
These physical effects arise from the unique ability of glaciers to pulverize
bedrock into fine-grained fresh debris. Although it is recognized that physical
and chemical weathering processes are linked, little work has been done to
elucidate the chemical impacts of glaciation. Because glaciers both increase the
rate of erosion processes above those in non-glacial landscapes and alter the
character of surface materials towards fresher deposits, it is likely that
glaciers also change the rate and nature of chemical processes. At present, the
influence of glaciers on the global carbon cycle and climate change is both
unknown and debated. This project lays the groundwork for developing a field-
based quantitative model of the effects of alpine glaciation fluxes important in
regulating the carbon cycle, i.e., weathering rates and mineral surface area
flux. Weathering drives the inorganic portion of the carbon cycle, and mineral
surface area has been recognized recently as a fundamental control on organic
carbon burial, and thus the organic carbon portion of the carbon cycle. The
change in sediment flux as a glacier advances, and the stranding of till and
outwash as a glacier retreats, are both expected to play important roles in
modulating these fluxes. This work will develop the necessary understanding of
the chemical processes in glacial sediments, and identify the best field sites
for model testing, with the ultimate goal of creating a solute-flux model to
piggy-back on a glacial erosion model in development by others at UC Santa Cruz
and INSTAAR. With such a model in hand, we will be able to address the extent to
which the physical change wrought by glaciers also alters the carbon cycle and
contributes to global climate change. Both sediment and solute fluxes directly
influence the carbon cycle. In marine sediments, organic carbon is strongly
correlated with mineral surface area, meaning that carbon burial is strongly
controlled by sedimentation rates. Therefore the degree to which glaciation
alters erosion rates and the grain size distributions of sediments reaching the
ocean is important in setting organic carbon burial rates. A reconnaissance
sampling program will address the sediment trapping efficiency of outwash plains
and the downstream changes in suspended sediment grain size and mineral surface
area. Inorganic carbon fluxes are due to mineral weathering reactions. We know
that both chemical weathering rates and strontium isotopic ratios decrease with
sediment age in glacial moraines. This work will use both lab experiments and
field observations to establish mineral weathering reactions in young glacial
debris, the time-scale for the decay in weathering rates, and how predominant
weathering reactions vary with sediment age. As an important part of this
analysis is to explore whether isotopic proxies, such as 87Sr/86Sr, reflect
weathering rates or weathering processes. In this research planning project, I
will identify a field site for a detailed program of field measurement of water
and solute fluxes, and develop field and lab-based algorithms to describe
quantitatively the suspended sediment and solute fluxes from a proglacial area.