* 9706166
* Quantum Mechanics and Random Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Brydges, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2001
* USD 96,399.00

9706166 Brydges A major problem in equilibrium statistical mechanics is the
calculation of critical exponents. The construction of Euclidean quantum field
theory is a closely related problem. The standard tools in theoretical physics
used for these calculations are the epsilon expansion and the 1/N expansion, but
neither of these are known to be correct methods of calculation. The epsilon
expansion is particularly perplexing, because it involves analytic continuation
in the dimension of space from 4 to 4 - epsilon. This continuation is made term
by term in perturbation theory, but it is not known that the resulting expansion
is the perturbation theory of any model. This proposal considers a different way
to introduce a parameter epsilon, where there clearly are models for epsilon not
= 0, and yet the epsilon parameter plays the same role of moving four
dimensional theories off a bifurcation. The objective is to study the properties
of expansion in epsilon and also expansion in 1/N. It is believed that methods
based on previous work by the author and his collaborators can be extended to
prove that these expansions are correct for epsilon small and for 1/N small. One
possible outcome of this study is the construction of quantum field theory in
three dimensions using the 1/N expansion. This theory should obey all Wightman
axioms, but the perturbation theory in the coupling constant will be non-
renormalizable. Quantum field theory originated in elementary particle physics,
but it is really a mathematical framework for systems with very large numbers of
degrees of freedom. Important applications include: predicting the size and
shape of polymers, the physics of sound waves and electrons in crystals, the
physics of phase transitions. When quantum field theories were first proposed,
it was not clear that they were free of internal contradictions. Examples are
now known which are free of contradiction, but consistent approximations for
prediction remain elusiv e. The purpose of this grant is to investigate two
approximations proposed by Wilson and Fisher, to show that they are truly
consistent approximations, and to delineate their range of validity.