* 9706829
* Ergodic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Daniel Rudolph, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 102,000.00

Abstract Rudolph Over the coming three years Rudolph proposes to focus efforts
in three directions. Having proved the multi-term return-times theorem by way of
multi-fold genericity of sequences for measures, he now proposes to consider
multiple recurrence results. Having just completed with Janet Kammeyer a multi-
year project to lay the foundations of restricted orbit equivalence for discrete
amenable groups, he proposes to apply this machinery to classical and novel
problems. In particular, the application of restricted orbit equivalence methods
to Vershik's theory of reverse filtrations has been extremely fruitful and will
be continued. Finally, he proposes efforts on constructive problems, in
particular exotic Markov randomfields and smooth examples related to the
classical T,T-inverse map. Most if not all interesting phenomena have some
random character. Ergodic theory, as envisioned in this project, is the attempt
to ferret out the nature and origin of this randomness in phenomena modeled
abstractly as probabilistic processes. This is done by examining the behavior of
the process over ever larger blocks of time and attempting to analyze or recode
the information gained. The principle investigator has developed an approach to
this analysis that considers controlled distortions of time in the process to
attempt to modify it to some simpler form. The degree or manner of distortion
one allows will determine what properties of the process are preserved or lost.
This allows one to focus on some particular properties to save allowing others
to be eliminated. One particularly interesting case of this is when randomness
appears spatially in a crystal or tiling and "time" is two or three dimensional.
The crystal structure or tile shapes will determine what "distortions" are
allowed. This "time distortion" approach, called "restricted orbit equivalence"
has already shown itself well-suited to understanding a wide variety of
properties of random processes and appears applicable to many others. Pursuing
these possibilities is the main focus of this project.