* 9706993
* Novel Optical and Magnetic Properties of Nanostructured     Materials Manufactured by Spark-Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Rolf Hummel, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2001
* USD 265,000.00

9706993 Hummel This project addresses spark processing, an exploratory method
for producing light emitting porous silicon. Spark processing utilizes a plasma
based discharge between electrodes, and represents an alternative technique to
the more common anodic etching approach to producing porous silicon. The
objective is to increase understanding of the properties of light-emitting,
nanostructured materials prepared by spark processing through a study of
mechanisms associated with processing parameters. Optimization with respect to
key optical and magnetic properties carried out, and the development of
relationships between nanostructure, properties, and conditions prevailing in
the spark processing environment will be sought. Laser processing will also be
employed in parallel with spark processing for comparisons, further property
enhancements, and to gain insight into processing/property relationships of
nanostructured materials. %%% The project addresses processing research issues
in a topical area of materials science with technological relevance. The
research will contribute basic materials science knowledge to important aspects
of extremely small structured materials with implications for advanced
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally, the
fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing greater understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***