* 9706183
* Analysis of Plant DNA Preservation in Woodrat Middens From  the Late Pleistocene to the Present
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Edward Golenberg, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 120,090.00

9706183 Golenberg During the Quaternary, the Earth underwent the last major
environmental changes, which were manifested by dramatic swings in atmospheric
chemistry and climate. These environmental changes coincide with massive shifts
in species and community distributions, which inevitably are associated with
population fragmentation, ecotype evolution and formation of sibling species.
Yet the morphological evidence of patterns of Quaternary evolution remains
sparse. Genetic analyses which could document the patterns of evolution have
been negligible despite the wealth of well preserved plant and animal tissue in
packrat middens. These dry depositions are ideal for the preservation of DNA,
allowing one to estimate species ranges, ecotonal boundaries, hybrid zones; and
migrational histories with high spatio-temporal resolution. The delayed progress
in DNA analyses of this material is the reluctance to support problem driven
research utilizing ancient DNA analysis when the reliability, repeatability, and
taxonomic and chronological range of DNA preservation is not well established.
To determine the contributions of taxonomic breadth, length of time, and
geographical/environmental restrictions to long term DNA preservation, material
from five plant taxa (Pinus spp., Juniperus spp., Artemisia spp., Atriplex spp.,
and Yucca spp.) will be sampled over increasing age increments from fresh and
recently preserved to material retrieved from woodrat middens from 90 up to
+38,000 years old. To complete this aim, our objectives are: ( To extract DNA
from dated vegetative material (leaf, needle, scales, and stems) from a wide
geographically and chronological range, ( To amplify, sequence, and analyze gene
sequences from the chloroplast regions rbcL, trnL to trnF intergenic region, and
the nuclear ITS regions of the ribosomal repeats, ( To assess rates of
successful retrieval as functions of taxon, age, age and tissue type. Prior
results from independent laboratories have demonstrate d that DNA can be
extracted from packrat midden material. Our own preliminary results show that
DNA regions that are diagnostic to the subspecies level can be retrieved. The
ultimate long range goal of our research is to exploit the large amounts of
subfossil material to combine, morphological, physiological, biogeographical
studies with the underlying genetic dynamics of the populations as they evolved
and migrated during the Quaternary. This goal will be the first merger of
population genetic and paleontological studies, and may serve as tests to our
understanding of the relevance of microevolution to macroevolution.
Additionally, in terms of practical implications of the long term goals,
defining the evolutionary processes behind these historical occurrences is
manifestly relevant towards understanding and predicting modern biospheric
responses to natural and anthropogenic climatological changes.