* 9706788
* Theory of Time-Dependent Phenomena in Quantum Many-Body     Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Giovanni Vignale, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 207,000.00

9706788 Vignale This grant will support the work of a mid-career PI on some
fundamental aspects of time dependent density functional theory. The PI has
pioneered the generalized current- density functional theory to describe the
high frequency effects under weak perturbing potentials. The generalized theory
has the prospect of a unified treatment of a large class of phenomena ranging
from standard linear response and transport to nonlinear and nonperturbative
phenomena and parametric instabilities. The PI will study exact solutions as
benchmarks, to learn about the rigorous structure of the exact exchange
correlation potentials. The theory will also be generalized to include the
electronic spin degree of freedom. The theoretical work will benefit from
experiments on the dispersion and lifetime of collective excitations in metals
and also on excitations in digitally designed quantum wells. In addition the PI
is also planning to investigate the excitations at the edges of quantum Hall
systems. %%% This mid-career PI was a pioneer in the development of a
theoretical formalism to study the time dependent properties of electrons in
metals. This work is widely known as the current-density functional theory. In
the present grant, he is planning to develop a unified treatment of the response
of atoms, molecules and metals to intense and high frequency electromagnetic
fields. The specific effects include a study of nonlinear phenomena and also
parametric instabilities in metals and in digitally designed quantum wells. He
is also planning to study the special properties of electrons at high fields,
the features associated with the edge states in a quantum Hall effect. ***