* 9706497
* Partial Differential Equations and Real Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Cristian Gutierrez, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 70,407.00

9706497 Gutierrez The problems in this project concentrate on the study of the
behavior of solutions of degenerate elliptic and parabolic equations in non-
divergence form with non-smooth coefficients. Such coefficients may either
vanish, be infinite, or both. A primary goal is to study the validity of the
Harnack principle for nonnegative solutions and estimates of the second
derivatives of solutions. Though the theory for divergence form equations with
measurable coefficients has been the focus of research during recent years, the
corresponding theory for non-divergence form equations is much less developed.
Non-divergence equations are natural in Probability, Control Theory, and
Finance. The results known in this direction concern either smooth coefficients
or the strictly elliptic case, but the methods developed for those cases do not
apply to the problems proposed. In some cases the geometry needed to study the
linear equation is given by the Monge-Ampere equation, a fully nonlinear partial
differential equation. This approach requires the study of the shape and
invariance properties of the level sets of solutions to the Monge-Ampere
equation, and further work will continue along these lines. The basis and
methodology that will be used to solve this set of problems are via the maximum
principle, localization, and nonlinear variants of the Calderon-Zygmund
decomposition. This mathematical research is in the field of partial
differential equations, linear and nonlinear. These equations are the principal
classical tool of the applications of mathematics to the physical world. The
project has a strong connection with Harmonic Analysis in Euclidean space, a
subject that has flourished during the second half of the twentieth century and
that has become an indispensable tool to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions of partial differential equations. Some
equations considered in the project are used in models of atmospheric a nd
oceanic flows and in the description of the diffusion of a gas in a porous
medium.