* 9706685
* COMMONWEALTH: Architecture and Protocols for                Scalable WWW Service
* CSE,EIA
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 06/30/2001
* USD 590,087.00

The phenomenal growth of the World Wide Web is imposing considerable strain on
Internet resources and Web servers, prompting numerous concerns about the Web's
continued viability. The success of high-performance Web servers in alleviating
these performance problems is ultimately limited, unless Web services are
designed to be inherently scalable. The Commonwealth project aims to design,
implement, and evaluate a prototypical architecture and a set of associated
protocols for scalable Web services. The Commonwealth architecture for hosting
scalable Web services allows scalability through (1) parallel processing on
tightly-coupled nodes within a Web site, and (2) load distribution across
loosely-coupled Web sites. Commonwealth's underlying philosophy is to achieve a
WEALTH of performance through the use of COMMON components, and to do so along
an incremental upgrade path. The Commonwealth protoype will catalyze basic
research in four main areas: (1) Data placement (caching, prefetching, and
dissemination protocols); (2) Resource management (scheduling, load balancing,
and admission control protocols); (3) Networking (routing, packet redirection,
and connection migration) and (4) Middleware services (replication and resource
discovery). These problems will be addressed with particular attention to the
issue of high-variability, which---in previous work by the principal
investigators---was shown to pose significant problems for the design of
Internet-based systems.