* 9706403
* Changes in Sahel Land-Surface Characteristics and           Climate Variation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Stephen Prince, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 251,352.00

9706403 Xue There are two distinct hydrological phenomena in the Sahel: a
persistent drought, which is very likely to have been partially caused by the
land surface change, and a significant seasonal variation in the surface water
balance. Simulations that couple a NCEP GCM with a biosphere model (SSiB), which
has been calibrated and validated against HAPEX and SEBEX data, will be
conducted to investigate influences of land-surface conditions on hydrological
processes and regional climate variability in the Sahel, especially the impact
of land cover on long-term Sahel drought patters. The simulations will use land
property data and land cover data from field measurements and satellite
observations to evaluate the integration between regional and local moisture
sources in determining rainfall. The impacts of heterogeneity of vegetation
distribution on land-atmosphere interactions will be explored. It will be
followed by the development of a methodology to aggregate land-surface
parameters to GCM grid boxes or sub-grid box. The study will focus on how land
condition changes seasonal patterns in rainfall, ET, Soil water, and runoff. The
results will be confirmed through comparisons with observed changing rainfall,
surface temperature, and in particular, the river discharge. A river routing
model will be used to convert the runoff values produced by the land surface
model in each grid cell of a GCM to the basin outlet. The diagnostic analyses
will be made to determine sources of Sahel precipitation, and relative
contributions of each evaporation source to the rainfall and its anomalies in
the Sahel. Attention will also be paid to study the impacts of land surface
processes on AFJ dynamics and wave propagation. The significance of the land
surface effects will be tested with respect to various patterns of land forcing
anomalies, which include different degrees of land surface degradation and
different percentage of vegetation cover changes in one GCM grid box.