* 9706148
* Admission Control in High Speed Multimedia Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ioannis Paschalidis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 08/31/2001
* USD 200,146.00

In recent years, technological advances and bandwidth availability have brought
about a web of new multimedia and real-time applications, such as internet
telephony, interactive TV, video-on-demand, and videoconferencing. These
applications have important uses in a wide range of activities from education
and health care to entertainment. Their full deployment will clearly have a huge
impact on the quality of our lives and the society as a whole. Such
applications, however, are very bandwidth demanding, very sensitive to
congestion, and require real-time and reliable communication. Although
appropriate protocols, such as the Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) protocol and
an enhanced version of Internet's TCP/IP protocol (with RSVP), already exist,
Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning remains one of the fundamental open
problems that need to be addressed before real-time applications can be reliably
supported. If congestion is not an option, restricting the number of users that
are allowed in the network becomes an extremely useful tool in guaranteeing QoS.
The central goal of this research is to devise such an admission control
procedure and test its performance in practice. To provide QoS guarantees the
network should prevent congestion which causes packet losses due to buffer
overflows and excessive delays. A worst case based admission control algorithm
(which allocates to calls bandwidth equal to their peak rate) leads to
significant underutilization of the network resources, since traffic is
typically bursty, i.e., the peak rate is not sustained for long. To achieve more
efficient use of the resources the proposed approach will permit some congestion
phenomena which will be occurring infrequently enough to allow for the provision
of statistical QoS guarantees. More specifically, it is desired to operate the
network in a regime where loss probabilities and probabilities of excessive
delays are particularly small (e.g., on the order of 10^{-6}). Real-time app
lications can tolerate such small frequencies of congestion phenomena. This
research will draw upon methods developed in applied probability, optimization,
and optimal control theory, and will use, extending whenever necessary, many of
the ideas developed recently by the PI. Calculating congestion probabilities for
non-trivial traffic models is particularly hard. The proposed work will
therefore resort to asymptotic results using large deviations theory (a subfield
of applied probability) as the main analytical tool. Issues that are considered
as prerequisites for successful admission control will be first resolved. Among
them the proposed research will address: -Traffic Modeling. The aim is to
propose models that capture the statistical properties of the traffic which are
relevant to admission control. -Performance analysis. The goal is to
asymptotically estimate congestion probabilities in a multiclass and multihop
network environment. The final product of the proposed work will be an admission
control algorithm that provides statistical QoS guarantees to admitted calls and
possesses the following characteristics: -Support for multiple service classes.
Applications will be bundled in service classes based on the statistical
character of the traffic they generate and on their QoS requirements. -Full
utilization of available bandwidth. The controller will be flexible enough to
investigate different bandwidth allocation strategies among service classes and
deny admission only when there is no feasible allocation that guarantees QoS to
all connected calls. -End-to-End QoS guarantees. Real-time implementation. More
information about this project can be obtained from the Web at
http://ionia.bu.edu/