* 9706787
* Dynamical Systems in Structured Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Horst Thieme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2002
* USD 95,000.00

Thieme 9706787 The investigator studies the interplay of population structures
and population development via mathematical models consisting of partial
differential equations, large systems of ordinary differential equations, and of
Volterra integral equations. The structures of interest are induced by internal
characteristics like (chronological or class) age, size, location or/and by
spatial or temporal heterogeneity. For infectious diseases that lead to
permanent immunity, a model is developed that allows arbitrary distributions for
the lengths of the various disease stages. A time scale method is presented that
makes it possible to express the stability of the endemic equilibrium in terms
of the first three cumulants of the durations of the disease stages. Further,
effects are investigated that temporarily varying vaccination strategies
(including vaccines with only transient effects) have on seasonal diseases
(influenza). Optimal treatment strategies are studied for diseases with
resistant strains in populations with core groups (AIDS, tuberculosis). As an
important tool the investigator extends the persistence theory for non-
autonomous dynamical systems. In population ecology, strategies are considered
by which populations cope with spatial or temporal heterogeneities of their
habitats. In particular, migration strategies in structured metapopulations and
adaptive strategies like metamorphosis and cannibalism for populations in
ephemeral habitats are investigated that maximize the reproductive ratio. In
order to interpret, forecast, manage and control the dynamics of microbial,
plant, animal and human populations it is necessary to understand the
interaction between population development and population and habitat structure
(as given by age or body size or by spatial and temporal heterogeneity). The
investigator develops mathematical concepts and tools to formulate and analyze
appropriate models for this interdependence. Particular poi nts of interest are
how population and habitat structure affect stability, resilience, persistence
and extinction of populations. In the area of infectious diseases, mathematical
models provide a suitable arena to study various mechanisms that cause seasonal
outbreaks (measles, influenza) and to determine adaptive vaccination strategies
that deal with them in an effective way. Further, in face of evasive or
resistant microbial strains (AIDS, tuberculosis), it is possible to compare
different disease treatment schedules for populations with core groups. As an
important issue in conservation biology, habitat fragmentation leads to the
formation of a patchy environment where local populations often go extinct and
are recolonized by individuals immigrating from other local populations.
Structured metapopulation models present a framework to identify the
circumstances under which gradual habitat deterioration leads to a sudden
collapse of the total population and, in turn, to determine critical thresholds
that must be met in order to successfully reintroduce populations that have
become extinct.