* 9706482
* Hydrogeologic Characterization of the Sand Hill Fault       Zone, Albuquerque Basin, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Allan Gutjahr, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2002
* USD 171,000.00

9706482 Goodwin Faults can act as either conduits or barriers to groundwater
flow, and their permeability can change over time as a result of diagenesis and
deformation in the fault zone. We propose to investigate the influence of faults
on fluid flow by conducting an integrated geologic/hydrologic investigation of
the spatial distribution of fault-zone permeability in poorly consolidated
sediments. all previous studies of fault-zone permeability have focused on
rocks, yet many important aquifers in the United States consist of poorly
consolidated sediments. Our characterization of hydrogeologic units in fault
zones in sedimentary aquifers will be based on detailed study of an exhumed
normal fault cutting poorly consolidated Cenozoic sediments. The Sand Hill fault
is exceptionally well exposed, providing extensive vertical and lateral sections
for study of the geometry and continuity of structures and diagenetic features
within the fault zone. The fault zone is distinguished by preferential
cementation with respect to adjacent sediments, and includes elongate oriented
zones of cement that record the orientation of groundwater flow at the time of
precipitation. Preliminary studies of fault-zone structures and cement
distribution indicate that fault-zone permeability characteristics vary in a
predictable manner. We have constructed a conceptual model in which the width
and permeability structure of the fault zone vary both laterally and vertically
depending on the sediments juxtaposed by the fault. This variation is
represented by two end members: (1) Where fine-grained, low permeability units
such as silts and clays are juxtaposed by the fault, the zone of deformation is
narrow and weakly cemented. (2) Where relatively coarse-grained, initially
moderate to high permeability units such as coarse sands are juxtaposed by the
fault, the zone of deformation is wide and moderately to strongly cemented.
Detailed geologic mapping and petrographic studies of deformation features
within the fault zone, cementation patterns both within and outside the fault
zone, and stratigraphic variability of sediments will be used to refine this
preliminary conceptual model of fault-zone hydrogeology. As a beginning point
for understanding the influence of cementation on fluid flow, we will consider
both uncemented and cemented states. The permeability variations of uncemented
fault-zone hydrogeologic units and lithostratigraphic units cut by the fault
will be determined using a combination of gas minipermeameters and falling head
permeability measurements. The pre-cementation permeability will be estimated by
dissolving cements and determining the permeability of repacked sediments as
well as applying empirical formulae correlating grain size with permeability.
One fundamental challenge in this study is to use the centimeter-scale
permeability values to describe larger scale permeability characteristic of the
sediments. Our approach to this problem will be to used the permeability data to
characterize meter-scale hydrogelogic units. The larger-scale (i.e., deca to
hectometer scale) hydrogeologic units can be considered as discrete structures
and characterized by geological mapping and distribution of meter-scale
measurements within the units. The conceptural model and quantitative
measurements will then be used with classical geostatistical continuum methods
based on variograms and cross-variograms as well as discrete statistical
approaches to characterize the spatial distribution of hydrogeologic units and
petrophysical properties within the Sand Hill fault zone, and to relate these to
the spatial distribution and petrophysical properties of lithostratigraphic
units juxtaposed by the fault. The comprehensive nature of this project makes it
imperative that collaboration occur at all stages. Statistical design will be
incorporated with data collection and initial analyses will be used to guide
measurement strategies at the later stages.