* 9706747
* A Modular Toolkit for Vision and Robotics -- An Experiment  in Domain specific Software Architecture --
* CSE,EIA
* 06/15/1997,09/21/1999
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 09/21/1999
* USD 865,004.00

The goal of this project is to develop and experimentally verify the
performance, usability and scalability of a modern programming language approach
to constructing complex vision- based systems. The research combines recent
advances in the theory and practice of imperative functional programming and
domain-specific languages with recent innovations in the development of
algorithms for performing visual tracking and vision-based motion control.
Specific research objectives include: advancing the state of the art in
designing domain- specific languages for rapid prototyping, developing and
empirical testing methodologies for combining high-level languages with
performance-critical components written in standard (imperative, non-typesafe)
languages, and the validation of a high-level, high-performance programming
framework for vision and robotics through empirical demonstration. The impact of
this research will be the transfer of modern programming language concepts (such
as monadic programming, process-algebraic approaches to concurrency, and time-
varying behaviors) into a novel, non-trivial application area, the
identification of the critical components of such systems with respect to both
functionality and performance, and the dissemination of a flexible, portable,
and freely available software environment for visual tracking and vision-based
motion control.