* 9706805
* Critical Behavior In Nanoscale Confined Fluid Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Eldred Chimowitz, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2001
* USD 165,460.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9706805 Univ. of Rochester Fundamental aspects of the critical
behavior of a confined fluid in a model nanoscale pore structure are being
investigated utilizing finite-size scaling theory in conjunction with computer
simulation methodology. Original results are described for analyzing critical
phenomena in there types of systems. The framework developed incorporates
critical scaling concepts and rigorously accounts for finite-size effects that
are important when doing simulations in the critical region. Underpinning the
analysis in the confined system has been the assumption of universality between
the gas-liquid and Ising-type systems, a perspective in keeping with the results
of modern critical phenomena theory. The finite-size scaling analysis presented
leads to very specific conditions that define the onset of critical behavior,
and hence the phase transition regime, in the confined system. In this way, size
dependence is made an ally of the simulations and helps lead to novel methods
for predicting critical properties and other fundamental behavior of interest in
these systems. Understanding the thermodynamic and transport behavior of near-
critical fluids confined in porous substrates is important to several areas of
research in chemical and materials engineering. These include the development of
methods for using porous materials to efficiently store gases with low bulk
critical temperatures, metallic thin film deposition in porous media using
supercritical fluid chemical vapor deposition (SFCVD) and the use of
supercritical fluids for drying porous silicon and aerogels. In this latter
application, the drying trajectory of the process is chosen to expressly avoid
traversing the intrapore fluid's phase boundary.