* 9706256
* Chaos and Stability in Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* James Howland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2001
* USD 72,255.00

9706256 Howland Howland will study (1.) stability and chaos in discrete quantum
systems driven by time-dependent perturbations; (2.) the asymptotics of
resonance widths in multiscale perturbation problems; and (3.) the occurrence of
twisted bundles in the Born-Oppenheimer approximation for molecular
Hamiltonians. Chaos Theory, one of the most important new fields of mathematics
to arise in the last few decades, is concerned with systems which can exhibit a
very erratic motion. The most common example is the turbulent flow of water from
a pipe when a faucet is turned on hard. A famous early example concerned
computer models of the weather, where the occurrence of chaotic behavior makes
it impossible to predict the weather more than a few days in advance. Perhaps
the most important discovery has been simply the realization that, far from
being rare, chaotic behavior is not only very common, but in some sense, is
actually the most common type of behavior. The systems usually studied in Chaos
Theory are described by Classical Mechanics, the theory initiated by Isaac
Newton which describes ordinary objects like those we experience. Microscopic
systems like atoms, molecules, and electrons are not at all like the objects of
ordinary experience, and are described by a strange theory known as Quantum
Mechanics, which was developed in the first quarter of this century. The main
thrust of the present project is to study Chaos Theory in the context of atomic
and molecular systems. This is quite difficult because, since Classical
Mechanics and Quantum Mechanics are so very different, there is no agreement on
exactly what it is that one wants to study. This is still a field where most
experts feel that some sort of new ideas and approaches will be needed before
the problem is understood. An example of the type of system that is of interest
is a Hydrogen atom in a laser field. As simple as this seems physically, it is
quite a difficult mathematical problem. In the present project, simple models of
such a system will be studied in order to try to come to some understanding of
how they work.