* 9706115
* Alluvial Architecture and Floodplain Paleosols:  Field      Evaluation of Theoretical Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mary Kraus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9706115 Kraus One of the most important advances in fluvial sedimentology has
been the development of alluvial architecture models. An important component of
these models is channel avulsion, and two recent studies provide new and more
realistic insights on the influence of avulsion on alluvial architecture. The
new model of Mackey and Bridge (1995) predicts "avulsion sequences" in which
major sandstones become progressively thinner up-section. Heller and Paola
(1996) have presented a simple geometric model that explores how the
relationship between avulsion frequency and sedimentation rate can influence
alluvial architecture. Despite their potential for interpreting the rock record,
the validity and usefulness of the models depend upon field testing in both
modern and ancient alluvial sequences. Consequently, the research proposed here
is to examine the alluvial architecture of Eocene alluvial deposits in light of
the new models. This research is innovative in that the alluvial architecture
and the intrinsic and extrinsic controls on the fluvial system will be
established by integrating the analysis of floodplain paleosols with the more
typical analysis of sandstone body characteristics. This project has two major
goals: (1) to field test the new concepts of avulsion and alluvial architecture
and provide field data for refining these new models and (2) to further develop
paleosols as an integral part of alluvial architecture studies (both field and
quantitative studies). To focus on only the effects of subsidence rate and
avulsion frequency on alluvial architecture, time-equivalent upstream and
downstream cross-sections in an exceptionally well-exposed ancient example will
be examined. The stratigraphic unit to be analyzed, the Willwood Formation, is
especially appropriate for this study because it has excellent biostratigraphic
and paleomagnetostratigraphic records that can be used for time correlation and
calculating sediment accumulation rates. Previous studies of Willwood paleosols
in other parts of the basin provide a framework for analyzing the paleosols.
Field study will focus on describing the major sandstone bodies and the
paleosols surrounding them. The external geometry, internal characteristics, and
interconnectedness of the major sandstones in the two study areas will be
described. Paleosols will be described and further studied in the lab to
determine the different the different kinds of paleosols and their maturity. The
analyses of the sandstone bodies and the paleosols will be integrated to test
and refine the computer models. The two cross sections will be examined for up-
section changes in sandstone body size and interconnectedness and in paleosol
maturity to test for the presence of avulsion sequences predicted by Bridge and
Mackey (1995). The alluvial architectures in the two study areas will be
compared and contrasted to see what effect increasing rates of sediment
accumulation had on alluvial architecture and to test how applicable the results
of Heller and Paola (1996) are to the stratigraphic record. Both the new
alluvial architecture models and the integration of paleosol analysis into
alluvial architecture studies have important implications for the way alluvial
processes and the resulting deposits are understood. Together they provide a
fundamental new assessment of how alluvial deposits can be described and
interpreted, and they offer enormous potential for better prediction of alluvial
architecture in subsurface resources such as aquifers and oil and gas fields.