* 9706297
* Control of Metallic Particle Contaminants in Compressed Gas Insulated Sub-station (GIS) Equipment by Conductor Coating
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Medhat Morcos, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 08/31/2000
* USD 91,682.00

Compressed gas-insulated switchgear (GIS), normally using SF6 gas as an
insulating medium, is now widely established all over the world and represents
the leading technique in the construction of high-voltage switching electric
power stations in urban areas. It offers distinct advantages to power supply
utilities. Due to low space requirements, GIS is adaptable to all types of
buildings. GIS also provides environmental protection by shielding humans and
animals in its vicinity from emanating electromagnetic fields. It is itself
protected from environmental hazard, such as lightning and pollution. The
advantages of GIS are compromised by the phenomenon of contaminating conducting
particles which are inevitably present inside the enclosure. Metallic particles
are known to drastically impair the insulation integrity of compressed gas
insulated sub-station (GIS) equipment. Such particles present a special hazard
when present in close proximity of support insulators. Most GIS equipment
manufacturers employ a variety of techniques and devices, such as electrostatic
particle traps, to control metallic particle contamination. Further research is
vitally needed to detect the presence of these particles and mitigate their
effects, and thus minimize unplanned outages. Reliability of electric supply is
important and its economic impact is recognized by all users and suppliers. The
efficiency and effectiveness of dielectric coatings on high voltage electrodes
in gaseous insulation systems have been studied over the past several years.
Data indicate that the dielectric coatings are beneficial and improve the
breakdown voltage in gaseous insulation systems. Moreover, results of some
preliminary studies show that such coatings reduce the adverse impact of
metallic particles in GIS equipment, thus increasing the reliability of the
system. The objective of this project is to use modeling and computational
methods to investigate the effectiveness of conductor coating in mitigating
adverse effec ts of particle contamination in a horizontal section of a coaxial
GIS system. The probability of insulation failure in the presence of metallic
particles can be calculated by combining the particle position density function
with the breakdown voltage profile of a given GIS system. The numerical model
also will be used to study the effect of parameters such as particle size, gap
dimensions, and voltage waveshape on particle trapping. Theoretical results will
be verified experimentally. The principal investigator, has studied the dynamics
of metallic particle movement in GIS equipment. His research has included the
use of a comprehensive computational program to analyze the effect of various
parameters on the particle movement in coaxial electrode systems under 60 Hz
voltage. International collaboration between Kansas State University, USA,
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, and the University of British
Columbia, Canada, will be accomplished in this project. At Kansas State
University the principal investigator will elaborate the particle dynamics model
in a coaxial electrode system with one electrode coated and predict improvement
in the breakdown voltage profile and the breakdown probability of the compressed
gas insulated transmission line (GITL) system in general. Experimental work will
be needed to verify the results of the modeling. Experimental data will be
obtained at the high voltage laboratory at Chalmers University of Technology,
under the direction of Professor Stanislaw Gubariski. The proposed collaboration
will enable verification of modeling outputs by conducting appropriate
experiments. The impact of the proposed study will be in the broad area of
energy infrastructure in urban USA by making compressed GIS/GITL technology more
efficient, environmentally friendly, and easier to operate and maintain. The
proposed project should be of interest to both utilities and manufacturers.