* 9706566
* Applications of Variational Level Set Methods to Some       Multiphase Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Hong-Kai Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 65,606.00

9706566 Hongkai Zhao The study and numerical computation of free boundary or
interface problems are quite challenging (especially in three dimensions) when
either there are topological changes in the free boundaries or there are more
than two phases that share a common boundary (triple junction). This project
will use the variational level set approach, which can handle these difficulties
easily and naturally to some extent, to model several multiphase problems such
as the configurations of clustered soap bubbles, the formation of droplets on
the ceiling or at the end of a nozzle and their topological transitions. The
effects of surface tension, bulk energy and external forces will be included in
the variational formulation. Using appropriate abstract 'surface' energy,
applications to some optimal graph partitioning problems will also be made. At
the same time, robust and efficient numerical schemes will be developed for
numerical computation in 2D and 3D for these problems. Surface energy plays an
important role in many physical phenomena due to the micro-structure of
molecules, such as soap bubbles, thin films, droplets formation, wetting and
dewetting process, etc. They are also related to minimal surface problems in
mathematical literature. It is well known that among all possible configurations
of closed surfaces which enclose a fixed volume, the sphere has the minimal
surface area. This explain why soap bubbles or oranges are rounded. The
understanding of the surface effects, its interactions with other physical
effects and numerical simulation of these free boundary problems in quite
complicated physical settings are the motivations for this project. It will
provide extremely useful information and tools for many practical applications
such as optimal shape design, etching and deposition in microchip fabrication,
plating and manufacturing of ink jet printer. It can also be used in some
optimization problems when the surface energy is properly interpreted, such as
the optimal domain decomposition cut for efficient parallel computing, landscape
dividing or metal cuttings.