* 9706372
* Model-Based Signal Processing for Digital Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Michael Fitz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

A demodulation paradigm using model-based symbol-by-symbol maximum a posteriori
(MAP) algorithms for digital communication signals has recently been developed
by the PIs. In parallel, an experimental physical layer wireless modem has been
developed that implements many advanced algorithms from communication theory.
This project uses these past developments to produce high quality research to:
-> Develop new algorithms for important wireless data communication
applications; -> Produce techniques to analyze the performance and stability of
these algorithms,; -> Deploy and experiment with new algorithms on realistic
wireless channels to verify the theory and to formulate more accurate analytical
signal models. Symbol-by-symbol MAP demodulation is important in a wide variety
of digital communication applications. Turbo codes have recently sparked
significant interest due to their near capacity performance and their relatively
simple demodulation architecture. MAP decoding is very important in Turbo
decoding and the project will explore methods to reduce complexity of standard
Turbo decoding in a principled fashion and explore noniterative techniques for
Turbo decoding based on approximations to optimal MAP decoding. Additionally MAP
demodulation is very important in interleaved coded systems commonly used in
wireless communications. This project explores soft output algorithms for use in
time-varying frequency flat and frequency selective fading channels. In
particular, we are exploring high performance demodulators for time-division
multiple-access applications like IS-136 and for digital television. In high
capacity applications, interference suppression has greatly increased in
significance. This project will extend the model-based MAP paradigm to develop
high performance demodulators for signals in the presence of co-channel
interference using both a conventional single antenna modem and ''space-time''
modem architectures. Another unique feature of our project is that we consi der
soft output demodulation/decoding in an integrated framework with receiver
front-end design (e.g., equalization, synchronization). Such an approach is
essential for operating at the low SNR's necessary to take advantage of powerful
codes (e.g., Turbo codes). A further unique aspect of this project is that we
intend to study the resulting algorithms in a much greater depth than is
traditionally attempted. This project will apply sophisticated analytical
techniques to analyze the performance and stability of many of the proposed
algorithms. This analysis will provide a greater insight into the performance of
these algorithms than can be achieved via simulation study alone. We also intend
to implement and field test many of the proposed algorithms. We currently have a
working wireless modem and new algorithms can be added by a simple change of
software. This combination of algorithm development, algorithm analysis, and
algorithm implementation will lead to significant new insight into communication
theory especially in the wireless area. This combined approach will also provide
a more well-rounded educational experience for the student participants.