* 9706931
* Computations and Analysis of Fluids and Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* John Lowengrub, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 138,000.00

9706931 Lowengrub The main objective of this proposal is to investigate the
dynamics of fluid-fluid and solid-solid interfaces by (1) developing and
applying state-of-the-art numerical methods to large scale computation and (2)
performing analytical, numerical and modelling studies of important constituent
processes. Specifically, the focus will be on studying topological transitions
in fluids and the diffusional evolution of microstructure in solids. These areas
involve fundamental physical processes whose phenomenology is basic to
understanding the behavior of real fluids and the material properties of solids.
Both are characterized by the presence of multiple constitutive components,
complex pattern formation and/or singularities (i.e. spatial complexity).
Although these processes arise in very different physical phenomena (fluids
versus solids), both involve free boundary problems where the motion of a
bounding interface, separating the different components, is driven by a
competition between surface energy and either an instability or multi-body
interactions. As such, they can be treated using a common set of analytical and
computational tools. The highly nonlinear nature of these problems makes fast,
accurate and robust numerical methods essential to their study. In this
proposal, we bring together mathematical and numerical analysis, modelling, and
large-scale scientific computation to study certain fundamental problems in
fluid dynamics and materials science. For instance, one problem we will consider
concerns changes in the topology of interfaces between different fluids. Such
changes occur, for example, when liquid jets pinch off into droplets and when
droplets of one fluid reconnect with another. These topological transitions
occur in many practical applications involving transport, mixing, and separation
of petroleum, chemical, and food products as well as in environmental
applications such as oil spills. Often, reaction and mixing rates within these
systems are controlled directly by the detailed dynamics of the transition
processes. Thus, there is a need to understand these dynamics in order to
develop accurate engineering models for mixing and reaction rate prediction. We
will use analysis, modelling and large scale scientific computation to
investigate the detailed dynamics of break-up and reconnection of fluid
interfaces. Another problem we will consider involves solid-state diffusional
phase transformations. These transformations are an important method of
processing multicomponent metallic alloys such such as steels. The result of
this process is the formation of a multiphase microstructure, which is a key
variable in setting the macroscopic mechanical properties (i.e. stiffness,
strength and toughness) of the alloy. The microstructure is characterized by
regions of different metallic components separated from one another by
interfaces. The goal of our research is to accurately model and simulate the
formation of microstructure in alloys in order to provide metallurgists with a
recipe for generating new alloys with desirable material properties. Although
the two problems described above arise from very different physical processes
(fluids versus solids), they are similar in the sense that the relevant
phenomena is strongly influenced by surface tension at the respective
interfaces. Consequently, they can be studied using common analytical and
computational tools. The highly complex nature of these problems makes fast,
accurate and robust numerical methods essential to their study.