* 9706545
* VLSI Optimized Architectures for Wide Area ATM Switches
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Paul Min, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 269,999.00

Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) has emerged as a leading technique for wide are
networking. The world's telephone companies are well on their way to total
conversion to ATM which is expected to take about 25 years. Utilizing a small
53-byte cell structure, ATM enables effective communication between a large
variety of broadband technologies that are currently evolving. Accordingly,
there is strong interest in formulating a switching architecture suitable for
ATM-based wide area network, for which several studies can be found in the
literature. Often, these studies reported specific switching architectures along
with performance data such as throughput and delay, but little in the way to
indicate their effectiveness as large, wide area switches. This project entails
comprehensive investigation in developing a framework for wide area ATM
switching. Based on the extensive experiences derived from our recent
prototyping effort for the Washington University Multi-Channel Switch (WUMCS),
we incorporate several important technological constraints in the investigation
of the characteristics of wide area switches, such as scalability,
synchronization, high performance, fault tolerance, fairness, and modularity.
Use of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) is necessary in order to provide the
extremely high clocking and data transfer rates needed in wide area switches.
The number of integrated circuit (IC) chips in a switch translates directly to
the cost and implementation complexity. We attempt to minimize the IC count in
the switch by implementing each switch module with the maximum possible
throughput in a single IC. Significant effort is devoted to the investigation of
various options in the design of switch modules that result in the maximum
possible throughput, while taking into consideration constraints associated with
VLSI such as die size, electrical propagation delay, power dissipation, and pin
limitation. An important goal of the proposed work is to determine the VLSI chip
limi ts of various switching architectures in terms of maximum throughput,
maximum number of input/output channels, and maximum achievable channel speed,
when implemented in a single IC. Since any realistic wide area switch requires
throughput that is not achievable in a single IC, we investigate methodologies
of scaling up the switch by interconnecting switch modules. We explicate the
benefits to a wide area switch of integrating multi-channel switching which
balances loads across the switch modules in a switch. In the project , we
develop switch architectures which are optimized for VLSI implementation, and
conduct comprehensive analytical studies on their efficacy under varying traffic
and network conditions. In addition, there will be a significant amount of
implementation. The proposed implementation work will comprise of: * Design and
development of switch ICs * System board construction * Software controller
development * Demonstration testbed development The first part of the
implementation work will be the definition of the functional requirements for
the switching system, followed by the design specifications for the switch ICs
and the software controller. IC design will be the first actual electronic
design step. We will most likely employ a schematic capture process for the IC
design, utilizing VHDL mostly for the functional and logical verification. We
will utilize a conservative CMOS technology from a reputable foundry. The
estimated IC size for switch module is 150 square milli meters, and the IC will
require about 350 pins and consume 1.5 watts. We expect that the system board
will be 12 inches by 16 inches in dimension, implement the line interface,
timing, switching, and header translation functions for 10 giga bits per second
throughput. By the conclusion of this project, we expect to have created a
promising methodology for guiding the development of wide area ATM switches. Our
overall goal is to suggest methods to alleviate the size and speed l imitation
of current electronic switches by proposing scalable and simple-to-implement
architectures that can support very high bandwidth and a variety of traffic
types seen in wide area networks. Given the growing deployment of ATM in local
area networks and the increased interest in using it in wide area networks, we
believe that the proposed work is very timely and can serve to establish a
framework for future work to follow. Details of this project can be found at
http://www.rgit.edu/projects/NSF-switch.