* 9706232
* The Morphologic History of Paleozoic-Triassic Ammonoids
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* W. Bruce Saunders, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 134,302.00

9706232 Saunders The proposed research will focus on three major themes
concerning Paleozoic-Triassic ammonaid cephalopods: 1. Analysis of variation in
suture-inclusive, whole-shell morphology and morhphologic diversity through
space and time (Devonian-Triassic), using principal components analysis (PCA) of
a 21-character set for each taxon; 2. The evolution of ammonoid suture
complexity through time, as a single-character measure of biological complexity,
and with respect to evolution of suture complexity in different ammonoid clades;
and 3. The effects of extinction events on ammonoid morphospace, and on
morphologic and taxonomic diversity, focusing on three major crises: the U.
Devonian Frasnian/Famennian, the Devonian/Carboniferous, and the
Permian/Triassic. The scope is unprecedented in ammonoid investigations, in
terms of (a) its time span (~190 my); (b) the comprehensive treatment of all 627
Paleozoic ammonoid genera (212 Devonian, 263 Carboniferous, 152 Permian) plus an
additional subset of 25-30 genera (75-100 species) of basal Triassic ammonoids.
Additionally, in order to precisely evaluate the timing of major extinction's
and to assess susceptibility, persistence, and recurrence of shell morphotypes
to these events, we will undertake PC analysis of variation in a combined total
of 700-750 species (~150 genera) present during the ca. 0.5-5 my intervals
spanning each of the three extinction episodes. This research will be the most
complete morphometric treatment of Paleozoic and early Mesozoic cephalopods ever
undertaken. It will generate a 21+ character morphometric data-set for more than
600 ammonoid genera and an additional 700+ species that is taxonomically up-to-
date, complete and stratigraphically precise. The time-stepped analysis by PCA
will permit documentation of how clades evolved, changed in morphologic
diversity and richness, and how they responded to biotic crises. The results
will have bearing on the interpretation of macro-evolutionary change, the evo
lution of complexity, the influence of morphologic constraints and extinction
events on variation and diversity, all on a time scale of nearly 200 million
years.