* 9706178
* A Study of the Origin and Significance of Pyrite Ooids
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Juergen Schieber, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 99,000.00

9706178 Schieber Pyrite ooids are sedimentary grains of up to 4mm diameter that
show concentric pyrite laminae around a core of variable composition. First
mention of such grains was made by Hayes (1915), and since then they have
sporadically been mentioned in the literature (e.g. Kalliokoski, 1966; Gorter,
1991; Taylor, 1949; Kearsley, 1989). In all these references, pyrite ooids are
found in association with oolitic ironstones, are summarily described in a few
sentences, and interpreted as diagenetic alterations of chamositic or goethitic
ooids. Hayes (1915) and Carozzi (1972) are the lone exceptions in considering
pyrite ooids as of primary origin. My interest in pyrite ooids stems from my
first encounter with these enigmatic grains in the Chattanooga Shale of
Tennessee. In a sedimentary sequence that was supposedly deposited under anoxic
conditions in comparatively deep water (Potter et al., 1982; Ettensohn et al.,
1988; Woodrow et al., 1988; Leventhal et al., 1987), these grains, with their
implication of agitation and wave reworking, seemed to be oddly out of place.
Since then I have become aware of other occurrences of pyrite ooids, and was
able to acquire material from two of them. Samples and polished thin sections
from the Chattanooga Shale, the Decorah Shale (Cambrian of Iowa), and the Powers
Steps Formation (Wabana iron ores, Ordovician of Newfoundland) were examined
with petrographic and electron microscopes (reflected/transmitted light; SEM and
BEI mode; EDAX). This preliminary study showed features that suggest that pyrite
ooids may indeed be primary intrabasinal grains, and also indicates that there
are several types of pyrite ooids that may well be reflective of
paleoceanographic conditions at the time of deposition. Funds are requested for
a detailed comparative study of pyrite ooids from a variety of depositional
settings and time periods. The aim of the study is (1) to verify that primary
pyrite ooids do indeed exist, (2) to show that primary pyrite ooids ar e a more
widespread phenomenon than typically appreciated, (3) to determine the
conditions for their formation, (4) to understand the various pathways for
pyrite ooid formation, and (5) to derive information about paleoceanographic
parameters, such as presence or absence of anoxia, energy level of the
environment, water depth, chemical conditions at the seafloor and in the surface
sediment, and rate of deposition.