* 9706863
* Bayesian Statistical Methods in Molecular Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 113,000.00

Churchill 9706863 The investigator develops new statistical methods for problems
in molecular biology. Three problem areas are addressed: sequence alignment,
phylogeny construction and genetic mapping. Although diverse and individually
well developed, these problems can be unified under a common statistical
framework. In each problem, a graph-valued random variable is of primary
interest. Hierarchical Bayesian models are developed for each problem with an
emphasis on common features. The techniques used to compute posterior
probabilities from these models are Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. This
computational approach is neccessary because analytic solutions for these
problems are not attainable. The overall goal of this project is to develop an
inference framework that is of general utility in a variety of problems. Toward
this end, simple models are considered first. The simple models are generalized
to the extent that it is feasible. This project does not solve all of the
problems of computational molecular biology. The purpose of investigating a
broad range of problems is to develop a common framework for statistical
inference. This project develops new methods for the analysis of data that arise
in molecular biology and genetics. These statistical methods have a wide variety
of applications and are motivated by the dramatic increase in molecular data due
to the expansion of biotechnology and the human genome project. Ultimately this
leads to a deeper understanding of evolution and the relationships among
different groups of organisms and their individual genes. It also addresses the
problem of locating the genes that affect specific traits in humans, plants and
animals. The greatest potential impact is on gene mapping in agricultural
plants, due to ongoing collaborations with plant breeders at Cornell University.
Although the project emphasizes statistical theory underlying the analysis of
data, the methods are implemented in softw are that is useful to other
researchers.