* 9706638
* Petrologic and Stable Isotopic Study of the Release,        Transport, and Deposition of CO2 During Regional            Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2001
* USD 112,061.00

9706638 Ague Tectonometamorphic processes during orogenic pulses can influence
the CO2 budgets of the atmosphere and hydrosphere, and produce global climatic
change. Processes include: (1) release of CO2 by metamorphic decarbonation and
(2) sequestering of CO2 by rapid underthrusting and burial of carbonate-rich
terranes. The PIs will investigate processes of decarbonation attending prograde
infiltration of metamorphic and magmatic fluids and carbonate deposition in
carbonate-bearing veins. Field area is the Orange-Milford belt in Connecticut.
The nature, degree and length scales of mass transfer of H2O, CO2 and chemical
elements and O, C, H and S isotopes will be determined by mapping chemical and
isotopic fronts across lithologic contacts and evaluating net transfer and mass
balance. PIs will investigate: (1) oxygen isotope zonations in in
porphyroblasts, (2) porphyroblast growth reatlive to isotopic fron propagation,
(3) isotpoic systemmatic of mineral in clusions in porphyroblasts, (4) cross-
cutting relatios betweenn vien sets and prophyroblasts, (5) timing of mass
transfer relative to folding and cleavage development, and (6)
sedimentary/diagentic/low-grade effects in order to distinguish them from
higher-grade phenomena. Geochemical modeling of fluid-rock interactions as a
function of P, T and wallrock type will constrain the processes and efficiency
of carbonation/decarbonation.