* 9706046
* RUI:  Magnetic Stratigraphy of the Marine Eocene-Oligocene  Transition in the Santa Cruz Mountains California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Donald Prothero, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9706046 Prothero The Eocene-Oligocene transition was critical period in Earth
history, when the "greenhouse" conditions of the early Eocene were replaced by
the "icehouse" conditions of the Oligocene. The mass extinctions and other
biotic responses caused by this climatic change have been studied in many
places, but the excellent fossil record of molluscs and foraminifera found in
California marine strata has been relatively little studied because the
chronostratigraphy has been so poorly resolved and calibrated. The middle Eocene
to Oligocene marine strata of the Santa Cruz Mountains provide the best
superposed record in California of the Narizian, Refugian, and Zemorrian benthic
foraminiferal stages that are also calibrated by planktonic microfossils.
Preliminary magnetic analysis of the late Narizian-Refugian-early Zemorrian
interval in San Lorenzo River yielded results which pass both a fold test and
reversal test, and show that the latest Narizian-Refugian correlate with Chrons
C13r-C13n (34.5-33.0 Ma), and the early Zemorrian with late Cron C12r
(31.5-31.0Ma). Three additional sections in the area will be sampled: one spans
the early and late Narizian, the second the early and late Zemorrian, and the
third is the type section of the Twobar Shale and Rices Mudstone members of the
San Lorenzo Formation. Magnetostratigraphy of the entire Narizian through
Zemorrian interval in the Santa Cruz Mountains will greatly help in the
correlation and calibration of these long-controversial benthic foraminiferal
stages. Such high-resolution chronostratigraphy, in turn, will allow us to
correlate events during the Eocene-Oligocene transition in the Pacific Coast
with the excellent records in the Gulf and Atlantic Coasts, with faunal and
floral changes recorded in terrestrial sections, and with the global record/