* 9706398
* Minority Research Planning Grant:  Precision Poling of      Dye-Doped Polymers Using Ion Beam Irradiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1998
* Fassil Ghebremichael, United States Air Force Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 11/30/1998
* USD 17,140.00

9706398 Ghebremichael The effects of implantation of light ions in nonlinear
optical polvmers will be studied. The optical nonlinearity in the polymers is
achieved by doping the optically inactive polymers with nonlinear optical
chromophores. Nonlinear optical polymers, when first processed, usually have an
isotropic bulk svmmetry. For such polymers to be used in second order nonlinear
optical applications, where bulk asymmetry is required, the configuration of the
chromophores has to be altered. The orientational orders of the ion irradiation-
induced orientational order is expected to be large because the ion deposition
depth, thus any chemical or physical reaction, is highly localized and
determined by the ion beam energy. The relaxation time after ion implantation
induced order is also expected to significantly increase, compared with the
techniques currently employed, because this method is virtually temperature
independent. Nonlinear optical studies, such as second harmonic generation,
electrooptic effect, and z-scan techniques will be used to estimate the degree
of ion irradiation induced asymmetry in bulk samples and waveguide devices.
Furthermore, standard studies of linear optical and mechanical properties should
reveal the effects of the irradiation on the integrity of the poled systems. ***