* 9706517
* Geochemical Effects of Deep Subduction of Oceanic           Crust:  An Experimental Study of 4-20 GPa
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Robert Rapp, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 71,355.00

9706517 Rapp This experimental study on the geochemical effects of deep
subduction of the oceanic crust has two parts. The first aspect is to place
experimental constraints on the linked processes of tonalite-trondhjemite
granodiorite plutonism and cratonization. A series of multi-anvil experiments on
hydrous natural basalts will be conducted in the pressure range 4-8 GPa at
900-1200oC, to complement existing experimental data at 1-3 GPa. Objectives
include defining the wet basalt solidus in this range, determining the
compositions of the phases in the hydrous melt-eclogite restite assemblage, and
estimating the trace element mineral-melt partition coefficients in order to
constrain the geochemical characteristics of eclogite residues of partial
melting. The second aspect of the proposal aims to examine the geochemical
changes oceanic crust undergoes as it subducts beyond the island arc regime into
the transition zone, again by conducting phase equilibria experiments on hydrous
basalt in the multi-anvil apparatus. This aspect will be addressed by defining
the general phase relations for hydrous basalt in the P-T range 4-20 GPa and
900-1300oC, and then focusing on trace element systematics in garnet,
clinopyroxene, and their solid solutions in natural basalt compositions as a
function of pressure.