* 9706078
* The Multicovering Radii of Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Andrew Klapper, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 09/30/2001
* USD 301,672.00

The purpose of this grant is to support research on a new concept related to
error correcting codes and stream ciphers. Pseudorandom binary sequences are
used for error correction in the presence of noise by introducing redundancy to
messages and for security by introducing pseudorandom noise to messages. This
research concerns pseudorandom sequences and the fundamental properties that
make them useful for coding and cryptography. The covering radius of a code is
the smallest radius such that every vector of the given length is contained in
at least one sphere of that radius centered at a codeword. It is a fundamental
measure of codes, closely related to many other measures. Covering radii have
been extensively studied for some 25 years. The multicovering radii generalize
covering radii by asking that several vectors be covered simultaneously by
codewords. This new concept arose from an investigation of the existence of
stream ciphers that resist all possible cryptanalytic attacks of a very general
type. The principal investigator will study basic properties of multicovering
radii of codes such as the multicovering radii of specific codes and bounds on
codes with various properties. The result of this research program will be a
better fundamental understanding of pseudorandom sequences with respect to
properties that make them suitable for use in cryptographic stream ciphers. It
will also lead to improvements in our fundamental understanding of error
correcting codes and perhaps to improved design and analysis of such codes.