* 9706875
* Mathematical Sciences:  Harmonic Measure, Conformal         Mappings, and Geometric Measure Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Stanislav Smirnov, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 61,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS-9706875 Smirnov Smirnov will work on harmonic measure and
distortion properties of conformal mappings. Harmonic measure is a fundamental
object in complex analysis, providing a good description of the geometry of sets
in the complex plane. This project will focus on the investigations into the
fine (local) structure of harmonic measure, related properties of Green's
functions, and possible applications to holomorphic dynamical systems. It seems
that extremal behavior of harmonic measure occurs for fractal examples arising
from complex dynamics and self-similar constructions. Therefore, powerful
machinery, developed for investigations of dynamical systems (ergodic theory,
thermodynamical formalism, holomorphic motions) might be useful (and perhaps
necessary) for solving some problems in classical complex analysis. This project
emphasizes research in, and interaction between two important areas of
mathematics: classical complex analysis and dynamical systems. Dynamical systems
is one of the more active areas of modern mathematics with applications to
biology, engineering and physics. Classically, the analytical approach helped to
solve many hard problems in dynamical systems. Recently it has become apparent,
that answers to many classical analytical problems have a deep, dynamical
origin.