* 9706592
* Coded Diversity Combining and Channel Estimation            for Wireless Data Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Stephen Wicker, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 246,636.00

Recently, a new post-detection macrodiversity scheme was proposed for cellular
communication systems. In this new scheme, termed Multiply-Detected
Macrodiversity (MDM), the signals at multiple base stations are detected and
used as input to a Decision Algorithm, which provides an optimal decision of
what was transmitted. The MDM scheme shows considerable improvement in the Bit-
Error Rate (BER), especially when the mobile is close to the boundary between
cells. As the boundary between cells is exactly the region in which the quality
of the mobile's signal is mostly impaired, the MDM scheme has the effect of
equalizing the BER throughout the system coverage area. The Decision Algorithm
of the MDM scheme requires as an input, in addition to the separate detections
of the receivers, also an estimation of the quality of the received signals, so
that appropriate"weightings" of these signals can be applied in the post-
detection combining process. To obtain estimates, usually some sort of channel
measurement is performed; e.g., the signal power (S-diversity) or the Signal-to-
Interference-Ratio (S/I-diversity). In such cases, the measurement process
complicates the design of the transmitter/receiver hardware and the operation of
the system. Furthermore, the measurements are subject to high variance and need
to be averaged over time. To avoid the disadvantage of the measurement-based
quality of signal estimation, we propose here to investigate the use of channel
coding to evaluate the transmission characteristics of a wireless channel for
macrodiversity reception. The proposed channel estimation schemes use side
information generated during the decoding process.In summary, we intend to study
the use of the MDM combining with coded channel estimation in the case of a
single site equipped with multiple,widely-separated receivers and in the case of
multiple cell sites. In the latter case, we will investigate the use of both
post-detection and predetection combining (with quantization of the recei ved
signal), comparing the performance in the schemes in the presence of channel
impairments characteristic to the mobile communication environment.