* 9706279
* Origins of Gold, Uraninite, Pyrite, and Organic Matter      in Conglomerates of Archean and Early Proterozoic Age
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Hiroshi Ohmoto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9706279 Ohmoto The goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive model for
the formation processes of gold-uranium deposits occurring in conglomerate beds
of ~2.8 Ga to ~2.0 Ga and their paleoenvironments. The results of this study
will lead to a better exploration model for this most important class of mineral
deposits, and to a better understanding of the evolutionary history of the early
EarthOs atmosphere and biosphere. The research goal will be achieved by seeking
solutions to three major problems: (1) what are the origins of gold, uraninite,
and pyrite: detrital, diagenetic, or hydrothermal?; (2) what are the origins of
the fluids involved in dissolution/precipitation of gold, uraninite, and pyrite:
oxygen-bearing ground water or high temperature hydrothermal fluid?; and (3)
what are the origins of organic matter: indigenous microbial mats or extraneous
petroleum? Solutions to these three problems will be sought from detailed and
systematic investigations of a variety of minerals and organic matter in ore and
country rocks in the Witwatersrand district, South Africa, and the Elliot Lake
district, Canada. The investigations will focus on micro-scale variations in
mineralogical characteristics (morphology, texture, abundance, paragenesis),
chemical characteristics (major, trace, and rare earth elements), and stable
isotopic characteristics (H, O, C, and S).