* 9706071
* The Interference Avoidance Hypothesis and Scaling           Principles in Crinoids
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Tomasz Baumiller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2002
* USD 70,919.00

9706071 Baumiller Crinoids were an important component of ancient marine
environments and an excellent record of their diverse morphologies has been
preserved, as is demonstrated by over 900 described genera. Yet 'm spite of
their importance and diversity, our interpretations of their evolutionary
history and paleoecology are limited and many questions remain unanswered. Two
problems will be tackled in this study: I)are the predictions implicit 'm the
tiering model (Ausich, 1980) supported by the pattern of spatial distribution of
individuals of the same species? And 2) what structural or functional rules
govern the growth of stalked crinoids? To tackle the first problem, one
prediction implicit in the tiering model (Ausich, 1980), namely that the same-
tier, upstream neighbors of crinoids interfere with feeding and that
interferences should be avoided, will be tested by quantifying the patterns of
spatial distribution of a living isocrinid, Neocrinus decorus. The patterns will
be quantified by digitizing photos taken from a submersible.A first-order
prediction states that if resources are limiting, since individuals of the same
species utilize the same resources upstream neighbors should be avoided or
should lie beyond some critical distance. Manipulations of in situ specimens and
specimens 'm a flow tank will be used to further assess whether crinoids
actively avoid interference. Another test of this hypothesis will involve
collecting several 'individuals of N. decorus by submersible, tagging and
redeploying them onto a small area, and episodically monitoring their pattern of
distribution; a non-random pattern would support the hypothesis. A
paleontological prediction of the intraspecific avoidance hypothesis is that the
spatial patterns of distribution characterizing avoidance should be expressed
only among taxa capable of relocation (e.g.: advanced cladids, articulates), but
not among those taxa permanently attached to the substrate. Tests of this
prediction will involve obt aining data on the spatial distribution of complete
individuals of the same species from a single bedding plane of a burial horizon
(e.g.: LeGrand, Burlington, Crawfordsville) and determining whether the pattern
differs from random and is consistent with the hypothesis of avoidance. Results
of all these approaches will provide a basis for assessing the relative
importance of factors such as hydrodynamic regime and nutrient limitations to
crinoid autecology and, possibly, evolutionary history. To determine if
structural or functional rules govern crinoid morphology , stalk length and
diameter and arm length will be measured for fossil taxa and for extant crinolds
collected by submersible. Comparison of these data to predictions based on three
scaling models, geometric, stress, and elastic, will be used to determine if the
observed data support any of the models. Stalked crinoid-. which are rheophiles
utilize a feeding posture which requires a certain flexure of the stalk, and
these crinolds are predicted to scale according to the model of elastic
similarity. If that prediction is home out for such crinoids, i.e., those with
"standard" ecologies (rheophiles utilizing a Parabolic Filtration Fan Posture),
fossil taxa thought to have had unusual ecologies (calceocrinids, Seirocrinus,
Pentacrinus) will be examined to determine if they scaled according to rules
different from elastic similarity. A successful completion of the project will
solve some major problems of crinoid functional morphology and test an important
ecological and paleoecological model, that of tiering. Although crinoids are the
focus here, the methods developed have broader implications. For example, the
principles governing crinoid morphology should also govern the growth of other
aquatic rheophiles.