* 9706623
* Three-Dimensional Groundwater Contamination Dynamics        From a Compact Model of Plume Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Carlos Puente, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1998
* USD 21,500.00

9706623 Puente The final goal of this work is to study the possibility of
studying the dynamics of transport in porous media based on a compact geometric
representation of evolving plumes. The approach is motivated by the fact that
most current (stochastic) transport models, by relying on averaging procedures
to transfer uncertainties due to porous media heterogeneities, often lead to
unreliable predictions which do not preserve the non-elliptical and generally
tangled geometries that natural plumes have. Guided by the success in using the
fractal-multifractal, FM, representation, developed by the proposer (Puente,
1992, 1994, 1995), to study the dynamics of vertically-averaged chloride as
measured at the Borden Site in Ontario, Canada, this works seeks to further
study the capabilities of such a procedure in encoding two and three dimensional
natural plumes. The tasks that shall be undertaken during the first year are:
(a) geometric encoding of vertically-averaged bromide concentration patterns as
measured at the Cape Cod site, (b) compact parameterization of whole three-
dimensional plumes at the Cape Cod site via extensions of the FM approach One
such tasks are performed the information they provide, in terms of geometric
surrogate parameters, shall be used (later on) to study the dynamics of the
plume. Throughout the study, research will continue on the use of sophisticated
search algorithms for the efficient solving of the inverse problem which defines
surrogate parameters at a given time.