* 9706824
* Effect of Microstructures on Turbulent Flow Mass Transfer   in Through-mask Electrodeposition
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Vijay Modi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2000
* USD 186,259.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9706824 Vijay Modi/Columbia U. Accurate estimation of mass flux in
impinging flow systems is important to wet chemical processes such as water
rinsing, photoresist development, electrodeposition and electrochemical
machining. The physical system of interest is a confined submerged slot jet
impinging normally on a mass transfer surface under turbulent flow conditions.
The effect on hydrodynamics and mass transfer of small scale structures on the
impingement surface, typical in MEMS device fabrication is not understood.
Experimental measurements of mass transfer will be carried out for both flush
surfaces as well as surfaces with structures ranging from 5 to 500 microns in
size. The location and aspect ratios of the structure will be varied as well.
Flush surface a single sensor will provide local mass transfer rates on the
impinging surface. For the smallest structure size, i.e. 5 microns, both single
and multiple patterned structures will be considered. Mass transfer measurements
will be made by the electrochemical method, where ferricyanide ions are reduced
on one or more closely-spaced platinum electrodes at a rate controlled by mass
transfer to the surface. An existing finite volume code will be utilized for
modeling the incompressible turbulent fluid flow and mass transfer. A major
question that needs to be addressed is: what is the appropriate model for the
turbulent eddy diffusivity near the wall at the high Sc applications common to
wet processing? Since one single model that is valid for all turbulent flows are
unlikely to emerge, the present effort will develop a model for the particular
flow system of interest here. The flush surface experimental data will aid in
developing such a model. This model will be implemented in the numerical
solvers. Once validated the ability of such a model to aid predicting the mass
transfer to a surface with microstructures will be established.