* 9706915
* Probabilistic Problems Arising in Disordered Systems, Wave  Propagation and Astronomy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Jan Wehr, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9706915 Wehr The proposal discusses three circles of problems arising in
mathematical physics of random systems. While the problems concern very
different physical situations, at the mathematical level they all deal with
situations where presence of disorder can significantly change properties of the
system. Part one studies ground states of random lattice models in statistical
mechanics---a question related to understanding thermodynamics of disordered
systems. In part two the focus is on effects of randomness on propagation of
nonlinear waves described by partial differential equations---of the
conservation law and Hamilton-Jacobi type. The content of part three is
statistics of density and of pairwise velocities of galaxies in the universe.
From the point of view of mathematics, each part of the proposal involves
studying nonlinear functions of many independent random variables or of the
realizations of a simple underlying process (often a Gaussian one). This relates
the project thematically to the theory of large deviations and concentration of
measure phenomena. The tools include functional limit theorems, ergodic theory,
large deviation estimates and martingale methods in the first two parts and
generalized Gaussian processes in the third part. The interplay of physical and
mathematical ideas is essential in the whole proposal. Many interesting
questions in mathematical physics are concerned with complicated inhomogeneous
systems. For example, a realistic description of a solid often has to take into
account presence of defects and impurities, which make its physical properties
different from those of a homogeneous crystal. These special properties of
disordered systems are of crucial importance in modern materials science and
technology --- semiconductors and glasses are examples of disordered materials.
Another example is the distribution of galaxies in the Universe --- their
positions do not follow any simple regular pattern and us ing such a pattern in
modeling their configuration would not account for observed phenomena. While
detailed configuration (arrangement of atoms, galaxies or other constituents) of
an inhomogeneous system varies from one region in space to another, there is
often an underlying simple statistical regularity, which leads to modeling and
studying such systems using concepts and methods of probability theory. Each of
the three parts of the proposal addresses a different physical problem of the
above type. Part one involves the study of models of disordered solids, focusing
on their ground states --- the energetically preferred configurations. Part two
is concerned with propagation of waves in disordered media --- several
applications of mathematics to hydrology are of this type. The content of part
three is fluctuations of various quantities related to the distribution of
matter in the Universe and statistical questions arising in interpreting
observational results. The general physical motivation behind the proposal is to
understand possible effects resulting of the presence of randomness in different
physical systems.