* 9706862
* Analysis of Defect Measures and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,09/29/1998
* Fang-Hua Lin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/29/1998
* USD 124,642.00

9706862 Lin The main theme of this proposal is the rigorous mathematical theory
of defects in condensed matter physics. Of special interest are defects in
liquid crystals and vortices (filaments) in superconductors. One describes the
geometrical properties, topological structures, and dynamical behavior of these
defects by analyzing the so-called defect measures. It is a rather formidable
task. For liquid crystals one has to study first a certain nonlinear coupling of
equations of Navier-Stokes type with those of evolutionary approximate harmonic
map systems. For superconductivity, one studies then the flow of Yang-Mills with
certain nonlinear effects (Eliashberg-Gorkov equations). The next key issues are
understanding the development of singularities of solutions, such as energy
concentrations, sharp interfaces, and bubbling phenomena. In particular, one
must examine singularities in the flow of harmonic and approximate harmonic maps
and the dynamics of vortices and filaments in Ginzburg-Landau equations. This
study should also give insight into other problems that arise in classical fluid
dynamics. Various natural phenomena can be described by solutions of certain
partial differential equations. Often singular behavior of solutions reveal not
only facets but also essential characteristics of the problems they describe.
The latter is very important for technological and industrial applications. For
example, the type II superconductors (high-temperature super-conductors) are
characterized by the existence of a certain lattice structure of vortices and
filaments. To control the dynamics of these vortices and filaments is one of the
central issues for the applicability of these high-tech materials. It is,
therefore, a very basic problem of continuing interest. Despite many serious
efforts, very few mathematical methods exist so far to tackle such problems. The
present proposal presents a new and novel theoretical approach which has already
been shown, by preliminary analysis, to be useful for a class of problems
arising in material science. Modern technology needs high performance, high
energy efficiency, and high accuracy. Both liquid crystals and superconductors
are in such a category. This study will yield new and insightful qualitative and
quantitative information regarding these fascinating materials, in addition to
having its own intrinsic mathematical importance and interest.