* 9706570
* RPG: Geochemical Constraints on Trace Element Mobility      During Early Diagenesis of Estuarine Sediments, Newark,     New York Harbor Areas, New Jersey
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Victoria Hover, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/29/2000
* USD 18,000.00

9706570 Hover There is considerable evidence that toxic metals carried to
estuarine marine environments as part of the suspended river load, are commonly
associated with authigenic sulfide minerals which form soon after deposition.
Toxic trace metals, particularly transition metals and metalloids, form
insoluble sulfides and may be absorbed or coprecipitated with Fe sulfides and
pyrite during early diagenesis near the sediment-water interface. The ultimate
bioavailability of such toxic metals inestuarine sediments, and the extent to
which they coprecipitate with or are absorbed on to authigenic pyrite, is
controlled by a complex interplay between biologic, chemical, and physical
factors that can alter the speciation of toxic metals in response to rapidly
changing pH and redox conditions in the sediments. Land use surrounding the
NewYork/New Jersey Harbor Estuary system makes the Harbor particularly
susceptible to toxic metal contamination. The Harbor is surrounded by a
population of over 20 million people and has been the sight of concentrated
refining and manufacturing industries for over a century. It is also one of the
most heavily utilized sea ports along the east coast. Studies of surface
sediments in the NY/NJ Harbor system have documented that over 75% of the area
has concentrations of at least one of the anthropogenically-derived, toxic trace
metals above concentration levels at which adverse biological effects have been
observed in benthic macrofauna.. The presence of significant concentrations of
anthropogenically derived toxic metals in the NY/NJ Harbor make the area an
ideal natural laboratory in which to study the interactions between contaminated
metal bearing sediments and associated pore-fluids during early diagenesis near
the sediment water interface under changing pH and redox conditions. The
objectives of this research are to apply an integrated approach to the
characterization of contaminated estuarine sediments to more specifically
determine the mineralogical s inks for toxic metal contaminants. The detailed
determination of sediment pore water geochemistry including major, minor and
trace element constituents, will be combined with the detailed characterization
of bulk sediments and clay size-fractions, using X-ray diffraction methods and
high resolution environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) and scanning
transmission and analytical electron microscopy (STEM/AEM) techniques. Pore
water and trace element data will be evaluated to determine the extent of
freshwater mixing, and the degree of anthropogenic toxic metal contribution to
the sediment. These results will be combined with the detailed textural and
compositional data obtained by ESEM and STEM/AEM analyses to better constrain
pore water trace-metal sulfide geochemical relationships and to determine
specific mineralogical sinks for metal contaminants. The analyses of sediment
and pore water geochemistry in contaminated sediments represents a new line of
investigation in the Rutgers/Newark Department of Geological Sciences. The
development of analytical techniques and the collaborative relationships
developed with nearby institutions such as the New Jersey Institute of
Technology, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and the Institute
of Marine and Coastal Science Rutgers/Cook Campus, will facilitate the
development of a strong multidisciplinary analytical and research program. The
results of the study will be of a strong multidisciplinary analytical and
research program. The results of the study will be of importance to agencies
concerned with the management of contaminated coastal sediments.