* 9706104
* Collaborative Research:  Calibration and Application of     Trace Element Thermobarometry in Metamorphic Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Craig Manning, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2000
* USD 26,714.00

9706104 Manning This is a collaborative project between Essene, Manning and
Riciputi. Key chemical reactions involving Zr and Ti in garnets will be
calibrated both empirically and experimentally as thermobarometers and applied
to zoned garnets in various metamorphic terranes. Empirical calibration of GZQ
and GRQ using measured Zr and Ti levels from SIMS data for buffered New England
garnets will be combined with thermodynamic estimations and calculations to
yield provisional phase diagrams. The GZQ reaction will be calibrated
experimentally with a piston-cylinder apparatus at UCLA (Manning) with
compositional reversals and analysis of run products by Oak Ridge SIMS
(Riciputi). Experiments on garnet-rutile-quartz and garnet-rutile-corumdum-
sillimanite that have already been conducted by Manning, Bohlen and coworkers
will be evaluated with the electron microprobe for their applicability to
calibration of GRQ. Empirical calibration of KD thermometry for REE's and Y will
be undertaken for selected garnet-monazite and garnet-epidote pairs from
Greenville terrane and from New England using SIMS and EMP data. Combination of
GZQ and GRQ barometry with REE KD thermometry offers a strong potential for
obtaining more complete P-T-t paths experienced by granulite terranes and should
elucidate mechanisms responsible for granulite facies genesis.