* 9706904
* Studies Toward the Rational Design of Ion Binding Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* James Cowan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 12/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
with a contribution from the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities for instrumentation supports work in the laboratory
of Professor James Cowan in the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State
University. The research will examine and compare the Mg(II) binding domains of
E.Coli RNase H, exonuclease II and other proteins. Since Mg(II) must be
recruited from the environment or cellular medium and binding affinities are
often not high, the stoichiometry of this metal cofactor required to effect
hydrolysis is often not well defined. While the metal binding domains show
considerable variation in charge density and coordination for the metal, they
have comparable binding affinities. Studies will focus on calorimetric and NMR
investigations of Mg binding to native and mutant enzymes. The results will form
the basis for the rational design of proteins with novel cation or anion binding
chemistry. This research involves a systematic investigation to define the
relative importance of Mg(II) inner and outer-sphere coordination, metal ion
charge density and solvation, binding affinity and other factors in the use of
Mg(II) in important hydrolytic enzymes. Not only should these studies improve
our understanding of the role of magnesium in proteins, but results should also
prove highly significant in the rational design of ion binding sites in
proteins.