* 9706637
* Relationships Among Multiple Livelihoods and Human, Social, and Cultural Capital
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* David Griffith, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2001
* USD 89,000.00

This project involves the research of a cultural anthropologist from East
Carolina University, studying the transformation of work through multiple
livelihoods. The project will study Mexican and Jamaican transnational workers
carrying special temporary worker visas who work in the seafood processing and
tourist labor markets of the mid-Atlantic region of the US, employed in seasonal
jobs formerly staffed primarily by local women. The increasing reliance on
foreign labor and decreasing reliance on native labor signals a convergence of
the working conditions and opportunities of workers in the Mid-Atlantic region
with those of workers from Jamaica and Mexico. The project will examine the
social network ties which enable workers to obtain public and private
assistance, in their home as well as their host country, by focusing on a sample
of US, Mexican, and Jamaican workers. The specific hypotheses to be tested deal
with the importance of formal and informal economic and political activities in
the home countries as affected by migrant labor experiences, as well as the
effects of specific work experiences on the cultural models of workers regarding
work and social opportunities. Combining in-depth open-ended interviewing and
local historical research and the more structured measures of cultural consensus
testing and sorting tasks, the research will determine the character and work
experience of workers in developed and underdeveloped regions; examine the roles
of government in this process; determine how the seasonal labor market
experience influences the formation of human social and cultural capital; and
explore the relation of cultural understandings and expectations and social-
cultural capital. This research will advance our understanding of the human
capital of transnational workers and the new knowledge will be of great interest
to planners and public policy makers