* 9706996
* Operator Algebras, Modules and Completely Bounded Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Blecher, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 213,758.00

Abstract Paulsen/Blecher The Principal Investigators propose several main lines
of research on topics related to the theory of completely bounded maps. Blecher
will be studying the general theory of operator algebras and modules over
operator algebras, Hilbert C*-modules, and questions relating to realizations of
Banach spaces as operator spaces. Paulsen will continue to study the completely
bounded Hochschild cohomology through its presentation as a completely bounded
relative Yoneda cohomology, some problems concerning polynomially bounded
operators, and questions in interpolation theory. The study of operator algebras
originally grew out of quantum mechanics. The set of "observables" in a quantum
mechanical system is described as an algebra of operators. For this reason, it
is often important to see how formulas involving numerical variables behave when
these variables are allowed to be operator variables. This process is often
referred to as finding "quantized" versions of the old theories and it was out
of this process that the theory of completely bounded maps grew. Blecher and
Paulsen's research focuses mainly on questions of how various theories behave
under this type of quantization. On the other hand, interpolation theory started
as a purely mathematical exercise, and only in the past 20 years has it been
found to have important applications in engineering. For example, in electrical
circuit design, one starts with a desired frequency response, for a few given
frequencies, and wishes to design the simplest circuit with that given response.
Mathematically, this problem becomes one of finding the simplest function of a
given type that achieves some given values at given points. This last problem is
what we call an interpolation problem. Already the demands of electrical
engineering take us beyond the known interpolation theories. Surprisingly,
interpolation theory and the study of operator algebras is interwoven, and this
interplay has lead to some new interpolation results. We ha ve found that a
better understanding of the "quantized", i.e., matrix-valued, interpolation is
what is needed to answer many ordinary interpolation questions.