* 9706060
* Improving Teacher Preparation in Science, Mathematics,      Engineering and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Rodger Bybee, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 01/31/2001
* USD 1,275,000.00

The Division of Postsecondary Policy and Practice of the National Research
Council's Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education will
undertake a three-year program of activities in teacher preparation. Out work
will be organized into three initiatives: (A) deepening understanding; (B)
improving practice' and (C) enhancing infrastructure in mathematics and science
teacher preparation. Communities that will be involved in and addressed by this
work include: scientists, mathematicians, and engineers; SME&amp;T faculty,
teacher educators, and educational researchers; and leaders and policymakers for
states, institutions of higher education, and other organizations. Building on
accomplishments in our current NSF Cooperative Agreement, "Partnership for
Leadership," we will undertake a set of eight interrelated projects which will
advance our three major initiatives. Projects include: developing a brochure
about the fundamentals of teacher preparation; creating a report which offers a
critical synthesis of recommendations, research base, and indicator system for
improving a workshop and proceedings about helping mathematics teachers learn
content more effectively; a report synthesizing research in mathematics and
science teachers preparation in a way that would help improve practice; and a
white paper from a panel of university presidents and state education personnel
calling for specific reform of teacher preparation policy at the state and
national levels. We also will include a strategic effort to inform, interest,
and engage the membership of the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy
of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine in teacher preparation issues. The
projects proposed here will be shaped, guided, and executed by the three
standing boards of the Center's Division on Postsecondary Policy and Practice --
the Mathematical Sciences Education Board, the Committee on Undergraduate
Science Education, and the Board on Engineering Education. These boards normall
y meet twice per year. Specially constituted NRC study committees will be
established when needed to undertake particular projects. The projects
capitalize on the two most effective mechanisms of the NRC: convening expert
group for the purpose of generating consensus, and producing objective, highly
visible and thoroughly reviewed reports. We look for forward to the substantial
contributions these initiatives can make to improving the system of mathematics
and science teacher preparation.