* 9706353
* Local Plus Global Adaptivity in Moving Node Finite Element  Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Keith Miller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2002
* USD 70,680.00

9706353 Keith Miller Miller plans to work on local plus global adaptivity for
moving node finite element methods. He plans first (in collaboration with Neil
Carlson of Purdue) to combine the local adaptivity of 2-D gradient-weighted
Moving Finite Elements (through the continuous movement of its nodes) with an
improved global adaptivity (through addition, deletion and reconnection of
nodes, based upon enriched geometric criteria and upon local error estimates).
Here they are building upon their longstanding and fruitful collaboration in
developing the GWMFE method. This method is especially suited to problems which
develop sharp moving fronts, especially problems where one needs to resolve the
fine-scale structure of the fronts. GWMFE does an extremely fine job of moving
its nodes around locally to resolve the sharp features of the solution, but
clearly global adaptivity is needed if we are to have truly robust and flexible
codes. Here they would be making fundamental changes and additions to the
partial global adaptivity introduced by Miller's student Kuprat in his thesis of
'92, which added so greatly to the robustness of the method. Miller plans second
to develop a revised GWMFE with streamline diffusion; this should correct some
problems which the present method has on certain steady-state convection
problems in which the GWMFE grid drifts downstream with the flow rather than
coming to a steady-state. This revised GWMFE works extremely well in 1-D;
success in extending it to multidimensions would be a significant advance for
slow-transient and near steady-state fluid computations. Finite element (FE)
methods with a triangular grid in 2-D typically compute a piecewise linear
approximation to the solution of a partial differential equation (PDE) or system
of PDEs; that is, the graph of the approximate solution is an evolving surface
with planar triangular faces. For standard FE methods the grid is specified and
fixed; however, for the GWMFE method the grid is allowed to deform and the nodes
of the grid decide for themselves how to move. On problems with sharp moving
fronts the nodes can thus automatically concentrate in the front and move with
it. In this way one attains high resolution in the critical regions of the
solution while using far fewer nodes and far larger time steps than with
standard methods. Examples are the highly nonlinear diffusion of doped arsenic
ions in the manufacture of silicon chips, the drift-diffusion equations for the
nanosecond evolution of holes, electrons and voltages as a semiconductor device
switches states, and the "black oil" equations for flooding of oil reservoirs.
The GWMFE method has been strikingly successful on these and many other problems
even within the constraints of a logically-fixed grid; that is, the grid deforms
automatically, but the number and interconnections of its nodes remain fixed.
However, a logically-fixed grid is inadequate for many important problems and it
is apparent that the efficiency and robustness of the method can be greatly
enhanced by adding global adaptivity (the insertion and deletion of nodes as
needed). This requires a good deal of code development, but the combination of
local plus global adaptivity in GWMFE should yield a combined method which is
accurate and robust, which uses far fewer nodes, and which thereby renders
efficiently computable important classes of problems with moving sharp features
which are presently inaccessible to numerical computation.