* 9706749
* Evolutionary Proliferation:  Diversification and its Contex in Neogastropod Molluscs
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Geerat Vermeij, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9706749 Vermeij Which circumstances characterize times of evolutionary
expansion? What attributes characterize clades that proliferate at such times?
These fundamental questions motivate the proposed study of diversification in
selected clades of Cenozoic neogastropod molluscs. The great morphological and
ecological diversity, as well as the excellent fossil record of this large group
of molluscs make the Neogastropoda ideal for the study of evolutionary
proliferation, an as yet poorly understood but crucially important phenomenon in
the history of life. The taxonomy, phylogeny, distribution, and ecology of
clades with apparently contrasting evolutionary histories will be studied.
Building on earlier work with rapanine muricids and pseudolivids, analyses of
ancestor-descendant and sister-group relationships will be conducted in the
muricid subfamilies Ocenebrinae and Muricinae, the buccinid subfamilies
Pisaniinae, Photinae, and Siphonaliinae, and the family Fasciolariidae.
Comparisons within and between these purported clades will focus on shell
characters of fossil and living species, to be examined in the major museum
collections of the world, and on DNA sequences to be obtained from living
representatives. Observations relating shell morphology to aspects of life
including feeding, locomotion, and defense will be conducted on the two coasts
of Panama. Hypotheses to be tested include the following: 1) key innovations as
well as antipredatory traits reduce barriers to speciation and increase the
range of potential phenotypes in a clade; 2) times of climatic warming (Middle
to Late Eocene, Late Oligocene to Early Miocene, Early Pliocene) favor worldwide
diversification; 3) constriction of the Central American seaway beginning in the
Late Miocene stimulated speciation in tropical America but not elsewhere; 4)
glacially induced climatic fluctuations stimulated speciation among high-
latitude clades beginning in the latest Miocene. Multiple comparisons among
sister-groups, a mong time intervals, and among regions with contrasting
histories will be used to evaluate the roles of these intrinsic and extrinsic
triggers of speciation and adaptive diversification. The study of
diversification is important not only because evolutionary proliferation remains
little understood, but also because of close parallels with economic growth. An
empirically based economic perspective on the history of life may shed light on
important controls of the human economy, and make possible intellectual links
between evolutionary science and the social science discipline of economics.