* 9706083
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation:  Mechanical and Electromechanical Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2002
* William Weldon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/2002
* USD 376,808.00

ABSTRACT EEC-9706083 Weldon The long time and high costs of developing new
vehicles and equipment for future products are becoming prohibitive. Companies
and the Government are increasingly turning to simulation to determine the
effectiveness of the design of new products. Research to develop a virtual
proving ground will provide the data necessary for product testing without
producing expensive prototypes. The University of Iowa and the University of
Texas at Austin have joined together to form an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center (I/UCRC) for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation: Mechanical and
Electromechanical Systems. About a dozen companies and Federal agencies have
committed to become members of the Center. The Center meets all requirements of
the Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program. The multi-
university Center brings together unique capabilities of research teams from
three universities (two of which will receive NSF I/UCRC funds) to address
research areas that none of the schools could address alone. The Center will
utilize expertise and facilities for vehicle system simulation developed at the
University of Iowa as part of a prior NSF I/UCRC in Simulation and Design
Optimization of Mechanical Systems. These capabilities, with the new addition of
the University of Iowa's National Advanced Driving Simulator (NADS) for the
driver-in-the-loop real-time simulation, combined with expertise at the
University of Texas at Austin in electromechanical system simulation and design
and expertise at Auburn University in vehicle-terrain simulation, will allow the
proposed Center to do virtual proving ground simulation. Virtual proving ground
simulation incorporates the dynamics of the interaction between a vehicle and
the surface on which it moves. The research program consists of core research
projects funded from center membership fees, and pilot projects funded by both
member companies and Federal agencies. The proposed core research projects are:
Vehicle and Equipment Virtual Proving Ground Modeling and Simulation, Virtual
Proving Ground Modeling, Dynamic System Simulation, Tire/Track-Soil Interaction
Modeling (Auburn University), Numerical Methods for Virtual Proving Ground
Simulation, Electromechanical System Modeling, Power System Simulation in a
Virtual Proving Ground Environment, Simulation-Based Design of Power Systems,
and Power System Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation. The bulk of the
funding for the universities to work on pilot projects will come from the
Department of Defense and other Federal agencies. These projects are within the
fundamental goals and objectives of the Center's research program. They greatly
expand the Center's research base and effectively guide the direction of the
research to meet industrial needs. The proposed pilot projects are: Simulation-
Based Design of Hybrid-Electric Vehicles, Agricultural Equipment Virtual Proving
Ground, Construction Equipment Virtual Proving Ground, Military Vehicle Virtual
Proving Ground, Rocket System Virtual Proving Ground, Simulation-Based Design of
Advanced Electromechanical Devices, and Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation
of Critical Power System Components. The DoD and other Federal agencies will
support pilot projects with funds as they become available during the five year
period.