* 9706767
* Mathematical Sciences:  Topological Index for Proper        Actions, Asymptotic Homomorphisms and Equivariant E-Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* John Trout, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 78,729.00

Abstract Trout The proposed research involves defining an equivariant ``Atiyah-
Singer''-type topological index for elliptic differential operators which are
invariant with respect to the proper and cocompact action of a locally compact
group on the underlying manifold, i.e. this index arises from equivariantly
embedding the base manifold into a (possibly infinite dimensional) Euclidean
representation of the group and applying an appropriate version of equivariant
Bott periodicity. The proof of the corresponding equivariant index theorem,
namely that this topological index is equal to G. Kasparov's equivariant
analytic index for the elliptic operator, requires the use of equivariant
asymptotic homomorphisms of C*-algebras and the associated equivariant version
of the E-theory groups of A. Connes and N. Higson. This research has
applications to the Baum-Connes Conjecture and the Novikov Conjecture. The
proposed research deals with the index theory of elliptic differential operators
on manifolds which commute with the action of a locally compact transformation
group, i.e., studying the spaces of solutions of differential equations which
exhibit certain degrees of internal symmetry. Associated with each elliptic
operator is an "analytic index," which can carry important topological and
geometric information about the manifold the operator is associated with.
However, this analytic index is very difficult to compute in general, requiring
a great deal of detailed analysis. I propose to construct, in a more topological
and geometric fashion, another method for computing this index, generalizing the
case of compact groups considered by Atiyah and Singer. Being able to compute
the indices of these elliptic operators should lead to a clearer understanding
of a variety of problems in geometry and representation theory, which are
important to physics. In particular the project will have a bearing on the Baum-
Connes Conjecture and the still-unsolved Novikov Conjecture.