* 9706680
* CREST: Center for Advanced Materials and Smart Structures.
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Lonnie Sharpe, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 07/31/2003
* USD 5,100,000.00

There is a keen interest in developing ceramics for a variety of applications
ranging from use as structural components, to energy-efficient thermal barriers,
to high- performance electronic substrates. Structural ceramics have unique
properties that can be used to great advantage in advanced heat engines, such as
automotive gas turbines, and low-emission high-efficiency diesel engines.
Certain composites are also being developed for various high- temperature
applications such as wear resistant materials and smart structure application.
Smart ceramic fibers and piezoceramic patch sensors may be attached to the
external surfaces of structures, or directly embedded within materials such as
advanced composites, to provide in-situ measurements of composite curing, health
monitoring of structures, estimating aerodynamic loads on flight vehicles, etc.
Thin film oxide-based structures, including high- critical temperature
superconductor (HTSC) structures and ferroelectric perovskites, are needed for
fabrication of electronic devices such as various sensors and transducers,
filters and nonvolatile memories. This film III-V nitrides have also generated
tremendous interest because of high- brightness semiconductor light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) and injection lasers with wavelengths ranging from red to
ultraviolet (UV). This proposal focuses on basic science issues affecting both
advanced structural ceramics and electronic ceramic materials in a synergistic
manner. The research team includes North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NC
A&amp;T), North Carolina State University (NCSU), Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL), and selected industrial partners. NC A&amp;T State University has been
associated with both ORNL and NCSU for many years in the advanced ceramic
materials research area, and has trained and graduated students together with
these organizations. This proposal addresses the fabrication of advanced
materials and smart structures using innovative materials proce ssing methods
ranging from ion-assisted pulsed deposition and plasma-source molecular beam
epitaxy for thin films, to liquid infiltration and reaction synthesis for bulk
materials. The advanced materials and their structures of particular interest
include structural (surface engineered ceramics, metal-ceramic joints, metal-
ceramic composites, tungsten carbide-aluminide composites, and piezofiber
composites), and electronic (high-Tc superconductor heterostructures,
piezoelectric thin film structures, and wide-bandgap III-V nitride
heterostructures) materials. The proposal emphasizes materials processing,
characterization, structure-property correlations, performance testing, and
modeling for all the proposed materials structures in a coherent way, utilizing
complementary skills at NC A&amp;T, NCSU, ORNL, and industry partners. The
Center will systematically investigate the influence of various processing
parameters on microstructure evolution and properties. Additionally, the atomic
structure and chemistry of defects and interfaces will be investigated using
high resolution TEM (with 0.18 nm point- to-point resolution) and STEM-Z
contrast (with point-to- point resolution 0.13 nm) microscopy techniques. The
above combination of techniques, expertise and instrumentation affords the
exploration of the nature of metal-ceramic interfaces produced under pulsed
laser irradiation, and of interfaces in superconductor and semiconductor
heterostructures; and these will then be correlated with properties and
performance of these novel materials structures. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained under the joint supervision of NCA&amp;T, NCSU, ORNL
and industry partners. We propose to build upon existing collaborative research
and education programs involving various combinations of the proposal partners
(NCA&amp;T-NCSU, NC A&amp;T-ORNL, NCSU-ORNL, NCSU-Kopin, NCA&amp;T-numerous
industries, etc.). Strong outreach efforts targeted towards the local community
will also be a pa rt of this center activity.