* 9706812
* Participation of Bioengineering Graduate Students in        International Conference on Artificial Organs, June 29-July 1, 1997, Providence, Rhode Island
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Pierre Galletti, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 01/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

9706812 Galletti Partial support is requested for the International Society for
Artificial Organs conference to be held June 29-July 1, 1997 in Providence, RI.
Funding from the Foundation would be used for travel and conference fee support
for up to ten graduate students. The meeting is expected to help the U.S. meet
new challenges in the development of artificial internal organs, viz. The need
to establish a strong engineering design basis for devices expected to perform
for increasingly longer periods of time. The need to sustain bioengineering
innovation in the U.S. academic community and to transfer that knowledge to
American industry for R & D related to medical devices. The need to consider
simultaneously technological, economic and ethical issues in the distribution of
health care resources. The need to attract women and under-represented
minorities to a field which already employs a large number of bioengineering
graduates. It is expected that new innovative and proactive interactions will
develop among the groups participating in the meeting. The young scientists to
be supported by NSF funds will have an excellent opportunity themselves to
engage in such interactions; a special session is planned wherein the students
can meet with their peers. Abstracts of presentations at the meeting are to
published in an Abstract Volume that will constitute a regular issue of
Artificial Organs, the official journal of the International Society for
Artificial Organs.