* 9706828
* Structure Theory of Infinite Dimensional Banach Spaces and a Gaussian Correlation Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Thomas Schlumprecht, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 64,057.00

9706828 Schlumprecht The concept of distortion played a crucial role in recent
discoveries of infinite dimensional Banach space theory. It tries to specify the
following problem: Given the norm topology of a Banach space, how different are
the equivalent norms generating this topology? Our main question is the
following: Are there any Banach spaces which are distortable but not arbitrarily
distortable? Directly connected to the concept of distortion is the concept of
stabilization and the spectrum of Lipschitz functions on the sphere of an
infinite dimensional Banach space. It was introduced by V. Milman in 1971. The
author intends to discuss the question whether, after stabilization, the
spectrum of a Lipschitz function must be a connected set. Furthermore it is
intended to work on several problems concerning the asymptotic structure of
Banach spaces. They could be summed up as follows: How much information about
the infinite dimensional properties of a Banach space can be deduced from its
asymptotic properties? The second part of this proposal treats the following
problem about Gaussian measures: Are two n-dimensional convex symmetric sets
positively correlated with respect to the standard Gaussian measure? Banach
spaces were introduced to provide a frame in which solutions of Differential
Equations exist, i.e. equations which model dynamic systems. The author intends
to continue his study about their structure. Roughly speaking, one might
summarize the problems as follows: What are the building blocks of Banach
spaces, are there "atomic" spaces? The second part of the proposal treats a
group of questions concerning multi-dimensional normal distributions. The
following question is a generic problem in statistics: One has tables for
standard normal distr ibutions, but no tables for multi-dimensional normal
distributions (there are simply too many of them). So, if we are dealing with a
multi-dimensional problem for which the data can be approximated by a multi-
dimensional normal, how can we deal with it? In order to find estimates of
confidence regions the author intends to find lower estimates for probability of
multi-dimensional events using the one dimensional standard distribution.