* 9706050
* Dynamics of Nonlinear Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Mallet-Paret, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 56,499.00

Abstract Mallet-Paret Mallet-Paret will study fundamental qualitative properties
of various classes of nonlinear dynamical systems, as they arise from
differential equations. Among the systems to be considered are those from
ordinary and partial differential equations, systems of lattice differential
equations (that is, spatially discrete systems), differential delay equations,
and nonlinear maps on cones. Issues such as existence of equilibria and their
stability, pattern formation, spatial chaos, and traveling waves, will be
examined for these equations. In addition to established techniques (both
theoretical and numerical) from differential equations and dynamical systems, a
significant portion of the proposed research involves the development and
implementation of new tools and techniques with which to study these systems.
Among the techniques to be employed are those involving singular perturbations,
invariant manifolds, and topological methods (Morse decompositions, fixed point
theorems, degree theory). Mallet-Paret is developing new mathematical techniques
for analyzing and understanding differential equations which arise as models in
various areas of science. A wide range of scientific areas is represented,
including biology, chemistry, electrical circuit theory, image processing, and
material science. While this is a very broad scope of inquiry, the specific
problems to be studied exhibit features in common -- spontaneous formation of
patterns, self-sustained oscillations, regulation by internal feedback (often
with time delays) -- which can be analyzed with some of the basic tools of
dynamical systems theory. It is expected that the resulting the mathematical
advances arising from these studies will increase the knowledge of, and will
provide insight into, both the abstract theory of dynamical systems, and the
scientific areas of inquiry.