* 9706394
* Evolution of Photosymbiosis in Oligocene-Miocene Planktic   Foraminifera
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Richard Norris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 230,000.00

9706394 Norris Symbioses are ubiquitous in the diversity of life and are often
cited as a source of evolutionary novelty. I propose to test the role of
photosymbiosis in the diversification of planktic foraminifera-a large group of
pelagic protistans that have a complex and well preserved fossil record. Equally
important for this study, planktic foraminifera preserve a clear isotopic signal
of foraminiferal-algal symbiosis in their calcareous shells that permits the
history and evolution of symbiosis to be studied in extinct species. My previous
isotopic and phylogenetic work has established that a large clade of planktic
foraminifera (the morozovellids) diversified simultaneously with their evolution
of foraminiferal-algal symbiosis. Evidence from the ecology of living
photosymbiotic foraminifera and changes in the taxonomic diversity of extinct
groups strongly suggest that at least some clades radiated as soon as they
acquired photosymbionts-perhaps because the photosymbiosis permitted the
foraminifera to diversify into oligotrophic surface waters. It remains to study
other clades of photosymbiotic foraminifera to determine whether these symbioses
consistently initiate major diversifications of the host foraminifera. This
proposal will examine two large clades: the Neogene globiginids (which may have
harbored symbionts following the major extinction of photosymbiotic species in
the middle Eocene). Data from both clades will be compared to a previously
studied group: the Paleogene morozovellids. The globigerinids are almost
exclusively photosymbiotic today as demonstrated both by observation of living
foraminifera and isotopic analyses of their shells. Yet, a small number of
isotopic analyses done as a pilot study for this project suggest the surprising
conclusion that the globigerinids only recently acquired the photosymbiotic
ecology. At least some of the early Miocene and Oligocene representatives of the
group were apparently asymbiotic. Should this conclusion be supported by further
cladistic and isotopic study, this will weaken the hypothesized link between the
evolution of symbiosis and taxonomic radiation of the host group. Conversely,
evidence for the recent evolution of photosymbiosis in both the globigerinids
and globoquadrinids will provide strong evidence that symbioses are easily
established in planktic foraminifera-a point also suggested by recent molecular
phylogenetic data that find that the same symbiotic dinoflagellate species
within diverse groups of globigerinid foraminifera. This study is significant
because it compares isotopic and cladistic evidence from three major clades of
planktic foraminifera that have independently evolved photosymbiosis to
determine whether symbioses play an important evolutionary role in the
diversification of these plankton. These analyses will result in a detailed
history of the photosymbiotic strategy in planktic foraminifera for the last 65
million years. The history of photosymbiosis can then be compared with the
oceanographic record to assess the paleoceanographic control on the evolution of
photosymbiosis.