* 9706558
* Design-Oriented Analysis and Practical Applications of      Log-Domain Filtering
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* William Eisenstadt, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2001
* USD 206,500.00

Even in today's increasingly digital world, analog continuous time circuits are
needed in many applications. Current approaches to analog processing are running
up against fundamental limitations. Log-domain filtering is a relatively new
approach that offers wide dynamic range and excellent high-frequency response
using simple, low-voltage circuits. Log-domain filters exploit the translinear
current-voltage characteristics of bipolar transistors or weak-inversion MOSFETS
to achieve overall linearity. The basic signal processing elements can be quite
simple in form and their high-frequency performance can be excellent while
distortion can be low because most of the transistor non-linearities are
cancelled within the circuit. This research has three major thrusts: The first
thrust is toward fundamental, design-oriented analysis of log-domain circuits.
Design methodologies and fundamental understanding of the limitations of log-
domain filters are in an early stage. Fundamental analyses allow development of
figures of merit for evaluating and comparing log-domain circuits. The second
thrust focuses on developing new log-domain circuit topologies. Based on an
understanding of fundamental limitations, new circuits are being designed to
improve performance. The third thrust is toward applications of log-domain
circuits. Integrated circuits are being built and tested to demonstrate the
usefulness of log-domain circuits in practical applications. Initial focus is on
two application areas: low-voltage wireless communications, to exploit the
performance potential of log- domain circuits and adaptive and biologically
inspired circuits, to build on their fundamental simplicity.