* 9706230
* Molluscan Evolution in the Pannonian Lake (Late Miocene,    Hungary)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Dana Geary, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 119,982.00

9706230 Geary The late Miocene Pannonian lake harbored one of the most diverse
endemic lacustrine mollusc faunas ever known, including approximately one
thousand described species, dozens of endemic genera, several endemic
subfamilies, and two endemic families. In spite of the textbook nature of this
case (e.g. Stanley 1979- Ager 1963, 1993, Sepkoski 1993), the evolution of the
Pannonian lake malacofauna is known only from a few studies of individual
lineages (e.g. Geary 1990a- Muller and Magyar 1992a), but has not been
approached in a comprehensive way. In addition to its impressive malacofauna,
the Pannonian lake presents an ideal system for paleontological research because
its paleoenvironment and stratigraphy are extremely well studied. Many aspects
of lake paleoenvironment and history, including the origin of the lake, its
sedimentation and water depth, lake level fluctuations, paleogeography, and
paleoclimate have been the focus of recent work. A newly revised
chronostratigraphy has just been completed, which incorporates detailed
biostratigraphic, seismic stratigraphic, and magnetostratigraphic data. The PI's
Hungarian collaborators, Drs. Imre Magyar and Pal Muller, have been important
contributors to this body of knowledge. The work we propose here includes
several smaller projects that will further enhance our paleoenvironmental
understanding. Thus, all the pieces are in place for a detailed examination of
the relationship between environmental and evolutionary change in this classic
system, We propose to examine the evolutionary radiation of the major clades of
Pannonian lake molluscs in this detailed paleoenvironmental context. We intend
to: 1) conduct a comprehensive review and taxonomic revision of four of the most
diverse molluscan families, 2) use morphometrics to characterize geographic
variation and morphological change over time in selected lineages from the
Pannonian lake, and 3) interpret the taxonomic and morphological results in an
environmental context. Specifically, we will test the idea of coordinated,
stasis among various molluscan lineages, and we will examine how environmental
stability or change influenced the diversity and morphological evolution of
Pannonian lake molluscs. Geologically gradual tempos appear to have been
documented in several Pannonian basin mollusc lineages (Geary 1990a; Muller and
Magyar 1992a; Staley 1992- Staley et al. 1992). A more comprehensive view of
Pannonian lake molluscan evolution, including detailed documentation of change
in additional lineages, will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms
behind various evolutionary tempos.