* 9706213
* Low-Frequency Attenuation in Polycrystalline Silicates and  Microstructurally Equilibrated Silicate Partial Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Reid Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2001
* USD 205,930.00

9706213 Cooper The dynamic and quasistatic mechanical responses of carefully
engineered aggregates of ferromagnesian olivine and of microstructurally
equilibrated olivine + synthetic basalt partial melts will be evaluated as
functions of temperature, frequency, grain size and loading morphology
(Young's-modulus mode in compression and flexure, shear-modulus mode in
torsion). The experiments emphasize (i) the use of drained conditions for the
partial melts, (ii) the use of specific differential-stress and temperature
potentials combined with a fine grain size such that a Newtonian rheology
describes the crystalline phase in both partial melt and melt-free states, and
(iii) a low-viscosity liquid phase in the partial melt experiments such that the
compaction length exceeds the specimen size. The immediate goal of the research
is to discriminate the effect(s) of partial melting on the dynamic signature of
the aggregate from the intrinsic behavior associated with the dissipation of
energy by solid-state grain-boundary processes. Given the experimental
parameters to be explored, extrapolation of the results to upper-mantle
conditions is possible. The longer-range goal of the research is to initiate
evaluation of melt-segregation microstructures ("mesostructures") on the dynamic
response. ***