* 9706948
* Dissertation Research: Morphological Diversification        and Phylogentic Systematics of the Plant Genus Weinmannia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9706948 Schaal Graduate student Jason Bradford, under the direction of advisors
Dr. Barbara Schaal at Washington University and Dr. Paul Berry at the Missouri
Botanical Garden, is studying morphological evolution of the complex
inflorescence structures in the tropical tree genus Weinmannia, of the
Cunoniaceae family. Extensive field collecting has been done in parts of South
America and in Madagascar, and additional collecting targets regions of high
species diversity in Australasia. A major focus of the research is DNA
sequencing of a nuclear ribosomal RNA gene, to generate data appropriate for
constructing a phylogenetic framework of the genus from mutational differences
among the species. About one-third of the estimated 150 species in the genus are
to be analyzed for DNA variation. Studies of the position and complexity of the
branched flowering axes, the inflorescences, will then be conducted, to
distinguish structures that are likely the result of shared ancestry from those
arising as convergent adaptations in different lineages. In a project focused on
tropical woody plants, and bringing both molecular and morphological approaches
to taxonomic study, Mr. Bradford will add field collecting in poorly researched
areas of Melanesia and Polynesia to sample Weinmannia diversity across its
southern-hemisphere range. The molecular phylogenetic data will augment general
studies of dicot phylogeny ongoing in several laboratories in the world. The
morphological analyses contribute to renewed study of modular growth patterns in
flowering plants, where differences in timing (heterochrony) and in positioning
(heterotopy) characterize vegetative and reproductive axes in related species.