* 9706036
* Capacity and Protocols for Integrated Voice/Data            CDMA Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jack Holtzman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 328,057.00

The aim of this project is to develop an analytical framework that provides new
understanding of the interaction of voice and data in an integrated voice/data
CDMA system. The insights obtained from this study will be further used to
develop new algorithms. The effect of the variability of data and its impact on
the capacity and performance of the voice service in such a multimedia wireless
system will be analyzed. New easily implemented real-time strategies for call
admission, and control after call setup will be derived for the data service
with delay sensitive voice being given priority. The effect of variable quality
of service (QoS) the different classes of service may require will be included
in the analysis framework and methodology. Further, the interaction between
protocol layers will be included in the study and design of access control
schemes for data. Specifically, we will analyze the interactions of end-to-end
protocols like TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) with data access control
schemes on the radio link. Analytical Methodology: Analysis of these problems
encounters two serious difficulties. Even if all the information (e.g.,
distributions of relevant random variables) was available, exact analysis
appears to be beyond current theory leading to computationally tractable
solutions. Secondly, the needed distributions are often not available. We
develop instead simple, reasonably accurate, analytic methodology which uses
only means and variances, when appropriate, and distributional assumptions when
necessary. Data Control Strategies: Recognizing that voice is delay sensitive,
we develop data access control strategies. One type of real-time control is
based on readily measurable quantities related to voice quality and uses
broadcasted permission probabilities to the data users. The proposal will
investigate the varied questions associated with the optimization of the data
control algorithms. We will develop and analyze such control strategies for both
conve ntional and multiuser receivers. Interaction between Protocol Layers :
Serious problems can arise when protocol layers are designed independently but
end up with unexpected interactions. We address this in the context of a data
access control strategy operating under TCP. We investigate the problems due to
such interactions and appropriate modifications in the light of the
interactions. Significance of this Project: This project will provide a more
complete understanding of the complex issues of voice/data integration. This
will include development of analytical methodology which is convenient to use
and consistent with the limited information expected to be available. New
effective real-time algorithms will be developed for both conventional and
multiuser receivers. Further, the study of the interactions between data link
retransmission schemes and higher layer reliability protocols (like TCP) should
provide valuable insights into system design for optimum coexistence of diverse
traffic. The work will thus provide a better understanding of the complex
interactions both between service types with different traffic characteristics
and different QoS requirements, and between different protocol layers. This will
lead to improved design of real-time algorithms for data.