* 9706754
* On the Global Regularity Properties of Nonlinear Wave       Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Sergiu Klainerman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 255,276.00

9706754 Klainerman One of the central issues in the theory of nonlinear Partial
Differential Equations of evolution is that of regularity or break-down of
solutions. The best known problems of this type, in fluid mechanics, concern the
regularity of the three dimensional Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. Another
well known problem is that of finding a correct concept of global generalized
solutions, including shock discontinuities, to compressible Euler equations.
Similar questions arise also in General Relativity. The problem of regularity
has been formulated, by Penrose, under the code name of "Cosmic Censorship". It
states, roughly, that the stable solutions of the Einstein Field Equations
should exclude "naked singularities", i.e. singularities not hidden by black
holes. Most of these problems are today out of reach. My objective is to help
develop tools for attacking these fundamental problems by concentrating my
attention on the simplified situation of the Yang-Mills and Wave Maps field
equations. As is known, the Yang-Mills equations are at the heart of our most
successful particle physics theory, the so called standard model. The Wave Maps
equations appear naturally when we look for special solutions of the Einstein
equations. The question of break-down of solutions to the Euler and Navier-
Stokes equations governing the behavior of fluids and gases and of the Einstein
field equations of General Relativity is of fundamental significance. In the
case of the former, this problem is intimately tied to the highly unstable
behavior of fluids and has bearing on the practical problems of taming
turbulence and predicting the weather. In the case of General Relativity, the
problem has deep significance to our understanding of the Universe, since black
holes and singularities are the most important, and least understood,
predictions of General Relativity. While from a physical point of view these
theories seem very different, mathematically they bear a lot of similarities.
Due to the non-linear character of these problems, they have led, throughout
this century, to the development of new qualitative techniques in which
mathematicians have played a leading role. Some of these techniques are now
routinely used in practice. The final goals remain distant, and the investigator
would consider this proposal a ringing success if it can help make a dint on
these difficult problems.