* 9706981
* Analysis of Multi-Particle Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Mary Beth Ruskai, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 60,651.00

9706981 Ruskai This research is concerned with problems in the mathematical
analysis of multi-particle systems. The main focus is on bound states of atomic
and molecular Hamiltonians with a new emphasis on systems in magnetic fields. In
particular, one-dimensional models will be used to study the maximum negative
ionization of atoms in strong magnetic fields. The contraction of relative
entropy for general quantum systems will also be studied using monotone
Riemannian metrics on non-commutative probability spaces, and some related
operator inequalities will be considered. Because real atoms and molecules exist
in ordinary 3-dimensional space with well established integer values for the
nuclear charges, models of systems in one or two dimensions with fractional, or
asymptotically infinite, nuclear charge may seem somewhat artificial and
esoteric. However, real atoms do not exist in isolation, but within various
kinds of materials ranging in size from microscopic computer chips to stars. The
behavior of electrons within such complex materials may be accurately modelled
by using a fractional nuclear charge or by supposing that they are confined to
one or two dimensions. For example, semiconductor scientists have recently
manufactured microscopic materials called "quantum dots" which behave like two-
dimensional atoms with fractional nuclear charge. At the other extreme, one
finds that atoms in extremely strong magnetic fields, such as those found on the
surface of a neutron star, behave as if the electrons were confined to one
dimension. Thus, the systems proposed for study have a wide range of
applicability. The other part of this proposal is concerned with the
generalization of an important class of entropy inequalities to quantum systems.
Entropy and the related functionals have significant applications in such
diverse fields as economics, statistics, population biology, information theory,
and physics. In view of recent advances in quantum co mputing, the work on
quantum mechanical entropy proposed here is expected to have an impact on
information theory as well as physics.