* 9706873
* Electrochemical Self-Organization of Ordered Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Albert Miller, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2001
* USD 220,000.00

9706873 Miller The PI's propose to study, theoretically and experimentally, the
self-organization process leading to the formation of two-dimensional periodic
arrays of nanostructures (quantum dots and wires) upon electrochemical treatment
of an aluminum-electrolyte interface with potential application to
nanolithography. Electropolishing aluminum in a suitable electrolyte for
specific durations at specific voltages leads to the formation of highly
periodic arrangements of nanostructures on the aluminum with a "pitch" or period
of ~ 100 nm. Anodization of the electropolished surface yields a non-porous
alumina film that can be filled up with a material of interest to produce a
quasiperiodic array of wires or dots embedded in alumina. These nanostructures
range from 5 to 50 nm. The above techniques of nanosynthesis are "gentle" unlike
beam lithography (e.g. x-ray, ion-beam, electronbeam) which cause radiation
damage to nanostructures by exposing them to high energy patterning beams.
Additionally, these are parallel techniques unlike direct-write lithography
since millions of wafers could be processed simultaneously leading to a
throughput fast enough for mass production. The PI's preliminary experiments
indicate that the dissolution pattern and length scale during both
electropolishing and anodization are very sensitive to electrolyte and aluminum
impurity composition, applied voltage and the applied duration. Regular and
irregular ridges and dots and combinations of each can all appear during
electropolishing. Periodic dot and ridge arrays can hence be achieved under very
specific but reproducible conditions. We intend to decipher this field-assisted
electropolishing and anodization pattern formation dynamics at a fundamental
level such that the results can be extrapolated to a wide class of materials.
Our preliminary analysis suggests that both dynamics are driven by a coupling
between the surface curvature and the electric potential field. During
electropolishing, the potentia l drop occurs over a thin double layer at the
metal/electrolyte interface where there is a quasi-steady ionic separation. An
idealized sinuous perturbation of the double layer would then induce an
interphase perturbation of the field gradient. This, in turn, preferentially
packs more polar molecules in the electrolyte onto the crests and hence reduces
the local ion transport and dissolution rate. For anodization, the positive
feedback mechanism occurs within the oxide layer where the potential drop
occurs. A slight curvature of the lower oxide/metal interface can focus the
field at the upper oxide/electrolyte interface to induce highly accelerated
local field-assisted dissolution. Both the proposed global electropolishing and
local anodization instability mechanisms have been expressed mathematically in
terms of model evolution equations and they have reproduced consistent scalings
for the observed patterns and dynamics. Both mechanisms, however, are found to
be highly sensitive to the electrolyte composition, applied voltage strength and
duration and the presence of impurity ions in the solid and scrutinizing these
effects and extending the technique to materials other than aluminum will be the
focus of the project. The models would then be authenticated by real-time
monitoring of the self-organization process using in-situ variable angle
spectroscopic ellipsometry. ***