* 9706922
* Mathematical Sciences:  Unitary Representations and         Zuckerman Modules
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Susana Salamanca-Riba, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 76,336.00

Abstract Salamanca-Riba During the duration of this grant Dr. Salamanca-Riba
intends to investigate some extensions to her proof of the following conjecture
of Vogan and Zuckerman on the representation theory of Lie groups: 'An
irreducible unitary Harish-Chandra module of a group G whose infinitesimal
character satisfies some regularity assumption is isomorphic to a Zuckerman
functor module derived from a one dimensional unitary representation of a
subgroup of G'. Relaxing this regularity assumption to include all genuine
unitary representations of the metaplectic group, the PI plans to use the Adams-
Barbasch dual pair correspondence of these representations to realize them as
Zuckerman modules that are induced from some other representations easy to
describe. The PI also has a program already in progress in collaboration with
David Vogan. The problem they want to solve is the following conjecture: There
is a bijection between the set of unitary representations of G whose lowest K
type is associated to a fixed parameter and the set of unitary representations
of a certain subgroup associated to the same parameter and whose K types are in
turn associated to that same parameter. A fourth problem she wants to study is
those unitary representations of a Lie group G which are predicted by the orbit
method. These representations, when restricted to the maximal compact subgroup K
are multiplicity free and are related to multiplicity free representations on
the ring of regular functions of a nilpotent orbit. Lie groups have connections
in many areas of pure and applied Mathematics like Differential Equations,
Harmonic Analysis, Topology, Geometry, Ergodic Theory; and in other areas of
Science and Engineering as well, like Materials Science, Quantum Field Theory,
Particle Physics, Control Theory and Robotics. For example, the PI has become
interested in the applications of Lie Theory to the field of Geometric Control
Theory. She is now exploring some mechanical systems that are interesting for
applications in several very different areas, such as robotic assisted surgery,
waste management and spacecraft control. These systems seem to have some common
grounds that allow engineers to be able to control the systems and could
possibly be explained with Lie Theory. She is also interested in exploring these
questions a bit further to see if they lead to interesting mathematical
questions and if the answers to those questions lead to practical applications
in industry.