* 9706810
* Operator Algebras, Operator Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Larson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 161,125.00

Abstract Larson This project has three areas of emphasis. The first focuses on
problems related to the structural theory of non-selfadjoint operator algebras.
Prior work by the investigator on quasitriangularity considerations within von
Neumann algebras has impacted some work of others outside the area in applied
control theory and in function theory. He will continue this direction of
research. The second ongoing project concerns a new functional- analytic
approach to some basic issues in wavelet theory. The PI has shown that certain
classical orthonormal wavelets could be derived using operator-algebraic
techniques, and he also proved the existence of single-function dyadic
orthonormal wavelets in all dimensions greater than one. This was a surprise to
some other researchers because it contradicted a wavelet folklore which
indicated that such wavelets were impossible. He has also shown that the unitary
group of a von Neumann algebra can in some cases be used to parameterize a norm-
path-connected family of wavelets. This suggests the possibility of perturbation
techniques. The third thrust extends prior work of this investigator and
collaborators in which counterexamples were obtained to some old open problems
concerning operator-algebraic reflexivity and related properties of single
operators. In prior supported work this investigator solved, with collaborators,
a conjecture in the area of non-selfadjoint operator algebras that had been
posed about ten years earlier by another researcher. This led to an unsuspected
development in the applied area of control theory which impacted work of others
outside of mathematics. He will continue pursuing this line of research. In a
second ongoing direction, this investigator and a former student have shown that
some aspects of wavelet theory are amenable to operator algebraic computations
of a nature that were previously unsuspected. Wavelet analysis and wavelet
oriented technology has been the scene of a tremendous research drive in
mathematics and engineering during the past few years. Primary applications have
been to signal processing and data compression. They showed that certain
classical wavelets could be derived using their techniques, and they also proved
the existence of certain wavelets in higher dimensions which were previously
thought to be impossible by many specialists. In a third direction the PI has
recently extended some prior work in which counterexamples were obtained to some
old open problems concerning properties of single operators. Several doctoral
students have been involved in all of this work.