* 9706029
* Next-generation algorithms for network layout
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Daniel Bienstock, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 08/31/2001
* USD 259,825.00

Nearly every single major telecommunications concern in the United States, as
well as many abroad, has a group responsible for network layout algorithms. This
is a growing trend, spurred by the large investments needed to upgrade and
expand networks, especially in the case of ATM technology --a single large
switch can cost millions of dollars. Typically, work focuses on individual
problems as they arise, and the resulting algorithms (whether completely
heuristic or based on thoroughly grounded techniques) heavily depend on many
particular details of the problem at hand. A similar approach is used by
researchers at universities. Other than completely general optimization
techniques --such as general purpose integer programming codes or heuristics
such as simulated annealing-- which usually do not prove satisfactory, no
successful common approach exists. However, network layout problems of all
flavors do share many common components. Our views on this matter were spurred
by our experience with practical ATM layout problems. In ATM network layout
several interrelated subproblems arise. There is a transmission system
subproblem: on every link enough capacity must be installed to carry the traffic
routed on it. There is a similar switch sizing subproblem (except that capacity
is installed at nodes, not links). There may be a further subproblem concerning
allocation of terminations at switches, again of a similar nature. Finally,
different types of routings may be allowed, for example, requiring
survivability. An algorithm for a complex problem of this type may therefore
need to handle each subproblem well (in case that subproblem is cost-dominant in
a particular application) but would also need to integrate the different
components into a coherent single unit (for example, the edge transmission
system subproblem will interact with the switch sizing subproblem). Network
design problems can be classifed as mixed-integer programs: the y involve
variables that must take integral values (e.g. the number of transmission
systems to install in a particular link) and also continuous variables (mainly
traffic routing decisions, which are effectively modeled without requiring
integrality). From a computational viewpoint these problems are typically very
difficult. Purely heuristic algorithms are notoriously unreliable in terms of
the quality of the solutions they provide. At the other end difficult network
design problems routinely trounce high-performance general-purpose integer
programming algorithms. See problems "dano3mip" and "danoint" of the MIPLIB
family (http://www.caam.rice.edu/~bixby/miplib/miplib.html) and other problems
in the PI's previous work. A final argument in favor of a general-purpose
network design algorithm, concerns one way in which network design is used in
practice. No network planner will commit to an expenditure of several million
dollars on the basis of a single run of an optimization algorithm, no matter how
good a track record this algorithm has. Typically, an algorithm would be used in
the context of a study where a design tool is run repeatedly. Here it is crucial
to get fast, good-quality estimates. The research supported by this award
focuses in developing a generic network design tool. We plan to develop several
fairly independent components of such a tool, principally: * Fast, approximate
algorithms for continuous linear programs arising in network layout problems, in
particular, parallelizable versions thereof for a shared-memory environment. *
General "cutting-plane" techniques for the mixed-integer programs we are
interested in, and * Fast rounding heuristics to quickly obtain good feasible
solutions.