* 9706591
* Bandwidth Efficient Multiple Access (BEMA) Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Mahesh Varanasi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 02/28/2002
* USD 160,000.00

This project will explore the potential of a new multiple access technique
called Bandwidth Efficient Multiple Access (BEMA) in offering higher spectral
efficiencies than the well-known multiaccess strategies such as TDMA, FDMA, and
CDMA. The primary emphasis is to realize BEMA with the use of only single-user
codecs (and not multiuser codecs about which too little is known) as subsystems.
Potential applications are in wireless indoor and personal communications. At
the heart of BEMA will be signal processing algorithms that realize the
functions of multiuser equalization and signal design by taking a combined
approach to those two subjects. A systematic development of a theory of
multiuser decision feeedback equalization for synchronous and asynchronous
multiple-access channels will be undertaken. The achievement of vertices or
near-optimal points in the capacity regions of Gaussian multiple-access channels
with correlated waveforms will be sought under latency and complexity
constraints on the multiuser equalizers. Generalizations of Rate-Splitting
Multiple Access by combining equalization and successive decoding will be
considered. Algorithms that determine the order in which users are to be
equalized and decoded will be obtained, error propagation effects for multiuser
decision feedback detection will be quantified, and a characterization of error
exponents for decision feedback receivers for coded systems will be sought. The
focus in signal design will be to obtain signature waveforms that shape the
capacity region under power and rate (quality of service) constraints to be
achieved for each user via decision feedback receivers so as to minimize
bandwidth.