* 9706839
* Tensor Categories and Subfactors
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Hans Wenzl, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 86,001.00

Abstract Wenzl A general procedure has recently been found to supply fusion
categories constructed from quantum groups with a C* structure. It is planned to
continue this study in order to make some of the proofs more self-contained, and
to include some additional cases not covered so far in the non-simply laced
case. More importantly, it is expected that the understanding of the C*
structure in the quantum group context would also be useful to get a conceptual
understanding of the asymptotic inclusions derived from these categories.
Besides its relevance for classification of subfactors, it would potentially
also be useful for getting a better understanding of the algebra behind the
Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten type invariants of 3-manifolds connected with such
categories. In related research, Wenzl's graduate student Orellana is studying
Markov traces of Hecke algebras of type B. For Hecke algebras of type A, such a
study led to the construction of subfactors closely related to quantum groups of
type A. For type B, the situation is quite different. But preliminary results
nevertheless suggest that one can also obtain subfactors from Hecke algebras of
type B. The original motivation for Wenzl's research was the construction of
examples of subfactors of a certain algebra, the so-called hyperfinite von
Neumann factor of type II_1. By now, a lot of examples of subfactors are known,
and a complete explicit classification seems to be out of reach. Wenzl's
research focuses on certain classes of examples with connections to other areas
of mathematics and physics. The examples he constructed are closely connected to
the representation theory of quantum groups and Kac-Moody algebras, which in
turn figure prominently in models in theoretical physics referred to as
conformal field theory. The subfactors which would arise from his graduate
student's work would be connected to Hecke algebras of type B and knot theory in
a torus. Such examples have the advantage that one can use addition al
information for their study. In the other direction, we expect that operator
algebra techniques can provide new insights to the related areas, such as it has
already happened in e.g. knot theory, study of 3-manifolds or representation
theory. This could be understood as part of von Neumann's program of using
operator algebras as a tool for representation theory and quantum physics.