* 9707934
* SGER:  Thermochemical/Thermophysical Aspects of the         Float-Glass Process as Applied to Glass-Ceramic and Other   Complex, High-Temperature Aluminosilicate Melts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Reid Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract - Cooper - 9707934 Application of the float process technique to the
fabrication of defect-free flat panels of complex-composition aluminosilicate
glass and glass-ceramic melts requires a fundamental understanding of the
thermodynamics and kinetics of reactions between the complex silicate and the
molten metal or metal alloy upon which it is poured. The PI plans to study the
reactions and kinetic mechanisms of silicate melt reduction, metal-float-medium
oxidation and the consequent chemical diffusion between the metal and silicate
media that are the thermochemical/thermophysical bases of the float process. The
study is designed to identify the optimal chemical approach to successfully
floating a complex silicate melt that incorporates a significant amount of a
transition metal oxide in its composition. The experimental study will
scrutinize the chemical dynamics of a magnesium aluminosilicate (MAS) melt and
its transition metal cation-doped derivatives in contact with molten tin and tin
alloys. Specifically, the base MAS composition to be studied is
1MgO-1Al2O3-4SiO2 (molar basis), which is a fully polymerized melt; transition
metal cations to be substituted (doped-in; initially at approximately a 5-cation
mol.% level) are Fe2+-Fe3+ in one case and Ti4+ in another. The reactions of the
glass melt with the pure metal and metal alloy(s) will be characterized both
with ion backscattering spectroscopy as well as with energy- and wavelength-
dispersive x-ray spectroscopies via an electron probe. The project is being
funded under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research program.