* 9707923
* Low Density Supersonic Plasma Jet Synthesis of Thin Films   of Refractory and Wide Band-Gap Nitrides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Mark Cappelli, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/2001
* USD 247,240.00

Abstract - Cappelli CTS-9707923 This is a combined experimental and modelling
study oriented toward an efficient process for the synthesis of advanced
materials in the nitride family. A supersonic plasma jet generated by an arc-
heated flow and expanded to low densities provides a large flux of energetic
dissociated (atomic) nitrogen into which a wide variety of reactants (such as
gallium trichloride, aluminum trichloride, methane, or boron trichloride) are
injected to generate a reacting flow from which products condence onto a
substrate to form films, coatings, or epitaxial layers. The ability to apply a
controlled electrical bias to the substrate provides an added variable to
influence film structure and properties. The project includes modelling of
reactant injection and subsequent decomposition in the plume; modelling of ion
transport through the plasma sheath surrounding the substrate; development of
empirical heterogeneous models of film growth; measurement of concentratures of
critical gas-phase species during film deposition by optical absorption
spectroscopy; measurement of concentrations and energies of a broader range of
neutral and ionic radicals by molecular-beam mass spectrometry; and correlation
of vapor-phase properties to film structure as ascertained by infrared
absorption (IR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and near-edge X-ray absorption fine
structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS). Optical and mechanical properties of the
deposited films are also measured. This study addresses the synthesis of a
number of nitrides that form the basis of "space-age" ceramics. These include
cubic boron nitride (c-BN), carbon nitride (C3 N4), gallium nitride (GaN),
aluminum nitride (AlN), and the mixed aluminum/gallium nitrides. The unusual
mechanical, electrical, and optical properties of these materials make them
attractive for many applications, but their wide use is inhibited by the lack of
an economic method of s ynthesis.