* 9707125
* New Generation Multithreaded Multiprocessors
* CSE,EIA
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 06/30/2001
* USD 400,002.00

This project is experimenting with languages, compilers, and architectures for
large-scale multiprocessors based on functional programming and single
assignment data structures. The project includes work at USC on translators for
functional languages, and work at the University of Delaware on architectures
and simulations. The key insight motivating the work is that functional
programming can increase performance of multithreaded systems. One increase of
performance comes from the ability to move threads among processors. Another is
the possibility that single assignment data structures can be cached with no
need for coherence traffic, potentially increasing performance of parallel
systems. Research will include development of a program execution model and
memory model, design of a cache management protocol for single-assignment data
structures, translation of benchmarks such as SPLASH 2 into a functional
language, and simulation of the benchmarks running on the new execution model
with cache protocol. The goal is to measure the extent to which the new models
and cache protocols provide a performance advantage over execution models that
permit multiple assignments. This project is experimenting with languages,
compilers, and architectures for large-scale multiprocessors based on functional
programming and single assignment data structures. The project includes work at
USC on translators for functional languages, and work at the University of
Delaware on architectures and simulations. The key insight motivating the work
is that functional programming can increase performance of multithreaded
systems. One increase of performance comes from the ability to move threads
among processors. Another is the possibility that single assignment data
structures can be cached with no need for coherence traffic, potentially
increasing performance of parallel systems. Research will include development of
a program execution model and memory model, design of a cache management
protocol for single-assignment data structures, translation of benchmarks such
as SPLASH 2 into a functional language, and simulation of the benchmarks running
on the new execution model with cache protocol. The goal is to measure the
extent to which the new models and cache protocols provide a performance
advantage over execution models that permit multiple assignments.