* 9707651
* Novel Techniques for the Solution and Solid Phase Syntheses of Peptides and Peptide Segments
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Louis Carpino, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2000
* USD 357,000.00

With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor Louis A. Carpino, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, develops novel techniques for the solution
and solid phase synthesis of peptides and peptide segments. Methods for the
synthesis of longer peptides and small proteins, whether by stepwise solution or
solid phase techniques or by segment condensation methods, are not wholly
satisfactory, suffering from problems in the coupling steps and the
unavailability or instability of suitably protected histidine and arginine
residues. Professor Carpino explores new derivatives of these amino acids,
permitting their incorporation and deprotection in automated coupling schemes.
Solubilizing systems such as peptide bond protection and poly(ethylene glycol)
residues are examined for their ability to provide good solubility of growing
peptides in comparatively non-polar solvents and for their applicability for the
coupling of peptide segments by various techniques. Optimized techniques are
then applied to the synthesis of longer peptides. With continued growth in the
demand for polypeptides for a variety of applications, including the study of
fundamental biological and biochemical phenomena and the development of new
medical diagnostics and therapeutic agents, new techniques for the rapid,
efficient, universally general, and, ideally, automated synthesis of
polypeptides are required. Professor Louis A. Carpino, of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, with the support of the
Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, develops such techniques. His
studies focus both on the design of suitable building blocks to allow the
automated sequential construction of peptides and on the development of new
techniques for the construction of peptides. The latter techniques center on the
highly effective use of solid `supports` as platforms for peptide synthesis and
extend the basic premises of such solid-phase peptide synthesis to homogeneous
solutions in organic solvents through the use of soluble polymeric materials as
the construction scaffold.