* 9707765
* The Development of Maritime Adaptations on Santa Cruz Island
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Michael Glassow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1999
* USD 82,093.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Glassow will conduct
archaeological research at a series of sites located on Santa Cruz, one of the
Channel Islands off California coast. Excavations indicate that this area was
occupied by Native American people as early as 8,000 years ago and that
habitation continued into historic times. As a result of his previous research
Dr. Glassow has located a series of sites which fall within the time interval of
6700 to 4500 years before the present and with student assistance he shall
conduct test excavations at five of them. Radiocarbon samples will be collected
from an additional three sites. The goal of the research is to determine how
subsistence practices changed over time and to accomplish this the team will
focus their efforts on the recovery of faunal and floral remains which are
identifiable to genus and species. They will also collect and analyze samples of
subsistence-related artifacts and tool manufacturing waste. Clam and mussel
valves which are abundant on island sites provide information on both the season
of year in which they were collected and the water temperature in which they
grew. Bulk soil samples will be collected and flotation procedures applied to
recover micro-plant remains. On the basis of this evidence it will be possible
to trace environmental changes over a ca. 2,000 year period and determine how
the human population responded to these. The Channel Islands have long been of
archaeological interest because the populations which inhabited them reached a
population density and level of social complexity which was rare among hunting
and gathering societies. It seems likely that abundant marine resources which
include both fish and shellfish are, in some way, responsible for this
phenomenon. Paleoecologists have reconstructed changes in water temperature over
this period and have therefore provided an excellent environmental context in
which to study human adaptation. Different species of shellfish have specific
tightly controlled environmental limitations and through analysis of species
compositions recovered in archaeological sites it is possible to tie individual
sites with environmental conditions. Dr. Glassow has noted that population
density of Santa Cruz appears to have increased significantly about 5,500 years
ago and he wishes to understand both the causes and the consequences of this
change. Using concepts derived from optimum foraging theory he has predicted how
such groups at a simple level of technology adapted their subsistence to
increased density and the data he collects will allow him to test these ideas.
This research is important for several reasons. It will provide important
information on how humans respond and adapt to environmental change. It will
yield data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training students
who are intimately involved in this research.