* 9707650
* Community-Level Selection: Laboratory Experiments and       Computer Simulations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* David Sloan Wilson, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 221,354.00

Wilson, D. S. DEB-9707650 Biological communities have often been described as
functionally organized units, similar to single organisms in the harmony and
coordination of their parts. The evolution of adaptations at any level of the
biological hierarchy, however, requires a corresponding process of natural
selection at that level. This grant proposal explores the process of community-
level selection with laboratory experiments and computer simulations. In the
laboratory, a population of isolated soil communities will be established and
scored with respect to a phenotypic character (plant growth). The highest and
lowest scoring communities will be used as the "parents" to colonize a new set
of "offspring" communities. This experimental design is identical to standard
artificial selection experiments except that the selected units are communities
rather than individuals. If the experiment is successful, it will produce soil
communities that are functionally designed to increase (or decrease) plant
growth. The computer simulations will allow the same process to be explored in
which the interactions among the species can be specified in detail. Artificial
selection at the individual level has been employed for centuries to develop
strains of plants and animals that are useful to man. The same procedure can
potentially be used to evolve multi-species communities that interact as a
coordinated team to solve important practical problems, such as promoting plant
growth, excluding a target species from a community, or degrading a toxic
compound. Artificially selected communities may provide better solutions than
artificially selected individuals for the same reason that coordinated teams of
people can outperform single individuals. The advantages of "teamwork" are
obvious; the problem is how to develop the teams. The proposed research may
provide a simple method that so far has been overlooked.