* 9707194
* Sigma Xi / A*DEC Town Meeting on Reform in Undergraduate    Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and          Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Thomas Malone, Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 02/28/1998
* USD 33,164.00

Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Society, in partnership with the A*DEC
Distance Learning Consortium, proposed to organize and conduct a "Town Meeting"
videoconference of individuals and institutions to promote further development
of the comprehensive and self-sustaining reform in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology recommended in a recent report to the NSF
Directorate in Education and Human Resources. The major objectives of the
project are: 1) to bring the central thrust of the NSF report to the attention
of a broad segment of research and comprehensive universities, community
colleges, governmental and industrial laboratories, and the varied
constituencies of all these institutions; 2) to generate an informed discussion
of the report's analysis and recommendations by knowledgeable individuals at
these institutions, legislators, and members of governing boards; 3) to
illustrate by a few selected case studies opportunities for educational reform
in these promising directions. The format of the Town Meeting will be adapted
from Town Meeting videoconferences sponsored by the Sigma Xi/A*DEC partnership
in 1995 and 1996. The program will originate in the television studio on the
campus of North Carolina State University in late March or early April 1997 and
will be uplinked to 2 redundant satellites for downlink to >100 sites across
North America. Interaction between the program participants at the Raleigh
location and the downlink participants will be facilitated through
800-telecommunications links (phone and fax) and by e-mail. It is projected that
the program and discussion will involve more than 2000 faculty, students,
administrators, and members of the general public. Following the 1.5 hour
discussion program, participants will be asked to evaluate the format of the
program and discussion using an evaluation form that will be provided at each
site and may be accessed on the Sigma Xi Web site, as well. A follow-up summary
and an alysis of the evaluations will be conducted and made available to
interested parties. A 30-minute edited videotape will be made available for
distribution and later use by individuals and groups to promote continued
discussion of the report.