* 9707364
* International Conference on Bayesian Modeling:  ISBA-1997;  Istanbul, Turkey, August 16-18, 1997
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Hamparsum Bozdogan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,900.00

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON BAYESIAN MODELINE: ISBA-1997 The funds from this
group travel grant are to enable, coordinate, and support U. S. participation in
the Fifth World Meeting of the International Bayesian Analysis (ISBA) which will
be held in Istanbul, Turkey during August 16-18, 1997. This meeting will be a
satellite meeting for the 51st Session of the International Statistical
Institute (ISI) in Istanbul, Turkey during August 18-27, 1997. This meeting is
planned around the theme of linking Bayesian statistics to other fields of
science to stimulate cross-fertilization of theoretical, methodological and
computational research directions to meet our societal needs by focusing
attention to the arena of applied problems in cross-disciplinary areas such as
in computer science, in engineering, in econometrics, finance, forensic and
medical sciences. A primary goal of these funds is to present opportunities for
young researchers, international researchers, and underrepresented groups, such
as women and ethnic minorities and persons with disabilities and graduate
students an opportunity to interact, to share, and to disseminate their research
and expertise with other researchers in many cross-disciplinary fields in the
international arena. Experts from several Western and Eastern European
countries, Australia, Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, Middle East, Russia,
Independent States of the former Soviet Union, India, Africa, and the United
States are expected to attend.