* 9707614
* Origin and Evolution of Endemic Asteraceae From the         Macaronesian Archipelagos
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Javier Francisco-Ortega, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 164,987.00

9707614 Jansen In collaboration with foreign colleagues Drs. Javier Francisco-
Ortega and Arnoldo Santos-Guerra, Dr. Robert Jansen of the University of Texas
is studying the phylogeny and biogeography of several genera of sunflower
relatives, family Asteraceae, on the islands of the Macaronesian archipelago,
the Canaries, Madeiras, and Azores. Over 800 species of plants have been
described that are endemic to these islands (found nowhere else), and 25% of
these belong to the family Asteraceae, which shows instances of evolutionary
radiation both among islands and elevationally on single islands. New evidence
from DNA sequencing of chloroplast and nuclear genes, from samples of island
species and from collections provided by colleagues from African and
Mediterranean species suspected to be related, will help construct phylogenetic
trees or genealogies for such genera as Argyranthemum, Cheirolophus, Pericallis,
and Tolpis. Where modern monographic treatments exist of the genera, such as for
Argyranthemum, the molecular evidence can be integrated with morphological
characters described for all the species, to assess rates and patterns of change
among species in select floral and vegetative features. The phylogenetic studies
on Cheirolophus (tribe Cardueae), Pericallis (tribe Senecioneae), and Tolpis
(tribe Lactuceae) will contribute to nascent efforts to determine the
phylogenetic tree structure for these large subgroups of the sunflower family on
a world-wide basis. Numerous conflicting or overlapping theories have been
proposed to explain the number and distribution of endemic species on the
Macaronesian islands, but without a well supported phylogenetic framework to
guide hypotheses about evolution and migration, the theorizing may continue
unconstrained. Whether the African mainland or Mediterranean regions have served
as sources for migrants to Macaronesia, whether back migration may have
occurred, whether single or few migrants radiated into numerous new species as
opposed to multiple in troductions from continental sources creating the
diversity of the islands, whether speciation has occurred more often between
islands or between elevation zones on individual mountainous islands_all these
questions of biogeography can be studied within a robustly supported
phylogenetic framework of the several groups of plants under consideration.