* 9707468
* Inheritance and Evolution of Ribosomal DNA Variants         in Salmonid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Kent Reed, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9707468 Reed The multi-copy ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes and their associated
spacer sequences have been widely applied as molecular tools for both systematic
and populational studies. However, mechanisms involved in the evolution of the
rRNA genes and the significance of variation in these remain as important
genetic and evolutionary questions. Ribosomal DNA sequences evolve through both
mutation of individual sequences and homogenization (concerted evolution) of
tandem gene arrays. However, origin of new rDNA loci (new chromosomal sites of
tandem arrays) may drastically alter the evolutionary dynamics of these multi-
copy genes. Salmonid fishes provide an interesting vertebrate model system for
investigating rDNA evolution. The ribosomal RNA genes of salmonid fishes appear
to have amplified during radiation of this group. Accompanying this
amplification is an increase in the number of rDNA loci in a number of species
including three of six members of the genus Salvelinus. Mechanisms proposed for
the origin of these include chromosomal rearrangements, amplification,
reinsertion errors and involvement of mobile genetic elements in either
recombination or transposition. The proposed research is intended to
characterize the level of intra-individual variation in the rDNA cistron of one
species (lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush) by closely examining the molecular
structure of the non-transcribed intergenic spacer region (IGS). Molecular
analysis of the IGS will focus on screening for sequences responsible for the
length variation seen in the rDNA cistron of this species. Cistron-specific
probes will be designed to test if length variants are interspersed within
individual arrays or occur as locus-specific variants.