* 9707076
* CREST:  Florida A&amp;M University/Florida International        University Center for Distributed Computing:  Theory,       Development and Application
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Charles Weatherford, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* JAMES J. POWLIK
* 08/31/2003
* USD 5,320,000.00

The major goal of this project is to establish a research Center for Distributed
Computing: Theory, Development and Applications. This is a collaborative effort
between Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU) and Florida International University
(FIU), both members of the State University System (SUS) of Florida. The
proposed center would integrate education with research in the areas of Science,
Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (SMET) to enable FAMU and FIU to
conduct increase minority participation in SMET disciplines and promote minority
participation in quality research activities. FAMU and FIU are in a unique
position to establish this center. FAMU's student population is 90% African-
American and that of FIU is 60% Hispanic. FAMU and FIU both have graduate
programs in the related fields and FIU offers a doctoral program in Computer
Science. The specific objectives of this project are: I. increase the number of
minority students majoring and graduating in SMET; II. strengthen the research
capabilities of FAMU and FIU at departmental levels; and III. increase the
number of minority students pursuing advanced degrees in SMET. This proposal
outlines a plan to use research as a tool to improve the enrollment of minority
students at the graduate and undergraduate levels in SMET. These objectives will
be achieved by upgrading the research capabilities at FAMU and FIU; recruiting
regional high school SMET students, retaining these students and involving them
in research. By meeting the above objectives, this project will increase
minority scientists and practitioners in SMET.