* 9707623
* Systematics of Cerithioidean Snails (Gastropoda:            Cerithioidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Charles Lydeard, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/2000
* USD 110,000.00

9707623 Lydeard Charles Lydeard of the University of Alabama and Winston Ponder
of the Australian Museum will generate a comprehensive molecular and
morphological database from which to infer relationships among cerithiodean
snails. These snails are a fascinating group of about 19 families, 200 living
genera, and several hundred species. Cerithioideans are distributed throughout
the world in a variety of marine and freshwater habitats, including mangrove
forests, estuaries, seagrass beds, rocky intertidal shores, algal fronds, fast-
flowing streams and rivers, and quiet lakes. Cerithioideans are often an
important component in marine and freshwater communities and play a prominent
role in the ecosystems they inhabit. Lydeard and Ponder's central objectives are
to examine roughly 115,000 base pairs of DNA sequence from mitochondrial DNA
(including parts or all of the ribosomal (r)RNA genes) and a suite of anatomical
characters in order to generate a historical, genealogical framework that will
be employed to address ecological, evolutionary, and other hypotheses. Of
primary interest are questions that relate to how such as diverse group has
adapted to such a wide array of habitats. Of importance is that many gastropod
organisms are targeted by Systematics Agenda 2000 as understudied creatures.
Lydeard and Ponder's work will provide the first comprehensive phylogeny of
cerithioideans.