* 9707131
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Robert Hinton, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Emma R. Dieter
* 06/30/2002
* USD 5,895,234.00

9707131 McDuff The R/V THOMPSON has a schedule of 265 operational days in 1997
of which 94 are in support of NSF-sponsored programs. In 1997 the vessel will
act as the support ship for a variety of scientific programs requiring the use
of the deep submergence remotely operated vehicles. Of the 15 THOMPSON cruises
10 will require the use of the ROV JASON, incuding cruises for the UK,
Washington State, NOAA and NSF (6 cruises). The remaining 5 cruises are in
support of programs for State of Washington, Navy and NSF (2). The THOMPSON will
undergo a Navy INSURV inspection in the last quarter of the year. The R/V BARNES
is scheduled for a total of 134 days in 1997 of which 106 operational days are
in support of NSF-sponsored programs. The NSF days include 57 days off the
Columbia River (Oregon) in support of the LMER program. The remainder of the
work is in Puget Sound. The THOMPSON and BARNES are part of a fleet of ships
used by the National Science Foundation in support of marine science research.
Most oceanographic projects require highly specialized equipment permanently
installed on the vessel, thus the necessity for specialized ships. These vessels
do not operate in the same mode as general cargo/fishing vessels, as a result
NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to
oceanographic research that are operated by universities and institutions around
the country. ***