* 9707361
* Ontogeny, Phylogeny, and Heterochrony in Old World Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Steven Leigh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/2003
* USD 247,494.00

Patterns of primate growth and development (ontogeny) appear to be highly
unusual relative to other mammals. Unfortunately, the principles that govern
these patterns remain poorly understood. Therefore, this research project
conducts an integrated study of growth and development in a group of closely-
related African and Asian monkey species (baboons, mandrills, mangabeys, and
macaques). The project is designed to broaden, refine, and clarify our
perspective on human ontogeny. This research will help reveal connections
between brain development and evolution that appear to have played a pivotal
role over the course of human evolution. In addition, detailed comparisons
between human and nonhuman primate ontogeny will be accomplished. Consequently,
it will be possible to establish whether or not humans are unique in exhibiting
an adolescent skeletal growth spurt, resolving a long standing debate in
theories of human evolution. In order to attain these goals, the research
conducts comparative analyses of ontogeny in fossil materials, living captive
specimens, and wild-shot specimens. A substantial portion of the study focuses
on growth and development of the skull and skeletal system. In addition, the
project undertakes innovative analyses of growth hormones using data from
captive colonies of baboons and mangabeys. Hormonal analyses enable assessments
of evolutionary changes in growth control. Several other areas of research also
will be explored. For example, the study evaluates the relevance of
developmental data to taxonomic questions, and conducts quantitative genetic
analyses of growth and development. Finally, the study has direct biomedical
applications because baboons and mangabeys are important animal models of human
diseases.