* 9707580
* CAA: Identification of Host Factors Regulating the Intra-   and Intercellular Movement of Bipartite Geminiviruses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Sondra Lazarowitz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9707580 Lazarowitz Viral-encoded movement proteins act to allow a plant virus to
cross the barrier of the plant cell wall and systemically infect the host plant.
Understanding the function of movement proteins is essential for defining the
stages of pathogenesis in plant virus infections and devising strategies to
engineer disease-resistant plants. Movement proteins also provide a unique
approach to defining pathways of intracellular and intercellular transport in
plants. This laboratory's investigation of the two movement proteins, BL1 and
BR1, encoded by the bipartite geminivirus squash leaf curl virus (SqLCV) have
shown that the two proteins have distinct functions and act in a cooperative
manner to move the viral single strand (ss)DNA genome. BR1 is a nuclear shuttle
protein that binds the viral ssDNA genome and moves it into and out of the
nucleus. BL1 is a cytoplasmic trap for BR1, providing directionality to movement
by trapping BR1-genome complexes in the cytoplasm and directing these to across
the cell wall, apparently in association with tubules derived from the
endoplasmic reticulum. The studies from this laboratory further suggest that the
interaction of BL1 and BR1 may be regulated through posttranslational
phosphorylation of both movement proteins. The proposed studies, to be done
during a sabbatical leave at the Scripps Research Institute, are designed to
directly investigate the role of posttranslational phosphorylation in the
interaction of BL1 and BR1, and to explore the feasibility of developing a
permeabilized tobacco cell system for in vitro studies on nuclear export using
BR1 as a model nuclear shuttling protein. The phosphorylation studies will be
done in the laboratory of Dr. Jeff Harper; the attempt to develop a
permeabilized plant cell system for investigating nuclear export will be done
with the advice and guidance of Dr. Larry Gerace. The specific goals are to: (1)
identify in vivo sites of phosphorylation in BL1 and BR1 by electrospray mass
spectrometry sequencing; (2) test whether BL1 and BR1 are in vitro substrates
for calcium-dependent calmodulin-independent kinases prevalent in plants, or for
other kinases; (3) demonstrate in vitro whether BL1 and BR1 directly bind each
other and the effects of phosphorylation on this interaction; and (4) explore
the feasibility of developing a permeabilized tobacco plant cell system for
investigating nuclear export using BR1 as a model nuclear shuttle protein. Many
plant viruses gain entry to the plant at points on the surface of the plant, and
are subsequently spread systemically from cell to cell through the plant by
intercellular movement through channels in the plant cell walls. The viruses
contain their own "movement proteins" encoded by their viral genomes which
facilitate the movement of viral particles or genetic material from the nucleus
to the cytoplasm within a cell and from cell to cell within a plant. Dr.
Lazarowitz has been studying the movement proteins of the Squash Leaf Curl
Virus. The proposed studies will provide Dr. Lazarowitz with essential new
biochemical and biophysical skills to study the regulation of protein function
and protein:protein interactions, and will allow her to do pilot studies to
develop a permeabilized plant cell system to investigate nuclear export in
vitro. These techniques are essential for defining the functions of BL1 and BR1.
Importantly, these new skills and systems will allow her to redirect her
research program into two exciting new areas: (1) biochemical studies to define
the pathways by which plant cells direct molecules to the wall, and regulate the
formation and functioning of channels in the cell wall; and (2) basic studies on
the mechanism of nuclear export. The techniques and intellectual perspective
that she will acquire during this sabbatical leave will enhance both her own
research capabilities and the training she can provide to her students and
postdoctoral fellows. ***