* 9707863
* U.S.-Czech Engineering Research on Dislocation Substructure and Crack-Tip Blunting on the Brittle-to-Ductile Transition in Iron and Structural Steels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Glenn Beltz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 11,590.00

INT 9707863 Beltz This U.S.-Czech engineering research project between Glenn
Beltz of the University of California, Santa Barbara, and Anna Marchova of the
Czech Institute of Thermomechanics, Prague, will address mechanical failure and
atomic scale defect formation. These processes influence the ductile versus
brittle nature of structural materials. Such characteristics have significance
when considering the performance and reliability of high strength steels and
advanced intermetallic alloys, especially when they are subject to adverse
conditions such as low temperature or harsh chemical environments. The
researchers intend to model this material behavior on macroscopic to atomistic
scales. Specifically, efforts will feature examination of: 1) the phenomenon of
"brittle" crack growth in pre-existing, apparently mobile, dislocations and 2)
the role of nanoscale blunting of a sharp crack spreading through a dislocation-
free zone, embedded in a plastically deforming medium. Results are expected to
improve our understanding of brittle-to-ductile transition and to yield
practical methods for reducing the likelihood of brittle failure of structural
metallic alloys. This materials engineering research project fuldills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??