* 9707358
* European Gordon Research Conference on Solid State          Chemistry; September 20-25, 1997; Queens College, Oxford,   England
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* M. Stanley Whittingham, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 12,500.00

DMR-9707358 Partial support is being provided for the symposium entitled
European Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Chemistry to be held at
Queens College, Oxford, England, September 20-25, 1997. It will bring together
researchers with expertise in a broad range of topics considered to be at the
forefront of global issues in solid state chemistry and materials. The support
will be provided for the educational aspects of the conference, namely to
provide money for a "scholarship" program to support 10 U.S. contributions from
students, postdocs, and new faculty, and for registration and partial travel
support for other U.S. participants of renown in the area of solid state
chemistry and materials. The cost of U.S. participation in this international
meeting is being cost shared by the Gordon Research Conference. %%% This is one
of four major meetings on solid state chemistry occurring in 1996-1997 that will
receive NSF support and which together will help to serve as an information base
for the NSF Workshop on Solid State Chemistry to be held late in 1997. The
purpose of this meeting is to bring together international researchers with
expertise over a broad range of topical areas in solid state chemistry and
materials to survey those considered to be of high priority by the international
community. ***