* 9707024
* Enforcing the Chinese Exclusion Laws, 1882-1907:            Administrative Discretion and Law's Contradictions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Kitty Calavita, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 52,738.00

Abstract Calavita 9707024 This research undertakes ethnohistorical analyses
focusing on issues surrounding the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act barring the entry
into the U.S. of all Chinese laborers. Merchants and other upper-class
individuals were exempt from the exclusion. The primary focus of the research is
on the conflicts encountered by enforcement personnel who had to implement the
Law. Ambiguities in the Act and gaps in the statute plus the inspectors'
preconceptions converged to make the task discretionary. The omission of any
mention of the status of women, assumptions about race as a biological state,
offset by social status, notions about the relation between physical appearance
and one's identity, and the clash between identity and social constructions all
converge in this project. Data from the Congressional Record, Congressional
Hearings and Reports, and the Annual Reports of the Immigration and
Naturalization Service provide information on the enforcement of the exclusion
laws and on intra-agency decisionmaking as well as the official records of the
law's enactment. Documentation from letters, notes, memos, and circulars from
and to immigration inspectors and their supervisors will comprise an additional
primary source of data.. conflicts and dilemmas surrounding the enforcement of
the Law and will provide insights into current conceptions of race, and the
intersections of race, class, and gender. This work contributes to our basic
understanding of the enforcement of legal rules. %%% This research undertakes
ethnohistorical analyses focusing on issues surrounding the 1882 Chinese
Exclusion Act barring the entry into the U.S. of all Chinese laborers. Merchants
and other upper-class individuals were exempt from the exclusion. The primary
focus of the research is on the conflicts encountered by enforcement personnel
who had to implement the Law. Ambiguities in the Act and gaps in the statute
plus the inspectors' preconceptions converged to make the task discretionary.
The omission of any mention of the status of women, assumptions about race as a
biological state, offset by social status, notions about the relation between
physical appearance and one's identity, and the clash between identity and
social constructions all converge in this project. Data from the Congressional
Record, Congressional Hearings and Reports, and the Annual Reports of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service provide information on the enforcement of
the exclusion laws and on intra-agency decisionmaking as well as the official
records of the law's enactment. Documentation from letters, notes, memos, and
circulars from and to immigration inspectors and their supervisors will comprise
an additional primary source of data.. conflicts and dilemmas surrounding the
enforcement of the Law and will provide insights into current conceptions of
race, and the intersections of race, class, and gender. This work contributes to
our basic understanding of the enforcement of legal rules. ***