* 9707780
* Sponsorship of Two WISE Summer Interns, 1997
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1997
* Raymond Morris, Society of Automotive Engineers Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1997
* USD 13,200.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9707780 AICHE Dale E. Brooks The concept of the WISE was proposed
in 1978 in response to concerns of the engineering community that few
engineering students have the opportunity to learn about public policy,
legislative and regulatory processes, and their relationship to technological
change. The WISE program is designed to accommodate 15 to 16 students each
summer. Since 1983 the number of students selected for any given summer has
depended on the level of support provided by the sponsoring engineering
societies. Those provided by the sponsoring engineering societies include:
AICHE, ANS, ASAE, ASAE, ASEE, ASHRAE, ASME, ASTM, IEEE, NSPE, ORSA, SAE, and
SME. Engineering students entering their last full year of engineering make up
the eligible students population. Students are drawn from a national pool and
the competition is extremely keen. From these candidates, the sponsoring
societies have selected 12 students to participate in this year's program.
During the 10 week program, WISE interns meet with government policy-makers,
attend seminars and conventions, and visit agencies and corporations to learn
how technological issues are legislated. This year, the interns will visit the
Office of Technology Assessment, the House Committee on Science, Space and
Technology, the National Academy of Sciences, the National Science Foundation
and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission-to name only a few.