* 9707202
* Development and Application of Quantum Chemical Methods for Molecular Potential Surfaces and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Peter Pulay, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 05/31/2001
* USD 381,500.00

*** 9707202 PULAY The Theoretical and Computational chemistry program is
supporting Prof. Pulay of the University of Arkansas for work to improve the
efficiency of SCF and density functional methods: the multi-Fock technique, and
novel basis sets. In another project, further development of the local
correlation method is proposed: gradients and a simplified treatment of distant
pairs. The latter constitute the majority of electron pairs in large molecules.
Density functional theory (DFT), in spite of its convincing success for ground
states, is still not applicable to excited states. A project uill explore the
use of empirical correlation terms, borrowed from DFT, together with exact
exchange, to describe excited states and diradicals. Pulay proposes to build a
powerful parallel computer system for quantum chemical calculations, using
commodity PC parts. The price of the proposed system is estimated to be about a
tenth of a comparable system using workstations. Several applications are
proposed: (1) geometries, force fields and vibrational spectra of porphyrins,
(2) systematic calculation and parameterization of NMR shifts in peptides as
functions of the backbone torsional angles, (3) parameterization of the
vibrational force fields of 200 organic molecules, generated under the preceding
grant, (4) search for novel stable molecules, such as the cyclic polymers of
phosgene and related molecules. The effort during this award is aimed at
increasing the efficiency and accuracy of quantum mechanical simulation of
molecular systems. Such simulations are likely to lead to fundamental
innovations in chemistry, biochemistry and materials science in the future, by
allowing the rapid computational determination of the properties of chemical
systems and materials. Accurate solutions of the quantum mechanical equations
for larger molecules requires very much computer power, and has become possible
only recently due to the development of new algorithms and inexpensive fast
computers. The proposal lists several projects that, if successful, will
increase the efficiency of molecular quantum calculations, or extend the
applicability of present methods, for example. to excited electronic states. The
work includes the construction of a parallel computer, based on commodity
personal computer parts. ***