* 9707325
* RPG:  Neuromodulation in an Invertebrate Neuromotor System: Comparative and Evolutionary Aspects of the Crayfish        Stomatogastric Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Ann Jane Tierney, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Lay Abstract PI: Tierney, Ann Proposal Number: IBN-9707325 All animals perform
rhythmic movements, such as walking, chewing and breathing. These movements are
produced within the central nervous system by circuits of cells called central
pattern generators (CPGs). Neurobiologists have studied CPGs for several decades
and have learned a great deal about how these relatively limited circuits
program movements. Recent research has shown that even simple circuits are very
flexible and can program a wide array of related movements. On a cellular level,
this flexibility is produced by neuromodulators, endogenous compounds that alter
the activity of individual CPG cells, and consequently alter the output of the
circuit. This project describes the distribution of neuromodulatory inputs
(including serotonin, dopamine, and two peptides) and investigates how these
compounds alter the motor program produced by the two CPGs. Seven species (four
from a single genus and three from different genera) will be studied to
determine how modulator type, location, or function might change as species and
general evolve. This systematic comparison of motor pattern modulation in a set
of closely related species is designed to contribute to knowledge of neuromotor
system evolution and to the understanding of the coordination of simple rhythmic
movements. Simple systems like the ones investigated here are studied in the
hope that the underlying mechanisms discovered can be applied to more
complicated systems, such as those used in vertebrate locomotor control,
including the control of walking in humans.