* 9707677
* Studies in Physical Organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Kenneth Wiberg, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2002
* USD 360,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor Kenneth B. Wiberg, of the Department of Chemistry at Yale
University, studies the factors that control the properties, reactions, and
reactivity of organic molecules. Through a combination of experimental and
theoretical approaches, Professor Wiberg addresses the degree of structural
distortion possible in small-ring compounds and the changes in energy and other
properties that result from such distortion. Carbon-bridged spiropentanes are
expected to have a remarkably high degree of ring distortion, with theory
suggesting the presence of a nearly linear bond angle at the central carbon.
Theoretical and structural studies of related spiropentyl cations address the
factors controlling the two different types of rearrangements observed for these
systems. Questions related to the structure and stability of small-ring
cycloalkynes and the attack by methylene and by permanganate on carbon-carbon
double bonds are also targeted for synthetic and theoretical analysis. Professor
Wiberg also explores the magnitude and the origin of the equatorial
conformational preference in monosubstituted cyclohexanes, focusing on careful
analysis of the conformational preference of the methyl group and on the role of
entropy terms in determining conformational preferences. Theories regarding the
structure and reactivity of organic molecules continue to be tested
experimentally, through the preparation of molecules designed to probe the
limits of chemical bonding, and theoretically, through the calculational
analysis of bonding issues in such molecules. Professor Kenneth B. Wiberg, of
the Department of Chemistry at Yale University, with the support of the Organic
Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, explores molecules known or
expected to display extreme structural distortions. These studies target a
number of classes of molecules, particularly those in which bond angles at
carbon atoms forming part of a small ring are forced to deviate markedly from
their preferred values in the absence of the geometry enforced by these small
rings. Through these studies, Professor Wiberg gains fundamental knowledge
regarding the factors that control the properties, reactions, and reactivity of
organic molecules.