* 9707598
* LTREB: Ecological and Evolutionary Determinants of Habitat  Selection and Risk of Nest Predation among Coexisting       Species
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/2002
* USD 258,745.00

9707598 Martin Habitat selection among coexisting species is generally thought
to reflect choices that minimize ecological costs and maximize fitness.
Ecological processes among coexisting species are often emphasized as a
potential explanation for differences in microhabitat choices. Yet, processes
and the mechanisms underlying processes are rarely directly tested. Predation
can favor microhabitat differences among coexisting species and is a process
that can be tested directly. However, habitat selection also may be constrained
by physiological tolerances as a function of the evolutionary history of a
species and different evolutionary histories or physiological tolerances may
provide an alternative explanation for differences in resource use among
species. Such alternative actions of biotic versus abiotic influences are
particularly highlighted along microclimate gradients because species commonly
segregate along microclimate gradients. This study will address the question,
"Does the distribution of species along an environmental gradient reflect
physiological constraints or responses to ecological costs such as nest
predation or vegetation preferences?" Continued long term study of this system
and nest site shifts is important because such shifts provide an unprecedented
opportunity to examine the potential role of biotic versus abiotic influences on
habitat selection and species coexistence based on dynamic changes in potential
environmental influences. Continuation of this long-term work will advance our
understanding of mechanisms underlying nest predation as a process influencing
habitat selection, species coexistence, and parental activity patterns. These
data will provide important information for long-term conservation of species;
habitat requirements for successful reproduction are critical for conservation
and data being collected under this project is currently being used by the US
Forest Service to affect land management decisions on the forests being studied.