* 9707146
* Relationships of Metazoan Phyla: Advances, Problems, and    Approaches hosted by the Society for Integrative and        Comparative Biology in Boston in January, 1998
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Kenneth Halanych, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9707146 MCHUGH The symposium ORelationships of Metazoan Phyla: Advances,
Problems, and ApproachesO, to be coordinated by Damhnait McHugh and Kenneth M.
Halanych, will be hosted by the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
in Boston in January, 1998. This symposium will provide a critical assessment of
the current state of knowledge about the historical (phylogenetic) relationships
among the phyla of animals, especially those that have different body plans. By
identifying problems and highlighting different approaches to reconstructing the
phylogenetic relationships among animal groups, the symposium will play an
important role in directing future research in the field. The two-day schedule
includes three keynote addresses and 17 symposium presentations from researchers
on topics such as the use of mitochondrial gene arrangements to analyze
relationships among animals, the genetic basis for change in animal body plans,
the phylogenetic relationships among bilaterally symmetrical animals as assessed
by both morphological and molecular evidence, and the possibility that the great
increase in the numbers of animal taxa observed in Cambrian-age fossils relative
to those in older rocks does not mean that there were fewer animal species
before the Cambrian. Symposium proceedings will be published in the journal
OAmerican ZoologistO.