* 9707984
* Geochronology and Paleoenvironment of Sheriden Cave, Wyandot County, Ohio
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Kenneth Tankersley, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2000
* USD 65,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kenneth Tankersley and his
colleagues will conduct one season of archaeological research at the site of
Sheriden Cave which is located in Wyandot County, Ohio. The cave opening was
exposed by a bulldozer in the course of commercial operations and discovered to
contain deeply stratified deposits rich in paleontological remains. During the
early course of digging by multiple excavators the site was believed to be of
paleontological significance only. However the 1995 discovery of a carved,
incised and beveled bone object clearly indicated a human presence. In
subsequent work Dr. Tankersley recovered flaked stone artifacts. Radiocarbon
dates have yielded an age of between 11,000 and 12,000 years ago which makes the
site unique for the Eastern part of the United States in terms of both antiquity
and the very rich stratigraphic sequence it contains. The deposits are
endangered because the remaining sediment is exposed, drying and subject to
attack by insects and other biological agents. Dr. Tankersley will undertake a
15 week season of fieldwork followed by laboratory analysis. He will remove a 2
meter square column from the floor of Sheriden Cave to bedrock. He will
systematically map and sample standing profiles and assess and radiocarbon date
the stratigraphy and material remains exposed in the excavation and profiles.
The bone object will be dated and raw material identified to species. A plan
will be developed to protect the sediments which remain. Because sites with well
preserved remains in good stratigraphic context are extremely rare in the
eastern United States, little is known about the lifeways of the earliest Native
American inhabitants. In the Southwestern US at ca. 11,000 to 12,000 years ago
contemporaries focused on hunting large game and carefully crafted projectile
points indicate a specialized subsistence adaptation. However it is not known
whether this is a regional specialization brought and maintained, perhaps from
Asia, or whether it can be explained in local terms. For this reason data from a
different part of North America and a different environmental context is
important. This research will provide such information and be of interest to
many archaeologists. It will also help to protect an endangered and important
archaeological site.