* 9707773
* Vibrational Spectral Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Prasad Polavarapu, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 06/30/2001
* USD 375,000.00

Prasad Polavarapu of Vanderbilt University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities to (i)
develop a step-scan polarization division interferometer with double
polarization modulation and digital signal processing capabilities, and (ii) use
this instrument to investigate protein-anesthetic interactions and host-guest
interactions for carcinogens encapsulated in cyclodextrin cavities. Enantiomers
of chiral molecules show differences in their effectiveness as anesthetics. To
better understand the stereospecific interactions at the molecular level, the PI
will study the absolute configurations of chiral enantiomers and the
conformations in which the anesthetic molecules exist. For elucidating guest-
host interactions, a series of substituted oxiranes will serve as guest
molecules trapped in cyclodextrin cavities. Isotopic substitution will be
exploited to isolate the spectral bands due to the guest molecule, and to
determine the perturbations imposed by the host. The PI will probe the
vibrational transitions of chiral molecules using circularly polarized light.
These studies have tremendously important implications in the area of drug
design, where differences in the effectiveness of enantiomers can be quite
dramatic. For example, one enantiomer of the infamous drug, thalidomide, is
known to be a sedative while the other causes severe birth defects. Why two
molecules of `nearly` identical structure could have such completely different
effects on the human body is not at all clear. This is fundamental chemistry,
the results of which will have a significant impact in the area of
biotechnology.