* 9707029
* Phytoliths in the Flora of Ecuador:  Methodology for        Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Deborah Pearsall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2000
* USD 90,571.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Deborah Pearsall and her students
will construct diagnostic phytolith profiles for a variety of present day
Equadorian vegetation communities. `Phytoliths` are microscopic silica forms
which are produced by plants and which are eventually incorporated into the
soil. Although a single species produces more than one phytolith form and few
forms are unique to any single species, through analysis of phytolith
assemblages preserved in the ground, it is often possible to identify the plants
which were present. Phytolith analysis therefore constitutes an important tool
for environmental reconstruction. For many years archaeologists have worked in
Equador and attempted to understand how complex societies arose in this region.
The country varies ecologically from the better watered Northern to drier
Southern coast. From West to East vegetation zones change from arid coastline
across the Andes to tropical Amazonian rainforest. Paleoecologists know that
these zones shifted significantly in response to past climate changes and
archaeologists wish to understand cultural change in relation to these natural
phenomena. Dr. Pearsall's research will provide data to assist in this process.
She and her students will establish two transects across Equador, one running
North-South, the other East-West. Through analysis of already collected
specimens as well as additional fieldwork they will define phytolith assemblages
which correlate with specific environments and note the most important indicator
types. On this basis it will then be possible to extract phytolith assemblages
from old soils and reconstruct paleoenvironments. This work is important for
several reasons. It will help to establish an environmental context to
understand cultural change. It will also shed new light on long term human
impact on the environment. Ecologists are uncertain about how humans who
functioned prehistorically at technologically simple levels affected their
surroundings. To what extent were rainforest boundaries and plant communities
influenced by small scale slash and burn agriculture? The data collected during
this research will shed new light on this question. It will also establish a
data base which will be widely used by archaeologists and natural scientists.