* 9707684
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of the Coevolution     of Inbreeding Depression and Mating System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Marcy Uyenoyama, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2001
* USD 235,000.00

9707684 Uyenoyama Mating between closely related individuals often results in
inbreeding depression, or the production of offspring of lower quality. This
project addresses the evolution of mating systems in response to inbreeding
depression and its evolution in turn in response to the mating system.
Theoretical analyses suggest that the penalty of inbreeding depression evolves
to different magnitudes among familial lineages that practice different levels
of inbreeding. Among the possible consequences of such interactions is the
evolution of mixed mating systems, which entail both inbreeding and outbreeding.
Natural populations of Datura stramonium, which practices a mixed mating system,
provide a model system for the direct exploration of these issues. Previous work
has demonstrated that a morphological character (stigma-anther distance) is both
heritable and a determinant of the level of inbreeding in individuals. The
magnitude of inbreeding depression will be estimated in individual families.
This system permits a test of whether inbreeding depression at the family level
is associated with mating system. In addition, numerical simulation studies will
be conducted to explore various aspects of associations between inbreeding
depression and familial lineage, including their genetic bases and consequences
for the evolution of mating systems. All living organisms are subject to the
deleterious effects of mutations. Processes that influence the generation,
purging, and maintenance of mutational load directly affect the length and
quality of life. Theoretical and empirical studies have established mating
system as a major determinant as well as a consequence of inbreeding depression
in natural populations.