* 9707012
* Dissertation Research:  Residential Architecture and Warfare in the Northern Maya Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* David Freidel, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 2,621.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Freidel, Mr. Travis Stanton will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Building on Dr. Freidel's prior work, Mr. Stanton
will analyze material collected during archaeological excavation at the Mayan
site of Yaxuna located in the Northern Peten region of Mexico. Through an
analysis of changes in architectural style over time it will, Mr. Stanton
postulates, be possible to determine the extent to which site layout and
building techniques reflect the organization of regional political power. The
core area of Yaxuna covers approximately one square kilometer and includes an
acropolis, causeways and raised stone structures as well as numerous smaller
earthen mounds. Although significant in size, Yaxuna was never a dominant
regional power and over its long prehistory the Mayan inhabitants fell within
the sphere of three larger political groups. Extensive burning and destruction
of structures indicates that the city was conquered more than once. Mr. Stanton
wishes to determine the extent to which the spatial and physical organization
was reorganized after the first of these conquests and to accomplish this goal
he will compare the architectural configuration of the site and the design of
individual buildings to those of the conquering power as well as to its pre-
conquest counterpart. In addition, analysis of material remains will provide
insight into how social organization developed in pre-conquest times and how it
was subsequently transformed. Archaeologists recognize that individual Mayan
sites were integrated into larger political networks and that by discovering the
extent of each and tracing how they changed over time it is possible to
understand the principles which underlie political organization. At Yaxuna, non-
architectural data strongly suggest how site domination changed over time and
this provides an excellent controlled context to determine whether architecture
in fact reflects these changing power patterns. If such, in fact, is the case,
it will provide an powerful tool for archaeological analysis. The project will
also assist in training a promising young scientist.