* 9707247
* The Evolution of Dioecy and Sexual Dimorphism:  An          Integrative Approach Using a Gynodioecious Strawberry
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2002
* USD 199,940.00

9707247 Ashman Separate male and female flowering plants (dioecy) have evolved
from hermaphrodite ancestors independently in numerous lineages, leading
evolutionary biologists to conclude that such a transition is a central problem
in biology. However, we do not have a complete picture of how this transition
occurs. An intensively modeled theory predicts that populations with females and
hermaphrodites are an intermediate step to dioecy. The presence of females is
expected to result in selection on hermaphrodites to become more male in gender,
and if certain genetic conditions exist then dioecy can evolve. This research
will address the potential for dioecy to evolve by characterizing the genetic
architecture of a model system, the wild strawberry (Fragaria virginiana), that
exhibits a transitional breeding system and among-population variation in a
fundamental aspect of the selective environment (the frequency of females). By
characterizing the genetic relationships among reproductive traits (pollen
production, fruit set, and petals) in four populations of wild strawberry (two
from each end of the female frequency continuum), this research will not only
reveal the potential for response to selection, but it will also evaluate the
assumptions and the robustness of theoretical models of reproductive evolution.
Furthermore, among-population comparisons will yield information on the
constancy of genetic parameters and the consequences of such constancy for
evolutionary change. This research will provide information on the evolution of
reproductive systems, information that is fundamentally relevant to evolutionary
biology because all organisms face allocation decisions similar to the
reproductive allocation decisions studied here. Plant reproductive systems are
like many other systems where organs are functionally and structurally
homologous, and thus necessarily have a shared developmental and genetic basis.
Gaining an understanding of the constraints imposed by genetic architectur e on
the evolution of individual phenotype and sexual dimorphism is an essential
aspect of evolutionary biology. Furthermore, comparisons among populations will
provide information on the lability of genetic architecture and will make a
significant contribution to testing the assumptions of quantitative genetics as
applied to evolutionary questions.