* 9707672
* RPG:  Characterization of Angiotensin II as a Potential     Volume Transmitter in the Central Extended Amygdala
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Andrea Zardetto-Smith, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/2001
* USD 17,741.00

Zardetto-Smith 9707672 Synaptic transmission is the key to understanding the
basic operation of the nervous system at a cellular level. Without transmission,
there is no direct communication between neurons. The classical view of
transmission is that of a chemical signal, referred to as a transmitter,
released from one neuron which then diffuses to other neurons or target cells
where it binds to a receptor and triggers a signal which excites, inhibits, or
modulates cellular activity. More recently, volume transmission which uses
extracellular fluid pathways has been recognized an alternative form of
interneuronal communication. Volume transmission includes not only the diffusion
of humoral factors through the extracellular fluid to their specific receptors
on neurons or glial cells but also the diffusion of electrotonic signals along
those pathways. Neuropeptides, which are stored within large dense-cored
vesicles in nerve terminals located near extracellular space, may be key to
understanding volume transmission. Dr. Zardetto-Smith will use this Research
Planning Grant to examine the role that the neuropeptide, angiotensin II, plays
in volume transmission. Angiotensin II is primarily known for mediation of the
intake of water in response to depletion of the extracellular fluid content but
it will also induce seeking out and ingestion of salty fluids. Dr. Zardetto-
Smith has designed a series of experiments to examine whether angiotensin II
functions in a volume transmitter mode, possibly through interactions with
specific GABAnergic neurons, under conditions which challenge body fluid
homeostatis. These findings will help us better understand the paradox resulting
from the dissociation between the location of transmitters and their receptors
in mediating interneuronal communication. It will also provide new information
on the neural regulation of sodium appetite which is very important given the
significance of sodium in intracellular mechanisms that are essential for our
survi val.