* 9707184
* Abundance, Biomass, Vertical Distribution and Selected      Process Studies of Arctic Ocean Zooplankton: A Collaborative Proposal for Ancillary Use of the SHEBA Platform
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Carin Ashjian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 01/31/2002
* USD 362,217.00

This collaborative research project represents one of the first comprehensive
biological process studies to be carried in the Arctic Ocean over a full annual
cycle. Investigators from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, University of
Rhode Island, and Brookhaven National Laboratory, the Canadian Dept. of
Fisheries and Oceans, and from other U.S. institutions will use a Canadian
icebreaker as home base for a 14-month period to study the seasonal cycle of
biological production and respiration, and the seasonal cycle in biomass of
algae, bacteria, protists, and zooplankton, in the central Arctic. This project
involves a year-long study of the distribution and abundance of total
zooplankton and standing stock, vertical migration patterns, and aspects of
secondary production and vital rates of four target copepod species, including
egg production, egg viability, growth, and changes in carbon standing stock, in
the upper 500 m of the Arctic Ocean. Additionally, the carbon and energy flow at
the over-wintering site will be described. The sampling plan includes both
continuous (acoustic) and weekly (net tows) monitoring of zooplankton biomass
and abundance augmented by periodic, intensive, process oriented work: 1)
Acoustic backscatter intensity data will be made available periodically to
calibrate the backscatter intensity: zooplankton biomass relationship using
total zooplankton biomass measured from net hauls. 2) Zooplankton biomass,
abundance, and taxonomic composition will be measured at ~10 day intervals
throughout the period of the project. Vertically discrete samples will be
collected at regular but less frequent intervals (monthly) using opening/closing
mechanisms on the ring nets. 3) Process Studies will involve egg production rate
and viability experiments, growth rate experiments, and taxa and life stage
specific determination of respiration rates for the dominant copepod species.
Individuals of the dominant taxa will collected for length, dry weight, carbon
and nitrogen content and the determination of the RNA/DNA ratio, an indicator of
the vital rates of the copepods. The results will be compared to those from
previous studies and will enhance understanding of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem,
the life cycles of copepods in the Arctic Ocean, variability in the Arctic
ecosystem, and the potential importance of zooplankton, especially copepods, to
the Arctic Ocean carbon cycle. The seasonal study of production/ respiration
processes will provide valuable information regarding: 1) the present structure
and function of central Arctic ecosystems, which can serve as a baseline for
evaluating the impact of future global change processes in this sensitive
region; and 2) the nature and timing of production and respiration processes in
a high latitude system and in particular how the heterotrophic community
survives during the dark winter months.