* 9707642
* CAA:  The Neurochemical Basis of Puberty in Ferrets
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Kathleen Ryan, Magee - Women's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 12/31/1999
* USD 59,443.00

9707642 Ryan Career Advancement Awards expand the opportunity for women
researchers to advance their career. Dr. Ryan will use these funds to acquire
new anatomical and neurochemical skills that will expand her research
capabilities that can then be used to tackle the understanding of the neural
mechanisms underling puberty. Puberty is defined by the process of sexual
maturation during which an individual becomes fertile. Dr. Ryan is interested in
the neural mechanisms controlling the onset of puberty. She is using an animal
model in which puberty can be advanced or delayed by modulating the ambient
photoperiod. Thus, Dr. Ryan can compare animals of the same age, some of which
were within a known number of days from maturation, or already mature, and
others which were still immature and would remain so for several months longer.
Evidence suggests that two systems, the gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH)
system and the dopamine secreting neurons in hypothalamic regions, may be
involved in onset of puberty. With the Career Advancement Award, she will learn
state-of-the-art neuroanatomical techniques to identify and track the function
of these two major neuronal systems. She will also learn the procedure and then
set up in vivo microdialysis in her own laboratory to enable an analysis of the
neurotransmitters during the pubertal process. These techniques can then be used
in her model system to provide a better understanding of the neural and hormonal
mechanisms underlying a major developmental process, puberty.