* 9707520
* Simultaneous In Situ Measurements within Polar Stratospheric Clouds of Particle Size, Number, Composition, Scattering   Ratio, &amp; of Gas Phase Concentrations of Nitric Acid &amp
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2001
* USD 190,147.00

Important details concerning polar stratospheric ozone depletion are still
required for a more complete quantitative understanding. This is particularly
true in the Arctic stratosphere where the loss of ozone is not as severe as in
the Antarctic. The microphysics of the nucleation, growth, composition,
sedimentation of particles in polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) is one of the
critical areas for understanding Arctic ozone loss. PSC particles provide sites
for the heterogeneous chemistry required to activate chlorine, which then
destroys ozone. The pivotal role played by PSC particles is most evident in the
Arctic when ozone loss is essentially modulated by temperature, a surrogate for
PSCs, from year to year. The frequency, duration, and timing of PSC occurrence
determines to a large extent the amount of ozone loss. Removing some of the
present uncertainties concerning PSC formation temperatures, particle
composition, and particle phase will permit more careful modeling of the amount
of chlorine processed by PSCs. This project is to collaborate on joint
measurements of PSC characteristics during the Third European Stratospheric
Experiment on Ozone. The instruments will be flown onto one balloon gondola
which will simultaneously measure, in situ, aerosol concentration, size,
composition, depolarization, backscattering, and gas phase concentrations of
nitric acid and water. The investigation will focus on methods to infer particle
index of refraction, which is a function of composition. These joint
measurements will be the first direct measurements of the complete thermodynamic
environment in which PSC particles exist, coincident with a characterization of
aerosol size, concentration, composition, phase, and optical properties. These
measurements should reveal the extent to which the measured PSCs are in
thermodynamic equilibrium with their environment, which hydrates of HNO3 are
formed, and the abundance of condensed HCI, an important species for chlorine
activation.