* 9707331
* Effects of a Founder Event on Genetic Diversity in the      Fire Ant Solenopsis invicta
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Laurent Keller, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 89,925.00

9707331 Ross Considerable attention has focused recently on the reduction in
genetic diversity that follows founder events and other types of severe
reductions in population size (bottlenecks). One reason for this interest is
that reduced genetic variation may affect the subsequent ability of populations
to respond to natural selection. Moreover, changes in the nature and extent of
genetic variation following a bottleneck may lead to genetic incompatibilities
between parental and founder populations, one outcome of which may be
speciation. Thus, the genetic changes accompanying bottlenecks are of basic
scientific interest because of their possible role in the natural processes of
adaptation and species diversification, and of applied interest because
endangered species subjected to bottlenecks may lack the ability to respond to
subsequent environmental change. The aim of this project is to describe the
effects of a well-documented founder event on variation in five different
classes of genetic markers in wild populations of the fire ant Solenopsis
invicta. The markers to be used are 78 nuclear markers derived from protein
electrophoresis, seven microsatellite DNA loci, 64 RAPD DNA markers, the locus
or loci responsible for sex determination, and markers of the mitochondrial DNA.
Results from these five sets of markers are complementary for studying the
effects of a bottleneck because they have different genetic architectures, are
under different selective regimes, and have different modes of inheritance.
Electrophoretic markers represent protein-encoding nuclear loci with modest
variation that generally are not under strong selection. Microsatellites are
repetitive nuclear sequences in non-coding regions that harbor extensive
polymorphism. RAPDs are randomly amplified nuclear sequences also assumed to be
in non-coding regions that display simple presence/absence polymorphisms. The
sex-determining locus is a regulatory element under strong selection that
maintains extensive polym orphism comparable to or even surpassing that of
microsatellites. Finally, mitochondrial DNA provides a set of markers that are
maternally inherited, in contrast to the biparental inheritance of the four
classes of nuclear genes. The composite results will be used to test theories
that predict how bottlenecks affect various classes of genes and how the
evolutionary potential of bottlenecked populations is altered. The results also
may allow estimation of the number of fire ant queens constituting the original
founder population in the U.S.