* 9707225
* Phylogeny and Rates of Evolution of the Carnivora (Mammalia)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Michael Nedbal, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 07/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

9707225 Flynn The Carnivora (Mammalia) are an extremely important group for
biological studies for several reasons, including (i) occurrence in all land
masses except Antarctica, (ii) position as keystone predators in a variety of
terrestrial and aquatic habitats, (iii) possession of a broad variety of well-
documented behavioral (including social), feeding, and other (often unique)
adaptations, and (iv) an extensive fossil record. Investigators John Flynn and
Michael Nedbal will examine a large suite of new, high-quality cranial and
postcranial characters from fossil carnivorans to better determine the pattern
and timing of radiation in early carnivoran groups - this will provide a
critical framework from which diversification and genealogical relationships
among modern carnivoran assemblages. Flynn and Nedbal also will acquire and
examine about 125,000 base pairs of DNA sampled from roughly 30 representative
carnivoran taxa. The DNA sequences will come from two genes encoded by the
mitochondria and two genes encoded in the nucleus. The DNA sequences will
provide an independent data source from which genealogical relationships among
Carnivora will be inferred. Finally, Flynn and Nedbal will map each gene
sequence onto the best-supported genealogies in order to test hypotheses of
molecular change. Specifically, they will examine the issue of whether molecular
change occurs more-or-less homogeneously through time (the "molecular-clock"
theory) or whether change is episodic. Results from the study will have far-
reaching implications relative to the processes and patterns of carnivoran and
molecular diversification.