* 9707451
* CAA:  Developmental Genetic Analysis of an Eyeless Strain of Mice.  A Study Toward Understanding Eye Morphogenesis and  Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Priscilla Tucker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 42,000.00

Abstract Priscilla Tucker CAA 9707451 The proposed research is designed to
identify genes responsible for the early stages of eye development in mammals.
The project has two aims. First, a genetic analysis of an eyeless mutant mouse
strain will be carried out to identify one or more genes responsible for the
eyeless condition. This involves conducting a genetic mapping study in which
eyeless mice are crossed with normal mice. Differences in DNA content between
normal and eyeless descendants of the cross are localized to specific
chromosomes and candidate genes, those thought to be responsible for the eyeless
condition, are identified. Second, a comparative study of gene expression will
be conducted in both eyeless and normal mice. Patterns of gene expression for
nine genes known to be involved in the early development of the eye will be
compared and any differences in expression of these genes between eyeless and
normal mice will be noted. The project has important implications for furthering
an understanding of how the mammalian eye develops as it will provide new
information on what genes are responsible for eye development and when and where
they are expressed during eye development. In addition, identification of one or
more genes responsible for the eyeless condition in these mice may shed light on
the genetic basis of instances of eyelessness in nature. More generally, the
project has important implications for understanding how eyes evolved in
animals. In nature, different species of animals exhibit a great diversity of
eye types and, for years, researchers thought that eyes evolved independently
multiple times. Yet, recently, several genes involved in eye development are
found in such diverse organisms as fruit flys and humans. This observation
suggests that animal eyes have a common developmental origin. The search for new
genes involved in eye development in animals will further our understanding of
how the same genes can be utilized differently in different organisms to produce
the great diversity of eye types found in nature.