* 9707544
* RPG:  Phylogeny and Biogeography of Oedionychina            (Coleoptera:  Chrysomelidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Catherine Duckett, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1999
* USD 17,234.00

(9707544) Duckett RPG The flea beetle sub-tribe, Oedionychina (Coleoptera:
Chrysomelidae: Alticinae) is a large evolutionarily natural group of 24 genera
distributed primarily is South America, Africa and India (the ancient continent
of Gonwana minus Australia). The evolutionary relationships among these genera
are not understood despite the presence of economically important species in the
sub-tribe. Oedionychina is also the only clearly defined suprageneric group of
flea beetles that is distributed in more than one continent. Therefore, the
biogeography of this group will be of value in elucidating the origins of the
flea beetles and the great radiation of flea beetle in the new world tropics. An
evolutionary analysis of the Oedionychina using modern cladistic methods will be
performed with the aim of investigating the role of dispersal and continental
drift in the current distribution of the genera. Of special interest are the
relationships among the New World and Old World genera and the congruence of
their evolutionary histories to the age and known evolutionary histories of the
areas where they are distributed.This study will test two existing hypotheses of
the evolution of the these beetles one which maintains that they evolved in
Gonwana and some groups diversified in Africa and South America after the
continents separated; the other maintains that this group evolved in South
America and later dispersed over water to Africa and India. These results are
important to the theory of the formation of biotas. The lack of systematic
understanding of phylogenetic relationships is in part because of reliance on
traditional characters of the insect exoskeleton. These characters will be
combined with analysis of morphological and developmental characters from
juvenile stages as well as female genitalia and the specialized sensory
structures of the mouth. As a result of this study the kinds of characters used
for evolutionary studies of the flea beetles will be expanded. Existin g data on
cytogenetics will also be integrated into the analysis to provide a more
powerful data set. Additionally, the natural history of the beetles, which is
totally unknown in 99% of the species will be documented and samples for later
analysis of DNA will be collected. During this planning grant the PI will
conduct a collecting and rearing trip to southern Brazil where 12 of the 24
genera are found is proposed. Work done on this trip will test and perfect
rearing and collecting techniques of juvenile stages, provide taxa for initial
analsysis using Scanning Electron Microscopy (mouth sense organs) and explore
the utility of character systems which have never been used in the Chrysomelidae
for evolutionary analysis. The adults and juveniles collected will be prepared
and analyzed morphologically; if these character systems provide good
phylogenetic resolution, research using these systems will be planned in
northern South America and Africa to complete the taxonomic sampling necessary
for an understanding of the evolution of the Oedionychina and to test hypotheses
of the evolution of the Gonwandian fauna