* 9707571
* RUI:  Phylogenetic Analyses in Trifolieae, Subtribe         Trigonellinae (Leguminosae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Kelly Steele, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 155,000.00

9707571 Steele In a plant systematic project emphasizing undergraduate
involvement at California State University-Hayward, Dr. Kelly Steele is studying
the genealogical or phylogenetic relationships among groups of herbaceous
legumes in the genera Medicago (alfalfa), Melilotus (sweetclovers), and
Trigonella (fenugreek), in collaboration with scientists in Canada and elsewhere
in the U.S. Focusing on a representative collection of c. 75 species of these
mostly Old World plants, Dr. Steele is emphasizing DNA sequencing of both
chloroplast and nuclear genes, to amass evidence of mutational differences
between species. In turn, the molecular data will be used, alone and in
conjunction with traditional morphological characters for these plants, to
construct genealogical or phylogenetic trees for the groups. Work in several
laboratories on related legumes provides a tribal level framework in which to
nest the results on subtribe Trigonellinae. A phylogeny constructed from
independent molecular evidence allows evaluation of the several competing
notions on the origin of the coiled fruit types found in Medicago and of the
specialized pollinator "tripping" mechanism that seems characteristic of certain
species in this group. Species and genus level diversity within the temperate
and subtropical tribes of legumes is relatively well known, from generations of
taxonomic work on morphology and anatomy. The evolutionary origins of various
distinctive features, like fruit types and floral mechanisms, is complicated,
however, by the likelihood of parallel or convergent development of similarly
looking characteristics, from different ancestral forms. Molecular data from
nucleotide sequencing of chloroplast and nuclear genes provide independent
evidence of mutational differences between species. Phylogenetic trees
constructed from this evidence help in understanding the direction and paths of
change in form that accompany speciation and migration.