* 9707975
* Construction and Characterization of Grain Boundary Defects in Semiconducting Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2000
* USD 245,000.00

9707975 Martin This research project will investigate the microstructure and
macroscopic properties of specific grain boundary defects in crystalline,
semiconducting polymer materials. The long-term goal of this work is to isolate
individual grain boundaries so that their microstructure and influence on
macroscopic properties can be determined unambiguously. "Polymer bicrystals"
make it possible to examine the mechanical and electrical properties of these
materials as a function of defect geometry. Measurements of the mechanical
strength and photocurrent transport both decrease with increasing misorientation
between component grains. These properties measurements are corroborated by
structural investigations using opticalmicroscopy, scanning electron microscopy,
atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), selected
area electron diffraction (SAED), and white-beam synchrotron X-ray topography
(WBSXT). The current research project will involve (1) investigations of new
materials of current interest for device applications, (2) processing schemes
for introducing defects into crystalline organic semiconductors in a controlled
manner, (3) structural characterization by transmission electron microscopy,
electron diffraction, and WBSXT, and (4) measurements of macroscopic properties
by mechanical and electrical testing. Of particular scientific and technological
interest is the manner in which carrier transport and mechanical deformation is
accommodated across individual grain boundaries. The manner in which slip
deformation is accommodated across the engineered grain boundary interfaces as a
function of tilt and twist misorientation angle will be investigated. From these
results we will learn about the manner in which planes of oriented polymer
molecules laterally translate by what are expected to be dislocatio n-mediated
mechanisms of slip. %%% This research should provide an insight into the defect-
limited behavior of ordered polymer and organic solids. These efforts will
provide fundamental information about the relationship between microstructure
and macroscopic properties of these materials in the solid-state.
Optoelectrically active polymers are of considerable interest for devices such
as thin film transistors, flat panel displays, chemical sensors, and injection
lasers. Recent publications have identified the critical role of grain boundary
defects in limiting the performance of these flexible, organic-based electronic
devices for low cost, large scale applications. ***