* 9707950
* Classic Maya Elite Households:  Extensive Excavations of    Rapidly Abandoned Structures at Aguateca, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Takeshi Inomata, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2000
* USD 183,458.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Takeshi Inomata will conduct three
seasons of archaeological research at the Mayan site of Aguateca which is
located in the Petexbatun region of Guatemala. The large multiroom site includes
an extensive and complex system of defensive walls. Its epicenter contains a
main plaza, causeway and a `palace group` which was the possible residence of a
royal family. Surrounding this are elite residential areas. Previous work at the
site by Inomata suggested that this elite area was burned during an attack by
enemies during the Late Classic period ca. 800 A.D. The residents fled leaving
most of their belongings behind. Preliminary excavations of the abandoned
structures revealed the richest floor assemblages ever found at a lowland
Classic Maya center. More extensive excavations of the artifact-rich buildings
planned for the next three years will provide an extraordinary opportunity to
study Maya households. This site offers a unique opportunity since at most sites
room materials which archaeologists recover represent worn-out and abandoned
artifacts which provide only the most limited and biased insights into
prehistoric lives. Substantial areas will be exposed and excavators will point
plot artifacts using a total station system and handheld computers. The analysis
of paleobotanical samples, soil chemical signatures and small discarded objects
will contribute to the understanding of lifeways and use of space in and around
houses. Laboratory work will include residue analysis on ceramics, the
composition study of ceramic pastes, use-wear analysis of lithics and the
examination of human and faunal osteological remains. Both archaeologists and
cultural anthropologists have come, in recent years, to realize that in
traditional societies households are the basic units of subsistence and
production and to understand how groups such as the Maya functioned it is
necessary to reconstruct activities on a household level. It is through
comparison of individual well documented household groups that insight into
social hierarchies and economic and political organization can best be
understood. This project is directed at this goal and poses three immediate
questions: how were Classic period Maya households organized?; What kind of
activities did their members conduct in and around their dwellings?; and how
were households articulated with higher-level political, economic and social
organizations. In this first three year phase of the research, Dr. Inomata will
focus on `elite` households and in following seasons he will expand the scope to
include a range of socioeconomic groups. This research is important for several
reasons. Because of the extraordinary nature of the site, it will provide a
unique insight into Maya life and produce data of interest to many
archaeologists. It should also shed new light on how with a relatively simple
technology and in harsh environmental conditions the Mayan civilization arose
and was maintained.