* 9707161
* Late Quaternary Ice Sheet Extent, Chronology, and           Paleoceanography, East Greenland Margin/Denmark Strait:     Implictions for the Arctic and North Alantic Oceans
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Anne Jennings, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2000
* USD 223,707.00

Funding is requested to support research on sediment cores obtained from
eastern Greenland during a joint USA/Norwegian research cruise. The objectives
of the proposal are to: 1) Document ice sheet/slope/deep-sea sediment transfers
and interactions for the East Greenland/Denmark Strait margin over the last
30ka; 2) Test different hypotheses for the extent of the East Greenland ice
sheet's margin during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the timing of retreat;
and 3) Develop and interpret high-resolution marine records (decadal to
centuries time-scales) of changes in the character of the surface water (East
Greenland Current) and bottom water (Arctic Intermediate Water) over at least
the last 14ka, and how these data reflect paleoceanogrphic changes in the Arctic
and North Atlantic Oceans. The core on the shelf and slope are firmly placed in
a seismic stratigraphic framework both from previous surveys and during core
collection in 1996. The choice of the core sites was designed to 1) test two
contrasting models for the extent of glacial ice on the south-central east
Greenland margin during and since the LGM and to 2) investigate the
paleoceanography and ice-sheet/ocean interactions across the Denmark Strait
"gateway" between the Arctic and the North Atlantic over the interval of record
(the last 30 ka). The extent of the East Greenland ice margin flanking Denmark
Strait during the last glaciation is virtually unknown, yet this extent and the
timing of deglaciation are important parameters for understanding the past
changes in ocean circulation through the Denmark Strait, and the role of this
ice margin in Heinrich events, meltwater spikes, and other abrupt climate
changes during the glacial period. The research thrust for the Holocene is to
document paleoceanographic and glacial conditions in the fjords and on the
shelf, and to compare these reconstructions with other paleoclimate data such as
the ( 18( record from Renland ice core, and the "Little Ice Age" events under
study from the t errestrial neoglacial record. The results of these studies will
help us to understand how, why, and how quickly the environment has changed in
this region during the Holocene.