* 9707280
* CAA: Site Directed Mutagenesis of the Photosynthetic Water  Oxidizing Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Bridgette Barry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9707280 Barpy This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
Engineers. Dr. Barry has been studying the structure and function of the
photosynthetic water oxidizing complex (photosystem II). She has used a variety
of techniques to achieve her research goals, including EPR and infrared
spectroscopies. She has developed procedures to purify photosystem II from
plants and cyanobacteria. In addition, she has been studying site directed
mutants, generated in photosystem II from a cyanobacterium that can be grown
photoheterotrophically. Dr. Barry will take a sabbatical leave in order to
master the techniques of molecular biology and genetics, and will subsequently
implement these techniques in her own laboratory. Photosystem II is present in
plants, green algae, and prokaryotic cyanobacteria. The complex oxidizes water
to oxygen. An understanding of the mechanism by which this occurs requires a
combination of techniques, providing information about the structures of the
redox active tyrosines in photosystem II, as well as information about the
structural changes that occur at the manganese containing active site. Site
directed mutagenesis can be used to assign spectral features to a particular
residue in the enzyme. Ultimately, this combination of techniques provides new
insight into the structure and function of photosystem II. ***