* 9707727
* GOALI: Resonant Holographic Interferometry: Diagnostic      Capabilities in Multi-Phase Flame Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Derek Dunn-Rankin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 01/31/2002
* USD 173,000.00

Abstract - Dunn-Rankin This is an industry-university cooperative research
project between the University of California at Irvine and Metro Laser of
Irvine, CA. Resonant holographic interferometry (RHI) is a laser-based
diagnostic that combines the three-dimensional imaging capability of holography,
the phase- sensitive detection of interferometry, and the species specificity of
resonance spectroscopy. It accomplishes this by recording two simultaneous
holograms at two different wavelengths, one tuned near an absorption line and
the other tuned off this feature. Upon reconstruction, the resulting
interference fringes correspond uniquely to the density of the species under
interrogation while phase contributions from background species, thermal and
pressure instabilities and optical aberrations are subtracted out. The approach
has been successfully demonstrated in gas-phase combustion systems. In this
effort, RHI is applied to multiphase systems for the first time. Specifically,
products from droplet and spray combustion systems will be analyzed
quantitatively. Now intrusive optical diagnostic techniques are commonly used in
study of gas-phase combustion systems and other reacting flow systems. These
methods are also being considered for incorporation in active control systems.
However, most such techniques are limited to single-phase systems, making them
unsuitable for many important combustion systems that use liquid fuels. It is
speculated that RHI can overcome this hurdle.