* 9707815
* Numerical and Observational Studies of Tornadic Supercells
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Michael Biggerstaff, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 230,001.00

9707815 Wicker While progress has been made over the last decade on
understanding the dynamics of tornadoes and their parent storms, much is still
unknown concerning the factors that cause tornado genesis and that control the
intensity and longevity of any given tornado. In this research, the Principal
Investigator will investigate how the large scale environment conditions (e.g.
wind shear and buoyancy) control the intensity and longevity of tornadoes within
supercell thunderstorms. This work builds on and is a logical follow-up to the
Principal Investigator's previous research on the development of low-level
rotation and tornado genesis within supercell thunderstorms. Two separate lines
of research will be pursued. First, the Principal Investigator's current
research will be extended down to the tornado scale in an effort to advance
understanding of tornadogenesis. The previous work has resulted in refinements
to the Rotunno and Klemp paradigm for origins of low-level rotation in
supercells. The Principal Investigator s new theory demonstrates the dynamical
role the inflow environment's near-surface horizontal vorticity has on
mesocyclogenesis and can be used to predict the near-surface vertical wind shear
profiles which are optimal for the generation of strong low-level mesocyclones
within supercells. Extension of this work includes examining whether tornado-
scale circulations are directly related to the mesocyclone circulation, as well
as a study to understanding the role of shear and buoyancy in determining the
spatial scales and magnitude of the low-level circulation and convergence needed
for the generation of tornadoes. Second, an attempt will be made to explicitly
model a particular supercell and tornado observed during the Verification of
Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment. This part of the study will provide
a much needed evaluation of the current state of cloud simulation realism and
hopefully identif y specific aspects of convective scale modeling which need to
be improved. Potential benefits from this research are many. Aside from
increasing basic understanding of storm and tornado dynamics, the operational
community will benefit from this research. Understanding which particular
environmental profiles of wind shear, temperature and moisture that are most
conducive for tornadoes will enable operational forecasters to pinpoint and
focus on small regions where the conditions are favorble for the formation of
intense tornadic storms. By more fully understanding the dynamics associated
with these supercells and their tornadoes, improved severe weather forecasts and
Doppler radar observations can then be used more effectively to forecast and
detect tornado formation and warn the public. ***