* 9707230
* Dissertation Research:  Changing Gender Roles as a Result ofInternational Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Patricia Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/1999
* USD 9,840.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student at
the Pennsylvania State University. The project involves changes in gender roles
within the family as a result of international migration. The student will
investigate traditional gender roles in a rural community in Bangladesh, and
also among a sample of Bangladeshi immigrants in New York City. The student will
test hypotheses concerning traditional gender roles, social networks and their
change in the new urban environment. Families with larger Bangladeshi social
networks, and with adult women with no formal employment will be expected to
maintain more traditional gender roles. The student will draw a random sample of
families in New York and in a source community in Bangladesh, and will
administer a formal measure of gender roles as well as do participant
observation at public events and private household contexts. This research is
important because modern means of transportation and communications facilitate
rapid population movements between different societies. Advances in our
understanding of the effects of migration on basic relationships in the family
will help policy makers and planners cope with problems rising from a mismatch
between traditional and contemporary forms of gender relations.