* 9707705
* Systematics, Ontogeny, Osteology and Historical Biogeography of Fossil and Living Gars (Actinopterygii,                 Lepsosteiformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* William Bemis, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 190,007.00

DEB-9707705 Grande The gars (Lepisosteidae) are members of a very long-lived
assemblage that is thought by most ichthyologists to be the most primitive
living group of Neopterygii (a group that contains about half of all species of
vertebrate animals). The seven, living species of gars are today restricted to
the eastern-America region, from southeastern Canada to Cuba. Extinct species of
gars, some over 100 millions years old, document that gars were once widespread,
occurring on both American continents, Europe, Africa, Madagascar, and India.
Drs. L. Grande (of the Field Museum in Chicago) and W. Bemis (of the University
of Massachusetts) will carry out the first comprehensive study of comparative
anatomy, biogeography, and ecology (including paleoecology) among all living and
numerous extinct species of gars. Their study will be anchored in thorough,
detailed examination of skeletal variation but they also will examine living
material to following developmental stages of critical morphological characters.
Several fossil species will be described and species-level taxonomic problems
will be resolved. A resolved genealogy (phylogeny) of lepisosteid species and of
primitive neopterygian groups is expected to yield critical information
regarding major questions surrounding the Earth's history, biodiversity, and
patterns of biological extinction. The work also will provide extremely relevant
data towards resolution of one of the major questions in ichthyology: the origin
of teleost fishes.