* 9707268
* CAA: Flagellar Beat Regulation in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Beth Mitchell, Le Moyne College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1999
* USD 50,249.00

9707268 Mitchell This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
Engineers. Eukaryotic flagella are complex organelles whose regulation is still
only minimally understood. Flagellar bending is based on the sliding of doublet
microtubules driven by multiple dynein ATPase isozymes. The radial spokes and
central pair microtubules are axonemal structures which have been implicated in
the regulation of flagellar beat. This project is directed at extending ongoing
studies on the regulation of dynein arm activity by axonemal protein kinases and
phosphatases that are in turn controlled by the radial spoke - central pair
complex. The biflagellate alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is an excellent model
system for studies on flagellar function, in part because it is well-suited for
genetic analysis. Extragenic suppressor mutations have been isolated which
bypass the paralysis normally associated with the absence of the radial spokes
or central pair microtubules. Some of these suppressor mutations, which code for
altered forms of outer arm dynein heavy chains, also result in a defect in a
signal transduction pathway leading to flagellar quiescence. The goal of this
research is to begin analysis of the role of these outer arm dyneins in the
regulation of flagellar beat and quiescence. It is expected that this signal
transduction pathway involves protein kinase/phosphatase activity, and the
proposed experiments are designed to explore this possibility. This award
involves a one-year sabbatical leave during which experiments will be conducted
in the laboratory of Dr. Winfield Sale at Emory University School of Medicine.
This collaborative effort will utilize previously isolated suppressor mutants in
combination with techniques currently in use in Dr. Sale's lab, including
videomicroscopic analysis of microtubule sliding rates and phosphoprotein
characterization. Increased understanding of regulatory cascades important in
Chlamydomonas flagellar motility will also contribute to better u nderstanding
of motility regulation in cilia and flagella of other organisms, and perhaps in
cytoplasmic dynein motility systems as well. A sabbatical leave will provide the
PI with exposure to a dynamic research environment, including several
individuals focusing on different aspects of flagellar regulation in
Chlamydomonas. In addition, the opportunity to attend research seminars on a
regular basis, as well as to attend professional meetings will enhance the
career advancement aspect of this award. Flagella are whip-like appendages that
propel motile eukaryotic cells as diverse as unicellular algae and mammalian
spermatozoa. The ability of these cells to swim smoothly and in appropriate
response to environmental cues is critical to their survival and function. The
experiments to be performed during Dr. Mitchell's sabbatical will further our
understanding of the mechanism whereby flagella beat with a regular motion that
results in smooth swimming. ***