* 9707551
* LTREB: Collaborative Research: Long-term Studies of Forest  Dynamics on the North Carolina Piedmont
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Robert Peet, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2002
* USD 209,498.00

9707551 Peet Much of the current uncertainty regarding the nature and mechanisms
of forest succession is a consequence of the paucity of long-term data sets,
particularly those dealing with patterns of establishment, growth, and mortality
of individual plants. The forests of the North Carolina Piedmont have long been
viewed as a model system for the study of secondary succession, in part because
of the availability of long-term records of forest development. Among the key
issues that remain to be resolved are the processes that influence community
reorganization during the transition from even-aged to all-aged stands and the
role of large, infrequent disturbances. This project will continue measurements
of a rich assemblage of long-term research plots in and near the Duke Forest and
thereby enhance the value of this site as a model system for the study of
succession. In September 1996, many of the long-term plots were impacted to
various degrees by Hurricane Fran which provides a new direction and opportunity
for this project. Major disturbances like hurricanes are known to play an
important role in forest dynamics, but rarely do such events occur on sites with
a sufficient long-term history of research to allow assessment of the changes in
ecological processes induced by the disturbance event. A second focus of tis
study will be the documentation and archiving of the Duke Forest data, including
standard metadata, for distribution to current and future researchers.
Ultimately, these data will be freely accessible to investigators via standard
network protocols.