* 9707722
* Integration of Maximum Likelihood Paternity Analysis        with Quantitative Genetics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Thomas Meagher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9707722 Meagher Paternity analysis and quantitative genetic analysis both have
proven to be effective tools for studying the evolutionary dynamics of
contemporary populations. A large number of recent studies have incorporated
these methodologies on one level or another. One of the ongoing problems in
applying quantitative genetic approaches, however, lies in obtaining precise
estimates of quantitative genetic parameters, such as additive genetic variation
and genetic correlations. Such estimates have been obtained for a limited number
of species, primarily short-lived organisms that can be readily bred under
controlled conditions and with crossing designs over two or more generations. A
short-cut often used for long-lived organisms is to make measurements on field-
collected progeny, typically grouped into maternal sibships. Because
investigators do not usually know whether individuals within maternal sibships
are related as half-sibs (different fathers) or full-sibs (the same father),
such maternal sibships provide estimates that are confounded with maternal and
dominance effects to an unmeasured and unknown degree. These estimates are thus
only gross approximations to additive genetic variance values. Statistical
advances in genetic-marker based paternity analysis over the past decade have
made it feasible to determine the underlying paternal sibship structure of
field-collected progeny in considerable detail. The goal of this project is to
integrate maximum likelihood methods for paternity analysis with maximum
likelihood estimation of quantitative genetic parameters. In this way, more
complete information about genealogical relationships within field-collected
progeny can be brought to bear, and evolutionary studies of natural populations
substantively enhanced.