* 9707679
* CAA:  Technology Transfer:  Bringing the Tools of Molecular Biology to an Ecological Genetics Program
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Susan Kalisz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract Susan Kalisz 9707679 CAA Measuring dispersal or the rate of movement of
individuals within and among populations in nature remains a challenge for
ecologists and population geneticists because of the difficulty in detecting
individual movements. This difficulty is exaggerated for many plant species, in
which the dispersing stages are small, such as pollen or seed. However, our
ability to quantify dispersal or migration within and among plant populations is
central to understanding many population and regional processes. In particular,
the extent to which populations or sub-populations are connected via migration
of pollen or seed will determine 1) the extent to which different populations
share genes in common and 2) the extent to which local extinctions are balanced
by recolonization from other populations within a region, and 3) the extent to
which local adaptation will occur. Emerging DNA technologies now make it
possible to use genetic markers to detect migration and outcrossing events with
greater accuracy. A powerful new molecular technique for ecological and
population genetics, that of making and screening genomic libraries for
microsatellite DNA repeats and microsatellite DNA polymorphism analysis will be
learned by the PI. Microsatellites are short, tandemly repeated simple
sequences, one to six base pairs in length, that are highly polymorphic for
repeat number. Amplification of the microsatellite region by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) results in fully penetrant, Mendelian-inherited, codominant
markers that can be precisely identified by length. Since these markers are
allelic, microsatellite data are directly applicable to population genetic
models and analysis. One of the greatest advantages of microsatellite DNA
markers is their extreme variability (typically 10-20 alleles/locus) that can be
used to characterize population structure, determine outcrossing rates and
evaluate parentage by paternity exclusion. This award will facilitate al l
facets of microsatellite library production, cloning, screening and scoring: in
essence, the transfer of this PCR-based technology to my program. These
techniques will be learned from Dr. M. Ashley who has developed microsatellite
markers for several plant and animal systems in her laboratory. The analysis of
microsatellite markers will enhance current research and future development in
four distinct areas: 1) Environmental variance typical in natural populations
causes local extinctions to occur. Such local population extinction should
select for bet-hedging traits which restore populations, both demographically
and genetically. With respect to local extinctions, we hypothesize that plant
populations which exist within a matrix of other population of the same species
should experience selection for seed dispersal. In contrast, isolated
populations should experience selection for seed dormancy, since isolated
population cannot receive nor cannot export successful migrants. One goal is to
quantify the relationship between seed dispersal, seed dormancy and population
genetic structure. Microsatellite markers would allow the assessment of the
extent to which the study populations of Collinsia verna are genetically
isolated entities (and express seed dormancy phenotypes) or exchange migrants
via seed dispersal (and lack seed dormancy). 2) Most models of the evolution of
selfing consider the negative genetic effects of inbreeding depression as the
critical factors in mating system evolution. However, a new model demonstrates
that environmental variance which prohibits pollinators from visiting flowers
during some portion of the flowering season can be more important than
inbreeding depression in driving the evolution and maintenance of self
pollination mechanisms. We have demonstrated that C. verna has high levels of
outcrossing and temporal separation of male and female phases but is capable of
selfing. Microsatellite markers would allow us to test this model by conductin g
paternity analysis and within flower outcrossing rates.