* 9707479
* RPG:  Maternal Regulation in Danio rerio (zebrafish):       Analysis of Polyadenylation During Oogenesis and Early      Embryogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Marcia O'Connell, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Critical to an understanding of the maternal regulation of vertebrate
embryogenesis is an analysis of the mechanisms used to translationally activate
stored maternal mRNAs. Analysis of these mechanisms can expose additional
maternal regulators, for the molecules involved in triggering the translation of
stored maternal mRNAs by definition play central roles in regulatory cascades.
One such mechanism was discovered in mouse and frog that involves the
cytoplasmic polyadenylation of specific maternal mRNAs. While initially observed
in the oocytes and early embryos of several vertebrate species, it is now clear
that cytoplasmic polyadenylation is also required for the temporal activation of
the bicoid, Toll, and torso mRNAs in Drosophila embryos. The analysis of
cytoplasmic polyadenylation in Drosophila, a genetically tractable system, has
led to the discovery of mutants in which this mechanism is impaired, While these
studies should lead to the identification of additional molecules that play a
role in the cytoplasmic polyadenylation pathway, molecules that are unique to
vertebrate embryogenesis will not be identified. In this proposal, the PI
outlines experiments directed toward identifying novel maternal regulators in
vertebrate embryogenesis, using the zebrafish system. Using a PCR-based assay
that was originally designed to follow cytoplasmic polyadenylation in mouse and
Drosophila, changes in the polyadenylation status of a series of known maternal
mRNAs in zebrafish will be followed. The results of this screen will set the
stage for future research aimed at my long-term goal of identifying novel
maternal regulatory factors in zebrafish.