* 9707532
* Molecular Systematics of a Rapidly Evolving Species Flock:  The Mbuna (Cichlidae) of Lake Malawi
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Irving Kornfield, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/2001
* USD 193,300.00

9707532 Kornfield Irv Kornfield of the University of Maine will employ
hypervariable microsatellite markers to study the systematics and phylogeny of
the mbuna , a large group of cichlid fishes of Lake Malawi, East Africa, that
have obligate ties to shallow, rocky habitats.. Mbuna represent a highly
speciose assemblage known for rapid and extensive diversification over a short
periods of time. Mbuna thus represent an ideal model system in which to examine
processes (e.g., habitat fragmentation, trophic and spatial niche shifts,
interspecific agonistic interaction, and sexual selection) that are associated
with speciation and adaptive radiation. Kornfield will use microsatellite
markers to construct a hypothesis of relationships among major lineages within
the extremely large and complex mbuna genus Pseudotopheus. The molecular
phylogeny will then be compared to one based primarily on morphological and
behavioral traits. Kornfield also will examine characters found in the
morphology and distribution of scales. This aspect of the project will be in
collaboration with E. Leppitsch of the Austrian Science Foundation. A second
part of the project will be to evaluate the hypothesis that allopatric
populations of mbuna that display reproductive coloration exhibit the disjunct
patterns of distribution as a consequence of vicariance. An alternate
hypothesis, that the similarities in reproductive coloration stem from
parallelism or convergence, also will be evaluated. Resolution of phylogenetic
relationships within the mbuna will provide fundamental insights into the
phenomena of sexual selection and behaviorally-mediated reproductive isolation.
The project involves significant collaboration with a scientist from Malawi, and
is co-funded by the U.S.-Africa Program in the Division of International
Programs at the NSF.