* 9707260
* Landscape-Level Paleoecological Reconstructions for Kaua'i
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* David Burney, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2001
* USD 238,650.00

BURNEY 9707260 This project seeks to understand the dynamics of prehuman
ecosystems on the island of Kaua'i in the Hawaiian Islands, and to identify the
processes whereby environmental changes of the human period have led to the
collapse of the native fauna and lowland flora. The overall methodology for
creating a detailed picture of past environments and their changes will be
through multidisciplinary study of paleoecological, paleontological, and
archaeological sites. Cores collected from the late Quaternary sediments of the
island will provide evidence for past vegetation, water chemistry, fire
occurrence, and environmental catastrophes. Some of these sites also contain
bones of indigenous birds and molluscs; these sites will be excavated in order
to reconstruct past faunal assemblages. Pollen and charcoal evidence from the
human period will provide an another record of changing human land-use patterns,
which can be compared to paleontological evidence of the introduction of exotic
animals and archaeological assessments of past human population densities and
distributions. Measuring prehuman extinction rates will enrich discussions of
climate vs. human activity in global extinction patterns. Obtaining high-
resolution paleoclimate records will also permit the generation and testing of
hypotheses regarding past changes in hurricane frequency, fire occurrence, and
abrupt climate shifts like those to be expected from marine phenomena such as El
Nino. A practical goal of this research will be to develop a comprehensive
picture of prehuman environments of the island, as a guide to restoration
ecology efforts underway in collaboration with the National Tropical Botanical
Garden, which is adjacent to the primary sites. Landscape reconstructions from
paleoecological data are likely to provide the best reference ecosystems
available as models for ecological restoration efforts.