* 9707597
* RPG:  Iodide Channels in the Thyroid
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,12/24/1998
* Peying Fong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 12/24/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Chloride channels represent the most extensively characterized class of anion
channels in living organisms. These channels participate in a wide variety of
tasks, ranging from highly specialized ones, such as transepithelial movement of
salts and water, to general housekeeping functions, such as regulation of cell
volume. The elucidation of channel behavior and regulation has been aided
largely by the application of patch clamp recording techniques. In several
instances, molecular biological tools have led to primary structural data,
permitting the determination of the structures underlying functional
characteristics. A defining property of such channels is their ability to
conduct chloride ions. However, a significant number of chloride channels have
been demonstrated to conduct iodide better than chloride. In most systems, this
selectivity presents no problems, since chloride is present in tremendous excess
compared to iodide. A notable exception is the thyroid gland, which vectorially
transports iodide from the blood and into the follicular lumen. Here, an iodide
selective channel would contribute substantially to normal physiology. Thus, the
thyroid follicular cell could represent an ideal model system for eventually
cloning an iodide selective anion channel, thereby facilitating elucidation of
structural features that determine halide selectivity. In order to obtain
preliminary data that will be important in determining the feasibility of such
long term goals, this study proposes to use patch recording techniques: 1) to
determine if an iodide conducting channel resides in the apical membrane of the
follicular thyrocyte and 2) to study biophysical properties, especially the
halide selectivity, of such a channel. Whereas comprehensive studies of cation
channel selective permeability have been facilitated by the availability of both
highly selective drugs as well as primary structural information, that of anion
channels has suffered from the lack of specific pharmacological probes. M
oreover, compared to that of cation channels, the application of molecular
techniques in cloning and structure-function studies of anion channels is in its
infancy. The latter has provided, however, information suggesting that the
gating of these channels does not necessarily result from mechanisms analogous
to those of cation channels. Thus, information gained from achieving the goals
of this proposal may represent the first insights into novel mechanisms
governing ionic selectivity of anion channels.