* 9707792
* Scalable Program-Analysis-Based Testing and Maintenance:    Infrastructure and Experimentation
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Mary Harrold, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 04/30/2001
* USD 1,612,531.00

Maintenance and testing of software are expensive. Program analysis techniques,
which analyze source code to obtain information about software, promise to
reduce this expense by providing information that helps software engineers
perform specific maintenance and testing tasks such as program understanding,
impact analysis, and regression testing. However, to be adopted or even
considered for adoption, program-analysis-based testing and maintenance
techniques must be empirically demonstrated to scale to large software systems.
The primary goal of this reqearch is to empirically investigate the
applicability of program- analysis-based testing and maintenance techniques to
large- scale systems. The research involves three overall efforts: (1)
construction of an extensible experimental infrastructure including a software
system and repository of subject systems; (2) development of program-analysis
techniques that support testing and maintenance of large- scale systems; (3)
rigorous empirical evaluation of the infrastructure, and of the program-
analysis-based testing and maintenance techniques. The principal results
expected from this work are an improved understanding of, and improved
techniques for, program-analysis-based testing and maintenance -- founded on
hard empirical data. The work will also provide a publicly available
infrastructure, that will support future tool development for, experimentation
with, and education in program-analysis- based testing and maintenance
techniques throughout the software engineering community.