* 9707716
* CAA:  Molecular Endocrinology of Metamorphosis in Flatfish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Jennifer Specker, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2000
* USD 62,749.00

The principal investigator (PI) is a mid-career professor of oceanography
specializing in comparative endocrinology of fishes. The PI's training in
comparative endocrinology and position at the Graduate School of Oceanography,
University of Rhode Island, enable the PI's laboratory to address two societal
issues: (1) the urbanization of the coastal environment and the consequent
potential impact of endocrine-disrupting chemicals on aquatic organisms, and (2)
the collapse of marine fisheries and the unmet demand for seafood products. The
PI's laboratory works on integrative organismal endocrinology and on comparative
protein biochemistry, focusing now on the problems of vitellogenins in
mouthbrooding fish, controlling the timing of metamorphosis in flatfish, and
gastrointestinal differentiation in fish. The overall goal of the career
advancement award is to acquire working knowledge in the area of molecular
endocrinology during a research-oriented sabbatical leave at the University of
Massachusetts. The proposed research aims to describe the spatial and temporal
appearance of thyroid hormone receptors and retinoic acid receptors in flounder
during metamorphosis. The PI will acquire familiarity with the techniques of RT-
PCR-based differential display, generating molecular probes for receptors, in
situ hybridization and dual-label in situ hybridization, and quantitative image
analysis. Characterization of the molecular endocrinology of flounder
metamorphosis provides a powerful foundation for examining responses to changes
in the physical and chemical environment, including endocrine-disrupting
chemicals. This working knowledge would strengthen the PI's service to agencies
and journals in evaluating proposals and manuscripts and in outlining research
initiatives; it would strengthen the teaching of endocrinology and physiology by
permitting firsthand coverage of molecular endocrinology; and it would
strengthen the role of the fish endocrinology laboratory in the new Coastal
Institute where marine mo lecular oceanography is an organizing theme.