* 9707742
* Unified Algorithms and Architectures for Low-Power          Wireless Video
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Douglas Jones, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2001
* USD 479,878.00

The demand for real-time image and video communications places unprecedented
demands on power and data-rate-limited communication links. Present day
communication systems are primarily designed for data communications at a fixed
rate and are poorly matched to video data, which is more tolerant of errors and
is characterized by fluctuating rates. The quality of wireless channels can also
vary greatly, and the video coding and transmission should be adapted to these
changing conditions. Existing hardware implementations are equally inflexible,
being designed independently for pre-specified conditions and a fixed power
consumption. The match between current video compressors, wireless modems, and
their hardware is thus often very poor. This research addresses the joint design
of video communication components to maximize the overall system design of video
communication components to maximize the overall system performance. While
achieving unprecedented performance in low-power image and video transmission
over wireless channels, this research also develops a powerful and general new
methodology for directly coupling chip design with signal processing algorithms
and overall system optimization. The research obtains dramatic improvements in
end-to-end video transport over wireless communication links through adaptive,
joint optimization of source coding, channel coding, and VLSI computation.
Instead of selecting fixed operating points for the source coder, channel coder,
and the VLSI hardware, dynamically adjustable coders and hardware supporting a
variety of operating points is being developed. Specific research tasks to
achieve this overall system goal include: (1) the development of rate-
distortion-optimized coders based on multi-resolution data structures and
tolerance to bit errors; (2) multi- resolution channel coding methods supporting
variable rate-vs.-quality data transmission for multiple channels; (3) real-time
reconfigurable hardware via Dynamic Algorit hm Transformations (DAT) to achieve
low-power operation at various operating points, and, (4) joint optimization of
the above three components subject to overall system power constraints.