* 9707462
* Processes of Aztec State Formation in the Northeastern Basin of Mexico:  Materials Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Deborah Nichols, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2001
* USD 49,982.00

In this collaborative project Drs. Deborah Nichols and Thomas Charlton will
analyze archaeological materials collected at the Aztec site of Otumba which is
located in the Basin of Mexico. The Aztec empire, known both through archaeology
and historic description, had become by 1519 AD the largest state in the history
of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica and the Basin of Mexico, the state's geographic
core, was one of the most urbanized areas in the world. In addition to the
imperial capital at Tenochititian the empire was administered and controlled
through a number of regional centers such as Otumba and how these smaller cities
functioned and were integrated with both rural hinterlands on the one hand and
the capital on the other, is not well understood. In past NSF supported research
the investigators have conducted extensive survey and excavation at Otumba and
have mapped the distribution of numerous cultural materials across the site.
They have also produced a general chronology for the city. The results show that
manufacturing activities are not randomly or evenly distributed across space and
this suggests a form of centralized control. In the present project, the team
will conduct a careful analysis of material remains to determine the sources of
raw materials and to trace their flow across space. They believe, as do many
anthropologists that in empires such as the Aztecs production and distribution
were centrally administered and that this control helped to solidify elite power
and solidify the state. To examine this proposition, the team will: 1. obtain
accurate dates for the development of craft specialization and Otumba's growth
as a center through radiocarbon analysis; 2. clarify manufacturing and
distribution patterns of various commodities, including items locally produced
and some probably imported, through neutron activation analysis of trace
elements to match artifacts with their raw material sources or source areas.
Neutron activation analysis will be applied to obsidians (volcanic glass used to
make tools), basalt, and the clays employed to make pots as well as figurines,
censers and spindle whorls. The Aztec empire covered a significant part of
Mexico and integrated large numbers of people into a single political system.
With a simple technology and lack of horses or other domestic animals for
transportation it is difficult to understand how such an entity could be formed
and maintained for hundreds of years. This project will shed light on the
economic organization of the empire and the role which control over production
and distribution played in the emergence and sustenance of this early state.