* 9707372
* Genetic Basis of Gender Expression in Silene vulgaris,      a Gynodioecious plant
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David McCauley, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9707372 McCauley This project will investigate the genetic determinants of sex
expression in natural populations of Silene vulgaris, a gynodioecious plant. In
plants gynodioecy, or the presence of female and hermaphroditic individuals in
the same population, is fairly common. Sex determination in gynodioecious plants
is often a consequence of the interaction of genes in the cytoplasm that
eliminate male function, and genes in the nucleus that restore it. The study of
S. vulgaris will consist of two parts. First, a complex series of "tester"
crosses will be conducted in order to characterize genetic diversity at the
cytoplasmic and nuclear gene loci. Second, cytoplasmic molecular markers will be
developed so that numerous individuals can be classified according to the male
sterility types identified by the crosses. This will enable a rapid
characterization of the genetic composition of populations. One observation that
is often made of gynodioecious species is that the relative numbers of females
and hermaphrodites (the sex ratio) can vary dramatically from place to place.
One goal of the crosses and molecular studies is to understand the genetic basis
for population to population variation in the sex ratio. This will be one of
just a few investigations of the genetics of gynodioecy in natural plant
populations. The use of male sterility factors to manipulate the gender of
economically important crop plants is an important tool in plant breeding, yet
the phenomenon is not well understood in nature. In addition to potential
benefits to plant breeders, this study will also be of value to the field of
basic population genetics, in that it will contribute to an understanding of how
genetic diversity is maintained within species.