* 9707368
* Phylogeny and Evolution of the Jumping Spider Genus         Habronattus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Wayne Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 125,000.00

9707368 Maddison The proposed work is a reconstruction of the phylogenetic
history of jumping spiders of the genus Habronattus, a primarily North American
group of 95 described species. DNA sequence data from about 70 species will be
gathered for at least three genes, which together with morphological data will
be analyzed to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationships of the species. Then,
using the phylogeny, patterns of character change in chromosomes and behaviors
will be studied. Available data indicate that an XXXY chromosome system has
arisen several times independently. One question to be studied is whether shifts
in chiasma localization released a constraint to allow repeated derivations of
the XXXY system. Another focus is courtship behavior. While females are
cryptically colored, males of many species have elaborate and colorful markings
and structures, and engage in complex behaviors during courtship. Behavioral
data will be analyzed on the phylogeny to seek patterns in the character changes
by which one complex style of courtship is derived from another, and in
distributions of colors and motions in male behavior. These studies will advance
our understanding of chromosomal and behavioral change, and hence of the forces
and constraints underlying diversification.