* 9707962
* INKA Economic Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Terence D'Altroy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 14,431.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Terence D'Altroy and Veronica
Williams will oversee neutron activation analysis of ceramics excavated from a
series of Inka sites in two regions of Argentina. The Inka empire arose in the
highlands of Bolivia and extended its control over a wide area which stretched
from northern Peru to portions of Argentina. Given the lack of writing and a
simple system of roads which ran over extremely rough mountainous terrain, the
development of an such an empire is a remarkable accomplishment. The feat is
even more impressive given the very culturally and linguistically distinct
groups which were incorporated, often against their will into the empire.
Archaeologists wish to understand the mechanisms which the Inka employed to
achieve such integration and this project seeks to examine this question at the
southern extreme of the area which the Inka controlled. In collaboration with
reactor scientists at the University of Missouri, the investigators will conduct
neutron activation analysis of ceramics from a series of sites. This will allow
them to determine the trace element concentrations which serve as `fingerprints`
to indicate which types of ceramics are made from the same kind of clay. This
often allows matching of ceramics with individual clay sources. With this
information it will be possible to determine which ceramics were produced
locally and which were made elsewhere and imported long distances. In particular
the investigators wish to compare the origins of elite finely made Inka wares
which have ritual significance with those used for cooking and other mundane
subsistence tasks. The points of ceramic origin provide insight into the amount
of direct control the Inka exercised. The investigators speculate that if fine
wares are produced locally, Inka rule was indirect and considerable authority
was ceded to local pre-Inka political structures. Importation of ritual Inka
ware suggests more direct control with a tribute system. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide new insight into how complex
organizations such as empires arise. It will also increase our understanding of
one of the most highly developed prehistoric civilizations in the New World.