* 9707527
* Phytoplankton Community Structure in the North Water        Polynya:  Causes and Consequences
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Joyce Lewin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2001
* USD 72,052.00

The structure of the phytoplankton community in the North Water Polynya will be
studied during the summer of 1998. The North Water is a predictable, recurrent
area of open water situated in northern Baffin Bay, which is ice-free beginning
in March. The taxonomy of diatoms and flagellates from Baffin Bay has been
studied in previous decades, and primary production was measured at a few
stations in the southern area of the North Water in the 1970's. Other than these
studies and a 48 hour study in May 1991, little is known of the biological
oceanography of this area which is very rich in marine mammals and birds. The
proposed project will quantify, using epifluorescence microscopy, the algal
populations belonging to various groups, such as diatoms, autotrophic
dinoflagellates and other autotrophic flagellates in terms of cell concentration
and biomass (as carbon) of individual taxa. The project will be part of the
International North Water Polynya Study comprising physical, chemical and
biological studies of the area, and samples will be collected in conjunction
with the Canadian study of primary production. The relation between
phytoplankton community structure and physical, chemical and biological
parameters will be examined. Conclusions will be drawn as to which environmental
conditions lead to removal of carbon to the benthos, and which lead to carbon
remaining in the upper layers. In collaboration with other investigators, the
consequences of a possible future warming of the North Water will be explored,
especially the effects of existing food chains.