* 9707427
* ABR:  Molecular Systematics of Grass Symbionts of the Fungal Family Clavicipitaceae (Hypocreales)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Christopher Schardl, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 135,500.00

9707427 Schardl Building upon an impressive record of recent research, Dr.
Schardl of the University of Kentucky continues his taxonomic and ecological
studies of symbiotic ascomycetous fungi that infect grass plants. These fungal
relatives of the infamous 'ergot' fungus live inside various turf grasses and
other species, and transmit their spores either asexually through the grass seed
("vertical" infection of the grass's progeny) or following sexual reproduction,
through fly-mediated contagion ("horizontal" infection of other grasses in the
habitat). The sexually reproducing fungal species have usually been classified
in the genus Epichloe, of the Clavicipitaceae family, while the asexual or
conidial anamorphs have usually been named in the genus Neotyphodium. Confusion
in the taxonomy has, until now, obscured the interesting symbiotic ecology of
the fungus and its grass hosts. With DNA sequencing of several targeted nuclear
genes, of samples collected over a wide geographical range, and with laboratory
and garden tests of mating success between fungal isolates, Dr. Schardl
continues to analyze the phylogenetic relationships of Epichloe and Neotyphodium
species and suspected relatives. In turn, these genealogically related groups or
clades of fungi are correlated with their host grass plants, to determine
whether this symbiotic association has closely tracked the history of speciation
of the grasses ("co-speciation") or whether new grass hosts are infected, and if
so, whether mostly by sexual or by asexual forms of the fungus. New molecular
methods of DNA sequencing allow fine-scale analysis of genealogical or
phylogenetic relationships among the separately named sexual and asexual forms
of fungi, and are being applied by Dr. Schardl in imaginative ways to an
ecologically fascinating system of fungal symbionts of turf grasses and related
grass species. Whether the fungi "track" the history of speciation of their
grass hosts, whether asexual morphs originate from sexual fungal forms or th e
opposite, and whether fungal species hybridize to produce some of the currently
documented Neotyphodium anamorphs, are just some of the questions being pursued
in this renewed award.