* 9707644
* CAREER:  Enhancement of Minority Research Opportunities     Through the Full Integration of Research and Teaching       Experiences
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Bruce Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2002
* USD 552,372.00

9707644 Jackson Prostaglandins are a family of cyclic fatty acids which are
potent mediators of key physiological processes in a large variety of organisms.
Prostaglandins are continuously synthesized in cell membranes by the sequential
action of the key regulatory enzymes phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and/or
phospholipase C (PLAC), and cyclooxygenase (COX). PLA2 /PLAC mediate the release
of arachidonic acid from the sn-2 position of membrane phospholipids. COX
incorporates two molecules of oxygen into arachidonic acid concomitant with the
cyclization of the carbon chain to produce prostaglandin. Two genes are known to
encode COX, a constitutive COX1 gene and an inducible, early-response COX2 gene.
This research will determine the molecular mechanisms that regulate
prostaglandin synthesis at the level of the COX1 gene promoter and COX1 mRNA.
The education portion of this project includes using this research program to
further develop the Biotechnology Program for non-traditional and minority
students at Massachusetts Bay Community College, to develop a related Marine
Biotechnology Program involving Massachusetts Bay Community College, the New
England Aquarium in Boston, and The University of the Amazon in Brazil; and to
develop a science enrichment program for primary school students and teachers in
the Boston Public School system. %%% Prostaglandins are a family of cyclic fatty
acids which are potent mediators of key physiological processes in a large
variety of species. This research will determine the molecular mechanisms that
regulate prostaglandin synthesis at the level of the COX1 gene. The education
portion of this project includes using this research program to further develop
the Biotechnology Program for non-traditional and minority students at
Massachusetts Bay Community College; to develop a related Marine Biotechnology
Program involving Massachusetts Bay Community College, the New England Aquarium
in Boston, and The University of the Amazon in Brazil; and to develop a science
enrichment program for primary school students and teachers in the Boston Public
School system. ***