* 9707676
* Evolutionary Dynamics of Mitochondrial DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* David Rand, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

9707676 Rand The goal of the research program is to understand the evolutionary
forces acting on variation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). MtDNA is the most
widely used genetic marker in population and evolutionary biology and it is
generally assumed that the variation in mtDNA sequence is neutral, i.e., is not
altered by natural selection. However, a number of recent reports have shown
that mtDNA evolution departs from various neutral models. While non-neutral
mtDNA evolution can compromise specific cases of evolutionary study, departures
from neutral evolution offer opportunities to examine the variety of general
evolutionary forces that can act on mtDNA itself, and on nuclear-cytoplasmic
interactions. The main question the investigator is studying is: Does natural
selection operate differently on interactions between nuclear sex chromosomes
and maternally inherited cytoplasmic genes (such as mitochondrial DNA) than on
interactions between autosomes and mitochondrial DNA (where an autosome is a
biparentally inherited non-sex chromosome). Theoretical models of cytonuclear
population genetics show that selection on cytoplasmic chromosomes and autosomes
cannot preserve genetic variation. A new model shows that selection on
combinations of mtDNAs and sex chromosomes can preserve variation. This model
will be tested with large samples of fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) from
natural populations in distinct habitats. Multiple-marker DNA analysis will be
performed on individual fruit flies using markers spread across the length of
the sex (i.e., X-chromosome) and autosomes (i.e., the 2nd and 3rd chromosomes).
Additional DNA sequence data will be collected to test other models of natural
selection on mildly deleterious mutations in mtDNA. These studies will provide
basic data bearing on how chromosomal inheritance and effective population size
affects evolutionary change, and may lead to a greater understanding of the
general principles of chromosomal coevolution.