* 9707945
* A Morphological and Molecular Investigation of Castaneoid   Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 155,000.00

9707945 Manos The ecologically and economically important family Fagaceae of
oaks, beeches, and chestnuts is most familiar to temperate-zone botanists from a
relative handful of species. But the family has many tropical species, and is
especially diverse in southeast Asia, where Dr. Paul Manos of Duke University
will be conducting field work to sample the two largest genera, Castanopsis and
Lithocarpus. These two genera comprise nearly half of the species diversity in
the family and represent an even greater range of morphological diversity in the
characteristic cupule (the burr or acorn) than found in the temperate-zone
members of the family. One goal of the research is to infer genealogical or
phylogenetic relationships among the many tropical species, by integrating
traditional morphological knowledge of these plants with new molecular data from
DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes, which provide a direct measure of
mutational differences between samples. This phylogenetic framework in turn will
allow analysis of the history of development of various cupule morphologies in
the lineages of tropical and subtropical Fagaceae, especially among cupule types
that are indistinguishable at maturity but suspected of convergent evolution
from different juvenile stages. The range and history of species diversification
in the "tropical chestnuts" or castaneoids are poorly known. Field work, study
of existing herbarium collections, and new DNA sequence data will be brought
together to improve our understanding of the basic taxonomy and phylogeny of
these plants. Tropical diversity often contains key elements to understand the
evolutionary history of plants in the temperate zone, and this is likely to be
the case with the diverse, insect-pollinated Castanopsis and Lithocarpus of
southeast Asia. The studies will prove useful in interpreting morphological
evolution, and will place the major groups of castaneoids into a geographical as
well as phylogenetic framework.