* 9707516
* RPG:  The Role of Integrins in Central Synapses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Yukiko Goda, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Goda, Yukiko IBN - 9707516 Information in the brain is encoded as electrical
impulses. The transfer of information between brain cells - a process critical
for myriad of brain function - is accomplished by converting electrical signal
into chemical signal at synapses which are specialized points of cell-cell
contact. It is likely that cell surface adhesive molecules play an important
role at synapses much like adhesion molecules present at cell-cell contact sites
of non-brain cells. Nevertheless, little is known of the role of cell surface
adhesive molecules at brain synapses. There are many different classes of cell
surface adhesion molecules that are classified according to their functional and
structural relatedness. This project addresses the role of protein family known
as Integrins are important for linking extracellular matrix molecules with
intracellular proteins crucial for maintaining the structural organization
within cells. The aim of this proposal is to establish the expression pattern of
integrins at brain synapses, and to determine the role of integrins in
regulating signal transfer across synapses. The experimental system consists of
dissociated brain cells which after culturing in an incubator, form synapses
with physiological properties indistinguishable from those found in living
brain. Preliminary results demonstrate that integrins are present at synapses in
cultured brain cells, and regulate functional aspects of signal transfer at
synapses. The experiments outlined in this proposal are designed to further
delineate the mechanism by which integrins modulate information transfer at
synapses.