* 9707515
* A New Concept in Glacier Mass Balance
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Keith Echelmeyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2001
* USD 420,010.00

Glacier mass balance provides an important link between climate and changes in
the size and shape or a glacier. Here the investigators propose a new concept
for mass balance, the reference-surface' balance rate, which is independent of
the changing geometry of a glacier. This is a three year project with two goals:
(1) To define and to show the importance of this new type of balance, and to
determine how to measure it within the context of conventional mass balance
programs. (2) To improve the theory of the response of a glacier or ice cap to
changes in climate. The first goal is motivated by the problem that the mass
balance of a glacier depends not only upon climate, but upon the geometry of the
glacier surface. This is a serious complication in finding a connection between
balance and climate. The proposed reference-surface balance rate is directly
connected with climate, and its measurement could become a part of ongoing
balance programs. The second goal is an outgrowth of preliminary work on
defining the reference-surface balance rate. It is a convenient starting point
for several extensions of the theory of the response of a glacier to climate
change. It includes the effects of the dependence of mass balance upon elevation
and upon the three dimensional nature of the surface. The problems to be studied
include the effects of a glacier's geometry on the stability and magnitude of
its response to climate change, the effects of observed geometrical asymmetry
during advance and retreat, and the possibility of deducing the reference-
surface balance rate from conventional mass balance rate.