* 9707206
* Risk-Sensitive and/or Adaptive Identification of Dynamic    Systems by Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* James Lo, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/2001
* USD 194,499.00

This project will address the fundamental issues of robustness and adaptiveness
in the identification of dynamic systems in both series-parallel and parallel
formulations. These two issues have been the topics of major concentrated
research activities in system identification, control and filtering in the past
20 years. generally speaking, a system identifier should be adaptive to
adaptation-worthy environmental parameters and robust to these which are
adptative-unworthy. Taking a synthetic approach inspired by the development of
the artificial neural networks (ANNs) it will lay the mathematical foundations,
develop the methodologies, and test their feasibility's for robust and/or
adaptive identification of dynamic systems in the project. The main idea for
adaptive identification is to use the nonlinear and linear weights of an
adaptive neural identifier as the long and short-term memory respectively, the
former being determined in a prior off-line training and the latter adjusted on-
line by an LMS or RLS algorithm. Such an adaptive neural identifier is expected
to have the advantages of minimizing computation, focusing on learning about and
adapting to the adaptation-worthy environmental parameters, and eliminating poor
local extreme of the performance surface during the operation of the adaptive
neural identifier. This idea was inspired by the way a brain performs
adaptation.