* 9707730
* Analysis of Multiscale Atmospheric Turbulence Structure     Within the Surface Layer of Lake-induced Convention
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Pierre Mourad, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/2001
* USD 302,819.00

9707730 Mourad The Lake-Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a multiple-
investigator project whose ultimate goal is the understanding of how lake-effect
conditions caused by cold air outbreaks over the Great Lakes, produce enhanced
and debilitating snowfall downstream of the Great Lakes as well as influencing
weather patterns in the northeast US. One approach to addressing this research
problem is the documentation and explanation of the effects of enhanced surface
fluxes of heat and moisture from Lake Michigan on multiscale turbulence.
Multiscale turbulence is generally thought to be made up of three classes. The
first is primarily two-dimensional roll vortices (or "large eddies") that scale
with the boundary-layer depth and have axes aligned with the mean boundary-layer
wind. The second class is sub-roll turbulence that also spans the boundary layer
but is three dimensional and is typically convectively-driven. The third class
of atmospheric turbulence, called "gust microfronts" or "ramps", is largely
restricted to the surface layer and is driven by a combination of shear and
convection. These three classes of turbulent structure evolve and interact in
response to the enhanced fluxes from Lake Michigan into the overlying
atmosphere. This study has four main goals. (1) The first is to examine the
spatial evolution and distribution of gust microfronts utilizing in situ
aircraft data. (2) Using the results of (1) and simultaneous synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) images, the second goal is to test the hypothesis that SAR images
can capture the spatially distributed stress patterns on the surface of the
water created by multiscale atmospheric turbulence structure. (3) The third goal
is to correlate geometric features in SAR images with those seen in satellite
images of clouds and with basic parameters that describe boundary-layer
structure. (4) The fourth goal is to work with several co-investigators under
the umbrella of Lake-ICE to understand the interactions between large ed dies,
km-scale thermals and ramps in lake induced convective boundary layers.
Successful completion of this research will provide an improved knowledge of
boundary layer fluxes over the Great Lakes and the ability to detect and
classify various types of boundary layer turbulence using remote, spaced-based
sensors.