* 9707583
* CAA: Anaysis of Endocytosis in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Sandra Lemmon, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1998
* USD 49,944.00

9707583 Lemmon This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
Engineers. A major long-term goal of Dr. Lemmon's laboratory is to understand
the function of clathrin-mediated vesicular transport and to identify and
characterize the proteins involved in this pathway. Studies in her laboratory
have taken advantage of the powerful molecular genetic methods available in
yeast to analyze the function of clathrin. In the last several years, her
studies of yeast clathrin have led to the identification of a number of
additional gene products that may be involved in vesicular transport at late
stages of the secretory / endocytic pathway. Two new classes of genes are being
studied. The first group encodes homologues of subunits of the clathrin adaptor
(AP) complexes. The adaptors are involved in the capture of specific membrane
proteins into clathrin coated pits and they facilitate the assembly of clathrin
onto membranes, which drives vesicle budding. There is evidence for up to four
distinct AP complexes in yeast, yet the function of these adaptors is still not
clear. The second group of genes was identified on the basis of their ability to
rescue the inviability of lethal strains of clathrin heavy chain-deficient
yeast. These genes are referred to as suppressors of clathrin deficiency (SCD
genes). The five SCD genes encode two novel proteins, two that had been
previously identified in yeast, and one that encodes a member of the widely
distributed 14-3-3 protein family. Mutants and biochemical reagents have been
developed that will enable Dr. Lemmon to further examine the function of these
gene products and their role in clathrin-mediated transport pathways. However,
her laboratory currently lacks the expertise to carry out an in depth
investigation of the role of these proteins in endocytosis. Therefore, she has
arranged to spend a sabbatical year in the laboratory of Dr. Howard Riezman at
the Biozentrum of the University of Basel, Sw itzerland. Dr. Riezman's group has
made many of the most significant advances in our understanding of endocytosis
in yeast and has developed methods to study both the internalization and post-
internalization steps of uptake from the cell surface. The goal of this
sabbatical project is to combine the efforts of these two scientists and examine
in detail the potential endocytic roles of the adaptor complexes and the Scd
proteins. In addition, a more complete analysis of endocytosis in clathrin
mutants will be performed. Studies to be carried out during this sabbatical will
enable them to dissect the specific steps in the endocytic pathway requiring
clathrin function. Endocytosis is a fundamental function of most eukaryotic
cells. The group of proteins collectively known as clathrin is important for
endocytosis of many nutrients and signal transducing receptors and for sorting
or retention at the trans Golgi. This collaboration should provide new
information on the machinery required for endocytosis and uncover new regulatory
mechanisms in the endocytic pathway. Pursuing these studies during a sabbatical
year in Dr. Riezman's laboratory will also allow the rapid development of the
project and will enable Dr. Lemmon to acquire important expertise that is
crucial for the continuing research in her own laboratory. ***