* 9707111
* Methods for Matrix Optimization Problems in Control and     Statistical Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2001
* USD 400,000.00

ECS-9707111 Boyd Powerful new methods for various convex matrix optimization
problems have emerged over the last few years. Most of this research has
concentrated on the semidefinite programming problem (SDP), i. e., the problem
of minimizing a linear cost function over linear matrix inequalities (LMIs).
SDPs are convex optimization problems that can be solved with great efficiency
using recently developed interior-point algorithms. These matrix optimization
methods have had immediate practical and theoretical impact in several fields,
notably control systems and combinatorial optimization. In control theory, the
basic idea is to formulate the analysis or synthesis problem in terms of convex
matrix optimization problems, which are then solved numerically. The current
state of research on LMIs in control can be summarized: There has been intensive
research on identifying control problems that can be cast in terms of LMIS, and
those for which an LM1 formulation is unlikely to exist. In the latter case,
bilinear matrix inequalities (BMIS) have been recognized as a unifying form. The
combined activity in mathematical programming and control theory has led to very
rapid progress in interior-point algorithms for solving SDPS, focusing on local
convergence rates, worst-case complexity, etc., and on extending to SDP the
sophisticated and efficient primal-dual interior-point methods developed for
linear programming (LP). Several basic software implementations of interior-
point methods for SDP have become available. These codes have proven useful for
small to medium-sized problems, but tend to be too slow for larger problems,
since they exploit little or no problem structure. LMls are becoming basic tools
in control, much the way Riccati equations became basic tools in the 1960s.
Thus, LMI/SDP solvers are becoming part of the infrastructure of control
(computation and practice), just as Riccati equation solvers are now. The same
techniques can be applied in several other fields. In statistical signal
processing, for example, SDP allows one to define optimization problems that
involve representation and decomposition of covariance matrices. Here many
challenges are still to be found in the problem formulation area (i.e.,
identifying statistical signal processing problems that can be cast in this
framework) but it is already clear that the approach will be rewarding. Perhaps
even more than in control, practical use of matrix optimization in statistics
will require efficient algorithms for large-scale problems. This proposal brings
together researchers in the three key areas involved: control theory,
statistics, and large-scale numerical optimization, in order to address the next
logical areas of research: identification of the problems in statistical signal
processing that can be formulated in terms of LMIS, and the development of more
powerful algorithms (and practical codes) for the matrix optimization problems
that arise in control and statistical signal processing. The research effort
will be complemented with a strong educational component, by integrating the
effort with the newly developed course Convex Optimization with Engineering
Applications. We will transition new research results in statistical signal
processing directly into the course material, which will help broaden the range
of applications presented in the course. The new research on numerical methods
will enter the course in two important ways: first, as an advanced topic on
implementation (missing from the current course), and second, by providing tools
that students can use during the course, especially in projects. Another
important (but less direct) educational goal is to train two PhD students in a
completely interdisciplinary fashion, equipping them with skills that range
from, say, robust control theory or statistics, to optimization theory and
implementation of large-scale numerical algorithms. As the power of computing
continues its exponential rise, researchers with this background will be
increasingly valuable.