* 9707496
* Phylogeographic Consequences of Different Paleoecological   Histories in Eurasian and North American Avifaunas
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Zink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 125,000.00

9707496 Zink Robert Zink and Sievert Rohwer of the University of Minnesota and
the University of Washington, respectively, will carry out a study of the
geographic divergence of mitochondrial DNA from a variety of widespread,
Eurasian species of birds. Their goal is to determine whether common patterns of
genetic variation and divergence within each species across Eurasia can be
documented. Comparisons of DNA sequences within and among populations reveal
whether species are genetically homogeneous across their ranges or whether they
have responded via natural selection or genetic drift to isolating barriers,
such as mountain ranges or glaciers that isolated ancestral populations.
Previous studies by these scientists among New World avifaunas have revealed a
mixture of population structures, although characteristically, relatively little
divergence is observed in regions that were glaciated. Very little is known
about this topic in Eurasia, and Zink and Rohwer predict that far more evident
patterns will be apparent among Eurasian groups because of less severe impacts
of the glaciers. Their comparisons of genetic patterns between North American
and Eurasian species will permit an assessment of genetic responses to
environmental events common to temperate, recently glaciated continental
landscapes. The project also will afford a unique collaboration with scientists
from Russia.