* 9707891
* Robust Control of Non-Minimum Phase Non-Linear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Alberto Isidori, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2000
* USD 162,764.00

ECS-9707891 Isidori In the last few years, new powerful ideas and concepts have
contributed to the development of a number of systematic methods for global
analysis and design of nonlinear feedback systems. A common goal of these
research efforts has been the synthesis of feedback controllers yielding
asymptotic stability (with prescribed region of attraction) and/or asymptotic
tracking (rejection) of selected exogenous commands (disturbances), in the
presence of structured uncertainties, such as parameter variations, and/or
unstructured uncertainties, such has unmodeled dynamics. The actual setup in
which these robust design methods have to be implemented is that in which only a
set of variables (and not the full state) is available for feedback. In this
case the entire design problem becomes of course more demanding, in view of the
need of including; some kind of "state observer" in the feedback architecture.
This problem is particularly felt in the case of tracking, when the most
realistic situation is indeed the one in which only the "tracking error" (and
not the entire reference trajectory) would be available for control purposes. As
it happens for any design scheme dealing with the selection of specific output
maps, the possibility of implementing the above-mentioned methods for feedback
design is deeply influenced by the asymptotic properties of the so-called "zero
dynamics" of the system (the dynamics which arise internally in a system when
input and initial state are such as to constrain the output to be identically
zero). More precisely, a consistent number of these methods for feedback design
require the zero dynamics to be asymptotically stable: systems having this
property are - in analogy with a terminology en vogue for linear systems called
"minimum phase systems". In particular, if a system is minimum phase it is
possible to achieve an arbitrarily small level of attenuation between
disturbances and output, with obvious positive consequences on the ability of
solving pr oblems of robust stabilization in the case of unmodeled dynamics.
However, many physical systems exhibit a non-minimum phase behavior. Motivated
by the importance of being able to robustly control also non-minimum phase
nonlinear systems and by the scarcity of available results in this area, this
research will focus on two directions. The first one deals with problems of
robust stabilization of non-minimum phase nonlinear systems, in the presence of
unmodeled dynamics. Robustness with respect to this kind of uncertainty is
usually dealt with by looking at the controlled system as to the feedback
interconnection of two subsystems, only one of which is accurately modeled, and
then seeking a control law which lowers, as much as possible, some suitably
defined "gain" of the interconnection modeled/unmodeled component. In this
setup, the research will address the problem of finding, for various classes of
non-minimum phase systems, estimates of the lowest achievable "gains" (so as to
reduce the conservativeness of the design). The other direction is to study
problems of robust tracking in the presence of parametric uncertainties. Unlike
the case of linear systems, where the presence of unstable zero dynamics is
generally not an obstruction to asymptotic tracking of prescribed families of
trajectories, in the case of non-minimum phase nonlinear system no method is
available yet to achieve asymptotic tracking, in the presence of large parameter
uncertainties and for arbitrarily large initial conditions. This part of the
proposed research is directed toward the development of systematic methods
yielding semiglobal robust tracking for nonlinear systems having unstable zero
dynamics.