* 9707223
* Optimal Reaction Norms and Genetic Constraints in the       Evolution of Plant Size in Ipomoea purpurea
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2001
* USD 329,940.00

9707223 Rausher The goal of this project is to attempt to understand the degree
to which a model organism, the morning glory Ipomorea purpurea, is optimally
adapted to various environments it encounters. Specifically, this project seeks
to characterize empirically the optimal value for several traits in different
environments and then determine whether natural populations have evolved to
exhibit those values in the respective environments. The project also seeks to
characterize any constraints that may prevent populations from evolving to those
optimal values. Characteristics of the range of natural environments normally
encountered by I. purpurea will initially be surveyed. Using this information,
two field experiments will be conducted in which I. purpurea is grown either a
gradient of soil nutrient levels or a gradient of competitive intensity. The
pattern of natural selection acting on traits related to plant growth and size
will be measured to determine how far the means of these traits are from their
optima in each environment. A set of breeding and selection experiments will
provide a characterization of any genetic constraints acting to prevent
evolution toward these optima, and the importance of these constraints will be
evaluated by computer simulation. Evolution by natural selection is a compromise
between what is favored (how selection acts) and what is possible (determined by
the genetics of organisms). While biologists have made great strides
understanding evolution in model organisms (e.g. fruit flies) living in simple,
controlled environments, much less is known about the evolutionary responses of
plant and animal populations to complex natural environments. The broad aim of
this project is to begin to provide an understanding of such a response in an
organism that typically encounters a complex environment.