* 9707559
* RPG: Phylogeny and Evolution of Mitochondrial DNA in ExtinctMalagasy Primates
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Anne Yoder, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Yoder 9707559 RPG The proposed research project will exploit ancient-DNA (A-DNA)
techniques in order to understand the evolutionary origins and demise of a
diverse assemblage of extinct primates. Mitochondrial DNA will be extracted,
amplified, and sequenced for a comprehensive sample of subfossil Malagasy
lemurs. The samples to be tested range in age from approximately 650 years
before present (b.p.) to more than 10,000 years b.p. DNA sequences will be
analyzed with phylogenetic, molecular evolutionary, and population genetic
methods in order to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of the large-
bodied extinct lemurs relative to the smaller-bodied extant lemurs and in order
to investigate the forces that led to the extinction of these unique mammals.
The comparison of time-interval DNA sequences within a single species lineage
will permit the observation of molecular evolutionary patterns in "real time",
thus contributing a novel perspective to the field of molecular evolution. The
study of changes in DNA sequence and structure over time (i.e.,molecular
evolution) is an increasingly valuable field of scientific investigation. Such
studies have applications for fields as diverse as the analysis and control of
organic pathogens (e.g., the AIDS virus), biogeography, phylogenetics,
physiology, and conservation biology --- just to name a few. The techniques that
are being developed within the community of A-DNA researchers permit scientists
to directly observe changes in DNA structure that had previously been confined
to the realm of extrapolation through the comparison of DNA from living
organisms.Although there is no real theoretical or conceptual principle that
unites the A-DNA discipline, the stringency and difficulty of the laboratory
methods that are employed has created a community of researchers for whom
intercommunication is essential. The proposed research will add to this growing
body of knowledge and will generate an unprecedented amount of DNA seque nce
data from extinct, non-human primates. Questions will be addressed on both
macro- and microevolutionary levels, thereby going beyond "technological
curiosity" to analyze larger questions. First, the project will contribute to
the goal of recovering the phylogeny of all endemic Malagasy primates. The
achievement of this goal is significant for understanding the biogeographic
history of Madagascar and Africa as well as for understanding morphological and
ecological evolution in an extremely diverse assemblage of mammals. Second, the
project will allow a fine-grained analysis of molecular-evolutionary phenomena
such as mutation rate and patterns of nucleotide substitutions. Third, time-
interval sampling of intra-population genetic diversity throughout a known
extinction window could help guide future conservation efforts by identifying
dangerous levels of genetic homogeneity.