* 9707895
* Dissertation Research: Local Identities in                  Transnational Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Lisa Rofel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of California-Santa Cruz. The project will study the changes in
cultural identity of people in Macau, a Portuguese colony on the south coast of
China, in light of the imminent reversion of the colony to China on 12/20/99. In
light of the approaching conversion into a Chinese city the diverse populations
have been defining their cultural identity as a unique blend of Portuguese and
Chinese cultures. The specific questions the project will study are how changing
forms of transnational mobility and identity give new meanings to old colonial
social categories, and how, when, and for whom culture itself has become a
meaningful category. The student will interview four groups in Macau: people
building the Macau Museum of History (which will define Macau's unique
heritage); students, teachers and administrators from two middle schools
(engaged in transmitting the local culture across generations as well as dealing
with the history of colonialism); members of neighborhood associations and
native-place organizations (concerned about defining and maintaining local
traditions); and residents of Macau who are returning to their hometowns in
China. The student will collect life histories, conduct participant observation,
and engage in formal interviews on the subject of changing identity. In addition
the student will travel to Beijing to interview members of the Hong Kong and
Macau affairs office about policy issues and to conduct archival research on the
history of Chinese-Macau-Portugal relations. This research is important because
it will advance our understanding of a global process of transnational and local
political cultural identity formation through this unique case of political
change. Cultural identities are involved in many cases of national and
international crises (e.g., the former Yugoslavia or central Africa), where
ideas of race, nation, Diaspora, city, colony and civilization are hotly
contested and not mutually exclusive. This case study will provide valuable
comparative information to help understand these contemporary processes.