* 9707224
* Novel Oligotrophic Bacteria from the Deep Subsurface        Phylogenetically Related to Plastids
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Terence Marsh, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 04/30/2001
* USD 195,000.00

9707224 MARSH Of the more than a million species of bacteria thought to exist on
Earth today, only several thousand have been named and described carefully. The
characteristics of these undescribed lifeforms may be rather different from
those that are known. Strains of bacteria have been isolated recently from
sedimentary rocks deposited ca. 95 million years ago and currently lying 150-200
meters below the earthOs surface. Some of these strains contain DNA sequences,
representing the small-subunit ribosomal RNA gene, that most closely resemble
those of the chloroplasts of algae and land plants, not other bacteria. Are
these sequences native to the bacteria, or did they come from some other source?
If native, are these bacteria (surprisingly) closely related to plastids? If not
native, how did these genes get into, and stay within, the bacteria, in
competition with the similar genes already there? To answer these and related
questions, Tery Marsh and Frans de Bruijn will conduct molecular biological
research on cultivated bacteria from these deep strata that appear to bear
plastid-like DNA sequences. They will attempt to determine whether the plastid-
like genes are part of the major (OgenomicO) DNA molecules of these bacteria or
are carried on smaller fragments (OplasmidsO). They will sequence additional
genes from these bacteria to determine whether they also resemble counterpart
genes in chloroplasts. They will also look for ways to label these bacteria and
others from the same or similar habitats, using fluorescent markers.