* 9707428
* Phylogenetic Relationships Within the Australian            Sphenomorphus Group (Squamata: Scincidae) and the Study     of Limb Reduction
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Tod Reeder, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 185,000.00

9707428 Reeder The scincid lizards of the Sphenomorphus group include at least
210 recognized species and represent a dominant component of the Australian
herpetological (amphibian and reptile) fauna. These lizards are characterized by
extensive variation in reduction of limbs: eight of the fourteen described
genera contain species that exhibit limb reduction, ranging from loss of a
single phalange (a bony element in a finger or toe) to complete limblessness.
Tod Reeder of the University of San Diego will employ DNA sequences from the
mitochondrially-encoded 12S and 16S ribosomal (r)RNA genes to assess
genealogical relationships among over 70 Sphenomorphus species and allies. He
also will examine a suite of morphological characters, derived primarily from
osteological structures and scales. These data will be used to generate a
genealogy of the species, in part to generate a natural classification. The
patterns of limb reduction in these species will be assessed from within the
context of the genealogy in order to determine the number of times and
trajectories of limb reduction and to determine the life-history traits
associated with these morphological changes. Relative rates of limb reduction
between fore- and hind-limbs also will be assessed. Results from this project
will improve understanding of lizard phylogeny, provide empirical information on
the utility of reductive characters in lizard phylogeny and biology, and
contribute a necessary framework for the investigation of other biological and
ecological attributes.