* 9707552
* Response to Light Quality and Photoperiod in  Arabidopsis:  Plasticity and Pleiotropy
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Massimo Pigliucci, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 127,000.00

Pigliucci 9707552 Molecular geneticists and physiologists working with the model
system Arabidopsis thaliana have achieved a detailed mechanistic understanding
of two distinct forms of phenotypic plasticity: the response to light quality
and the response to photoperiod. These analyses have clearly established that
there is extensive overlap among the genes that regulate these two forms of
plasticity, raising questions about the evolutionary origins and ecological
implications of pleiotropy and genetic redundancy. The PIs' understanding of
these genetic details allows us to address a complex question: how do plants
integrate a suite of cues that provide information about different aspects of
multifactor selective environments? For annual plants, light quality serves as a
specific and reliable cue for present and imminent competition for light,
because encroaching competitors alter light quality (i.e., the ratio of red to
far-red light - R:FR). Similarly, in the temperate regions where A. thaliana
grows, the length of the photoperiod is an indicator of seasonality. Can natural
populations of A. thaliana respond to selection on the ability to sense and
respond to light quality cues? How strong is the relationship, if any, between
the R:FR-mediatedplasticity syndrome, andphotoperiod-mediated plasticity? The
PIs will propose a short-term selection experiment with replicated selection and
control lines. The PIs will work with a large natural population already under
intensive study in East Tennessee. We will select directly on the R:FR-mediated
plasticity of flowering time. While assessing the response to this direct
selection, we will also examine two forms of indirect response. First, was there
a response in the R:FR-mediated plasticity of other traits? Second, was there a
response in the photoperiod-mediated plasticity (i.e., a different cue) of the
same trait, flowering time? The PIs' plan to address the interaction among
traits and be tween R:FR- and photoperiodmediated plasticity in a series of
mutant lines. These mutants lack specific photoreceptor genes that affect a
suite of traits, including reproductive fitness. Furthermore, in these mutant
lines and their associated wild types, normal and altered patterns of plasticity
occur in the same genetic background. Thus, it is possible to make strong
inferences about how a gene (or genes) controlling plasticity affects the whole
organism, including its performance or fitness (pleiotropy).