* 9707476
* Tunable Interaction Potential in Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Suspensions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Amy Larsen, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9707476 Larsen The proposed research would develop a technique for continuously
adjusting the interaction between charged colloidal spheres. The application of
a rotating electric field will induce a dipole moment in the dielectric spheres,
resulting in a net attractive interaction. This attractive interaction would be
continuously tunable by varying the voltage used to create the electric field.
The quantitative functional form of the induced interaction will be measured
using blinking optical tweezers. This tunable interaction will then provide
unique opportunities for studying phase transitions in the model system of
colloidal spheres. Notably, the technique could be used to help discern the
fundamental nature of two dimensional phase transitions. Some experiments have
indicated a continuous transition; others demonstrate an abrupt transition
reminiscent of three dimensional transitions. Recent studies (Marcus and Rice,
PRE 55 p.637, 1997) have suggested that the range and nature of the interaction
potential would allow for direct tests of the influence of the interaction on
the type of phase transition which occurs. %%% The proposed research would
develop a method for continuously adjusting the interaction between tiny charged
spheres. This interaction can be continually tuned by exploiting the electrical
properties of the spheres, namely through the application of an electric field.
Such spheres are a popular model system for studying melting and freezing
transitions such as ice melting to water. The freezing transition occurs
abruptly at a specific temperature for bulk samples of water for example,
however, the nature of the transition for a very thin film has not yet been
resolved. Some experiments indicate that the transition for the thin film is
abrupt as in the bulk sample; others have demonstrated that the transition is
gradual, like jello solidifying-it continually gets stiffer and stiffer. Recent
studies have suggested that the thin fi lm transition depends very sensitively
on the form of the interaction between the spheres. By developing a technique to
continuously tune the interaction between the spheres, the influence of this
interaction on the thin film transition could be directly tested. ***