* 9707774
* Dissertation Research: Translocal Indentity In Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Sylvia Yanagisako, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 12/31/1999
* USD 9,759.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Stanford University studying individuals and organizations in Indonesia who are
defined as having minority social status. Indonesia is attempting to develop a
national, capitalist, middle-class identity, while at the same time the
individuals to be studied are influenced by a global movement concerned with
issues of civil rights and disease. The western model of behavior stresses
individual choice and responsibility, while the traditional Indonesian model
stresses group values derived from families or religious communities. The
project will assess how individuals of minority sexual orientation combine their
local experiences with global concepts and issues in light of Indonesia's
emerging national movement for legitimization and acceptance. The student will
study in three cities, using ethnographic techniques and intensive interviews as
well as observations. The sites will be a large, central Muslim industrial city
with strong national and global connections, a Hindu city in a tourism and
migration center, and a provincial city distant from the centers. Through
volunteer work as a HIV educator in local HIV/AIDS centers in each place the
student will study the history, structure and activities of minority sexual
activist groups as well as their understanding of the disease. Focus groups of
activist as well as non-activist persons will be conducted in each site to probe
local conceptions of identity, civil society and disease. The Indonesian
minority sexual behavior movement is emerging at the same time that a new
national culture and middle-class identity are developing, in the context of
global media forces and international aid activities. This project will show how
Indonesians use these political and economic categories together with more
traditionally cultural categories like gender, kinship and the family, to
interpret their own identities and the notion of community. This study will
advance our understanding of how marginal groups relate to dominant cultural
categories emanating from both their traditional society and from international
sources.