* 9707862
* U.S-Japan Cooperative Science:  Research on Strategic       Cycle Time of World Class Manufacturing Companies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Roger Schroeder, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/2000
* USD 33,200.00

9707862 Schroeder This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
between Professor Roger Schroeder of the University of Minnesota and Professor
Michiya Morita of Gakushuin University in Japan. The researchers will undertake
a study on the effect of development cycle time and production cycle time on
manufacturing effectiveness in both the U.S. and Japan. Additionally, they will
study the effect of manufacturing strategy and quality in the two countries on
the resulting cycle time. Reduction of cycle time and the associated
manufacturing strategy has been an important objective of companies in both
countries. They will attempt to determine: 1) why similarities and differences
exist; 2) how cycle time reduction facilitates competition and cooperation among
firms; and 3) how quality and cycle time are interrelated. The researchers will
visit factories in the U.S. and Japan to develop case studies in order to
extract theoretical propositions and implications. This collaboration consists
of researchers who are very knowledgeable in their field and will be invaluable
to each other in gaining access to the companies they plan to survey. This
research has significance to industry because it will suggest the best practices
for maximizing plant performance, using a broad set of performance criteria. It
is important to academia because it will advance knowledge by using multiple
theories and multiple disciplines to address a question of trade-offs, which
have not been effectively addressed by previous research. Through the exchange
of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge
and promote international understanding and cooperation. ***