* 9707543
* East Coast Computer Algebra Day, Northeastern University,   Boston, MA, May 3, l997
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Gene Cooperman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 02/28/1998
* USD 7,000.00

A one day meeting, called the East Coast Computer Algebra Day, will be held at
Northeastern University, Boston, on Saturday, May 3, 1997. The purpose of this
meeting is to stimulate interest in and enhance understanding of the technical
aspects of computer algebra, by providing a way for those in the region who are
active or interested in becoming more active in computer algebra to meet with
each other in an inexpensive and easily accessible way. This meeting will be
more informal than the annual ISSAC meetings, with ample time for unstructured
interaction. Participation by the region's graduate students will be
particularly encouraged through special invitation to contribute to the poster
sessions, and through travel support. In addition, the offer to fund travel and
hotel for graduate students makes this is an important opportunity to attract
more women and minorities into the computer algebra community. For many
professionals and graduate students on the East Coast, the current meeting
represents the most accessible opportunity over two years to meet with a
significant portion of the computer algebra community. Both ISSAC and IMACS
(major computer algebra meetings) were held in Europe last year, and will be
held in Hawaii in summer, 1997. Northeastern University is inside Boston itself,
with excellent mass transportation, including subway connections to bus, train
and plane. Three invited speakers will anchor the meeting and will help attract
participants. The invited talks and poster sessions contributed by the community
will cover the breadth of computer algebra: algorithms, software, and
applications.