* 9707991
* Response of a Cycling, Diverse Cell Population to Toxic     Stress:  Dose-Rate Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 62,300.00

Hahnfeldt 9707991 When a cell population is subjected to toxic or transforming
doses of chemical or radiation agents, the net population effect depends not
only on the total dose but also on the time course of dose delivery, i.e. one
has dose-rate effects. Dose-rate effects are not only very important in
themselves but give insight into the underlying biochemical mechanisms and
kinetics of damage formation. For ionizing radiation, DNA repair usually leads
to direct dose-rate effects, i.e. less damage if a given dose is prolonged. But,
for dynamic cell populations, inverse dose-rate effects, with more damage for
prolonged irradiation, also occur. The inverse dose-rate effects are due to the
first part of a prolonged dose delivery preferentially killing the more
sensitive cells in a diverse cell population, and biological processes then
driving the preferentially spared, more resistant cells into more sensitive
states, where the remainder of the dose can act upon them more effectively. Such
resensitization is often due to redistribution of the cell population attendant
on movement through the cell cycle. The investigator studies dose-rate effects
for induced damage to a heterogeneous, dynamic population, by combining standard
models for cell population dynamics with standard models for cell damage.
Various population dynamics models are be used, having the common feature that
there is a well-defined asymptotic growth rate and an asymptotically stable
population structure. Recent resensitization theorems on the killing of cycling
cells are extended to theorems on cell populations having additional diversity.
Biologically important examples under investigation include: (a) populations
consisting of more than one age-structured subpopulation, (b) maturity-
structured populations (with cell cycle synchrony loss ascribed to variable age
progression over time), and (c) populations subjected to environmental
stochasticity. Quantitative models, developed in p reliminary studies, of the
inverse dose-rate effect for in vitro transformation, an indicator of cellular
mutagenesis are generalized. Adverse effects of radiation (or chemicals) in the
environment often occur at low dose rates over long periods of time. For
practical reasons, laboratory studies of the parameters that govern the adverse
effects normally use much shorter time periods and much higher dose rates. To
bridge this gap, modeling of dose-rate effects is needed. One dose-rate effect
is observable for populations, e.g. of cells, that possess any sort of
susceptibility variation over time to toxic insults. Under these conditions,
prolonging the delivery of a fixed total dose e.g., by halving the intensity (or
concentration) and doubling the exposure time will not have neutral effect but
will instead change the efficacy of that fixed total exposure. This is because
more of the population members, as they undergo their sensitivity variations
naturally over time, will now have the opportunity to display their more
susceptible states in time to be affected by the exposure. This pattern is
different from that anticipated in most laboratory studies. Over a wide range of
conditions, the difference can in fact make a given dose more damaging when
delivered over a prolonged period rather than rapidly, but for some other
conditions, the opposite result can be expected. Mathematical theorems are
developed to elucidate these dependencies. Important implications of this
investigation include the prediction of cellular mutagenesis and transformation
frequencies due to ambient, long-duration stress conditions.