* 9707220
* An Experimental Study of the Role of Gamete Recognition     in Reproductive Isolation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Stephen Palumbi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2001
* USD 280,000.00

9707220 Palumbi The genetic basis for variation in fertilization success will be
determined by examining the interaction of eggs and sperm from a well-studied
species of coastal marine invertebrate. Prior work on this species, the Hawaiian
sea urchin Echinometra mathaei, has shown that different males possess different
alleles for a gene that determines the attachment of sperm to eggs. The proposed
research will determine whether males with different alleles have sperm with
different attachment properties, and if eggs tend to be fertilized better by
sperm from males with particular alleles. We will use a combination of
microscopic eterminations of fertilization success of different males, and a PCR
assay of which sperm actually fertilize which eggs to determine the degree to
which genetic variation at the sperm attachment locus influences fertilization
success. The interaction of eggs and sperm is crucial to successful
fertilization, yet is one of the most difficult biological processes to study.
The ability of different males to fertilize eggs from a particular female
sometimes varies enormously, but we have little idea what types of mechanisms
might cause this variation. Recently, it has been shown in some species that
different males differ genetically at loci that determine aspects of sperm-egg
attachment, and this provides a powerful system to investigate for the first
time the genetic basis for differences in fertilization. The results will
illuminate how natural selection might be acting to maintain fertilization
polymorphisms in natural populations, and may help explain the rapid and novel
patterns of molecular evolution at genetic loci involving gamete interactions.