* 9707459
* Tracing Upper Arctic Circulation Via Barium, Oxygen Isotopesand DOM Fluorescence
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Kelly Falkner, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2000
* USD 113,693.00

Approximately ten percent of the world's total river discharge flows into the
Arctic Ocean, strongly influencing its physical and chemical properties.
Determining the fate of river waters flowing into the Arctic is necessary for
understanding oceanic circulation in the Arctic and its links to global climate,
and for assessing the transport of radioactive and industrial wastes dumped into
the rivers and shallow marginal seas of the Arctic. A variety of physical and
chemical tracers, including temperature, salinity, alkalinity, 3He, tritium,
halocarbons, nutrients, and oxygen isotopes, have been applied to investigations
of Arctic circulation. These tracers have been successfully used with simple
linear mixing models to distinguish the riverine component from sea-ice
meltwater, Pacific, and Atlantic components of Arctic Ocean waters. None of
these tracers, however, are able to distinguish between waters from different
rivers within the Arctic. Past work has shown the utility of dissolved barium
(Ba) as a naturally occurring geochemical tracer that can offer new insights
into oceanic circulation in the Arctic, particularly with regards to its
riverine component. Ba concentrations are highly elevated in the Mackenzie River
(the only major North American river flowing directly into the Arctic) relative
to any of the Eurasian Arctic rivers (i.e. the other nine of the ten largest
rivers flowing directly into the Arctic). The investigators will analyze water
samples collected from 1993 to 1996 to verify that the geographical distribution
of Ba in the surface waters of the Arctic Ocean reflect the significant
difference between Ba concentrations in the Mackenzie and Eurasian Arctic
rivers, and that Ba can be used to distinguish between North American and
Eurasian sources of river discharge to the Arctic and thus provide information
not available from other tracers of oceanic circulation in the Arctic. Ba data
will also be combined with other tracer fields obtained over the same period of
ti me to quantitatively map freshwater contributions throughout the upper
Arctic. Using this background information, the investigators will examine
continuous UV-fluorescence records generated from sensors mounted on the hull of
the nuclear submarine USS Pogy in 1996 during the SCICEX96 expedition throughout
the Arctic interior. These data will provide information about the distributions
of both marine and terrestrial derived dissolved organic matter (DOM).
Terrestrial DOM may prove useful as a tracer of riverine discharge to the Arctic
Ocean and the simultaneous, continuous records of both components will improve
our knowledge of carbon cycling within the Arctic.