* 9707117
* Constructivist Reflections: World Of Water Project Planning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Dwight Downs, Discovery 2000 Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,518.00

9707117 Kindervater "Constructivist Reflections: World of Water Project
Planning" is a planning activity to be carried out by Discovery 2000, Inc. They
are developing a 14,000 sq. ft. area of aquatic exhibits and support spaces that
will increase visitors understanding of the science concepts related to water,
aquatic habitats, and organisms. The exhibit area will be developed in two
phases. Phase I will be completed in the spring of 1998. It will consist of 15
or so fresh-and saltwater habitat tanks, a learning laboratory, a small program
theater, a salt marsh touch pool and eight interactive exhibits. Phase II, for
which this planning support will be used, will consist of an additional 25
interactive exhibits and associated programs. The Phase I area will serve as an
experimental laboratory for the creation of the Phase II learning activities.
With this planning grant, they will hold three staff development workshops, a
planning seminar focusing on the learning theory of constructivism and how it
can inform and drive exhibit and program development, produce a report of the
seminar proceedings, and identify and recruit a national advisory team to assist
with the development of Phase II. As a result of the planning activity their
staff will be informed about constructivist theory and its application to museum
exhibits and activities, they will increase their knowledge of front-end
evaluation strategies, they will develop new community and professional
partnerships, and they will have a plan to use as they move forward with the
implementation of Phase II exhibits.