* 9707817
* CAA:  Differential Gene Expression Related to Calcium       Oxalate Formation in Grape
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Mary Webb, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 61,200.00

In most higher plants, certain cells become specialized to accumulate calcium
and precipitate it as crystalline calcium oxalate. These cells appear to
function in bulk regulation of calcium by sequestering excess calcium, thereby
reducing levels of free ionic calcium within the plant. Plant cells that
sequester calcium oxalate exhibit distinct structural and biochemical
differences as they differentiate for this role. Dr. Webb's research goals focus
on understanding what stimulates plant cells to develop for this specialized
function, and how the cell controls the crystallization process. The primary
objective of her current research is the application of molecular approaches to
identify genes that are differentially expressed at early stages in the
development of crystal-forming cells. Molecular studies will be initiated with
two tissues in grape, endosperm and root cortex, which have contrasting patterns
of crystal morphology and development. Differentially expressed genes will be
identified using mRNA differential display to compare distinct populations of
mRNA from each of these tissues. Messages from endosperm will be compared at
selected developmental stages, and those from roots after manipulating calcium
nutrition to alter crystal development. After differential expression of
selected cDNAs is confirmed, they will be sequenced and compared to known
sequences in computer databases. Full-length cDNA clones will be isolated and
characterized. Clones that have potential roles in calcium transport, oxalate
metabolism, or vacuole function will be of particular interest. To identify
genes specifically expressed in crystal idioblasts, the cellular localization of
expression will also be determined for selected cDNAs using in situ
hybridization. These studies will form the basis for future research to
determine how expression of particular genes and gene products are important in
calcium oxalate crystallization and the differentiation of crystal-forming
cells. Correlated studies will examine the structural development of crystal-
forming cells in grape roots during their differentiation. A variety of
approaches will be explored using scanning confocal microscopy to observe unique
features of these cells. A primary objective in this work will be to examine the
development of the membrane systems that compartmentalize calcium oxalate
crystals within the vacuole. All of the research to be conducted under this
Career Advancement Award emphasizes activities and techniques that are new to
Dr. Webb and will significantly enhance her research and advisory capabilities.