* 9707470
* Mapping of Genetic Factors Causing Genotype-Environment     Interaction for Fitness in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1997,07/31/2000
* James Fry, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2000
* USD 305,000.00

9707470 Fry Natural populations of animals and plants often harbor heritable or
genetically-based variation for traits closely related to reproductive fitness,
such as juvenile survival or egg production. The existence of this variation
presents a puzzle, because natural selection is expected to eliminate variants
with low fitness. According to the environmental heterogeneity hypothesis,
genetic variation for fitness traits is maintained because different genotypes
have highest fitness at different times or in different places. Although much
indirect evidence supports this hypothesis, fully evaluating the hypothesis has
proven difficult, because to do so requires knowledge of how different alleles
(variants of individual genes) affect fitness in different environments,
information that is seldom available. In particular, for environmental
heterogeneity to maintain variation, "trade-offs" must be present, such that
alleles that increase fitness in some environments decrease fitness in others.
In the proposed work, the chromosomal locations of genes affecting fitness on
different diets, food with and without ethanol, will be determined in the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster, in order to determine whether trade-offs are
present. Ethanol is a natural component of breeding sites of D. melanogaster,
and variation in ethanol levels has been proposed to maintain genetic variation
in populations of this species. The proposed work makes use of large laboratory
populations that are adapted to food either containing or lacking ethanol; on
each type of food, the two populations maintained on that food type have
substantially higher fitness than the populations maintained on the other food
type. Chromosomal regions responsible for these fitness differences will be
mapped, in order to determine whether regions causing higher fitness on one food
type give rise to lower fitness on the other. If this work produces evidence for
trade-offs, an important assumption of the environmental heterogene ity
hypothesis will be supported. Whether environmental heterogeneity maintains
genetic variation for fitness traits has implications for a number of important
biological issues, including how new species are formed, and what determines the
degree of ecological specialization of populations. In addition, a full
understanding of the factors maintaining genetic variation for fitness traits is
important for analyzing the potential for pest species to adapt to new crop
varieties or pesticides, and for designing strategies for maintaining the long-
term viability of populations of rare, endangered species. The proposed work
will therefore make contributions on both basic and applied fronts.