* 9707548
* Evolution of a Multigene Family: Mhc Class II Genes in Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Scott Edwards, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

9707548 Edwards The Mhc (major histocompatibility complex) is a group of genes
-- a multigene family -- that help defend vertebrates, including humans, against
parasites and infectious disease. In humans and other mammals, various groups of
Mhc genes exist, known as families and subfamilies. The most well known of these
are called class I and class II. There are 3-5 class II genes in most mammals;
these are very distinct from one another, as indicated by the large number of
differences one can find between sequences of their DNA. By contrast, the class
II genes of birds appear to be much more similar to one another, i.e., less
diverse than those of mammals. This similarity is puzzling because diversity
among Mhc genes is a major way in which vertebrates are thought to be able to
recognize the diversity of infectious agents in nature. It suggests there may be
less diversity among genes in birds than in mammals, despite presumably similar
needs for protection against parasites. This research will help characterize the
similarities and differences among the class II genes in 5 divergent lineages of
birds in order to determine whether they have remained distinct as in mammals
(the divergent evolution model), or have become similar (homogenized) to one
another (the concerted evolution model). These two models can be distinguished
by the pattern of phylogenetic relationships of the different bird genes to one
another. Class II genes from several songbird species will be isolated and the
sequences of these genes will be aligned and compared phylogenetically. The
presence of pseudogenes will suggest yet a third model of multigene family
evolution, namely the 'birth and death' model. Determining which of these models
describes the evolution of Mhc class II genes in birds will help indicate
whether the mammalian Mhc is unique in its pattern of evolution, or whether bird
Mhc is also characterized by this pattern. Understanding the pattern of
multigene family evolution will help yield insig ht into how the genomes of
vertebrates evolve. Because Mhc genes are important for resistance to disease,
understanding the mechanisms diversifying bird Mhc genes could also be important
for conservation of endangered species and for increasing our ability to
manipulate disease susceptibility in humans.