* 9707087
* Collaborative:  Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and         Diversification of Extant Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Paul Wolf, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 94,990.00

9707087 Wolf In a three-institution collaboration with colleagues at Chicago's
Field Museum of Natural History and at the University of California at Berkeley,
Dr. Paul Wolf of Utah State University is amassing a major database of molecular
and morphological characters of representatives of the 30 or so families of
living ferns, in order to construct an overall phylogenetic framework for ferns.
Building upon the impressive results of a 1994 symposium of fern specialists,
with an international team that produced preliminary results for this effort
(published in 1995), Wolf and his colleagues are continuing a major DNA
sequencing project for four genes, two from the chloroplast genome and two from
the nucleus, that hold promise of yielding informative variation for
genealogical analyses. This molecular database in turn is to be supplemented
with traditional anatomical and morphological features drawn from the vegetative
and reproductive parts of the same ferns analyzed for their DNA, features used
standardly in their taxonomic identification and classification. A well-resolved
phylogeny for ferns will facilitate future work on the patterns and sequences of
character evolution in ferns, and on the Cretaceous radiation and
diversification of the major group of ferns, the "polypodiaceous" group. A
phylogeny also will provide a foundation for family- and genus-level taxonomic
revisionary research. Using comparative methods, researchers can explore
patterns of association among characters for correlated evolutionary changes,
that may help explain the success or failure (extinction) of various lineages
within the ferns.