* 9707997
* Late Holocene Human Impacts on Pacific Coast Bird           Populations:  Evidence from the Emeryville Shellmound       Avifauna
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Jack Broughton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 55,614.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jack Broughton will analyze faunal
remains recovered from archaeological excavation at the Emeryville Shellmound
located the shoreline of San Francisco Bay. This deeply stratified site was
first occupied ca. 2,600 years ago and it records human habitation and use of
local resources over a roughly 2,000 year period. Prehistoric Native Americans
lived at the site and the faunal remains they discarded provide detailed insight
into their hunting and subsistence practices. Such materials are both abundant
and extremely well preserved. In his doctoral dissertation work, also funded by
NSF, Dr. Broughton analyzed fish and mammalian faunas. In this current project
he will extend his study to avian materials. From prior work it is clear that
people hunted birds extensively and large numbers of both individuals and
species are present in the archaeological collections. Dr. Broughton will
identify materials to a species level. He will also develop a method to
determine the age at which cormorants were harvested and thus be able to examine
the age structure of the population. Given the stratified nature of the site it
will be possible to determine how harvesting practices changed over time. Both
archaeologists and paeloecologists wish to understand the effect of Native
American hunter-gatherers on the prey they hunted. Paleoecologists wish to know
whether the environment which the first colonists observed was `natural` and
essentially unaffected by humans or whether, in fact, hunter and gatherers at
relatively low population densities had a significant impact. Archaeologists
want to determine whether such populations were affected by human-induced
resource scarcities and thus needed to change their subsistence strategies over
time. Dr. Broughton's research should provide important insight into this
question. Through the use of models derived from optimum foraging theory one can
predict how species composition and age structure change when bird populations
are stressed and their numbers decrease. Thus, this analysis will provide direct
insight on human impact on the environment and, in turn, the effect this change
had on subsequent human behavior.