* 9707474
* RPG: Population Dynamics and Life History Evolution in      Metapopulations of Social Spiders
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Leticia Aviles, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Aviles 9707474 Plant and animal populations are naturally subdivided. Except for
the occasional exchange of migrants or the recolonization of vacated sites with
members of existing subunits, population subdivision in some species is strong
enough that the subunits are largely independent from one another. An extreme
example of such metapopulation structure are the social spiders, organisms that
form colonies that are both social groups and relatively small, self-sustaining,
and largely isolated populations. Using social spiders in the genus Anelosimus
as a model system, the study that will follow the planning activities described
here will investigate how parameters that govern the growth of local populations
(in this case, colonies) can also affect the structure and stability of the
entire metapopulation. The study will compare species that exhibit a three-fold
difference in the size of their brood, but are similar in other aspects of their
biology. A hypothesis that this study will test is that larger brood sizes lead
to colonies that oscillate in size and undergo more frequent dispersal and
extinction events. Computer simulations will complement this empirical study by
exploring whether life history parameters that lead to local unstable dynamics
can evolve in a metapopulation and whether stability at the metapopulation level
is possible given different levels of instability of the local populations. This
planning grant will make it possible to (1) explore alternative species and
field sites to be included in the study, (2) test the feasibility of
manipulative experiments to study colony extinction and dispersal in these
social spiders, and (3) explore alternative ways of analyzing the type of data
to be collected in the field. The field aspects of this project involve visits
to two tropical rainforest areas in Ecuador and one in Peru and the
participation of American, Ecuadorian, and Peruvian students. In addition to
addressing intriguing aspects of the biology o f social spiders, this study will
(1) provide a test to the theory that large rates of growth, in combination with
density-dependence and time delays, can lead to unstable population dynamics or
chaos; (2) shed light on the causes and consequences of local population
extinction and dispersal; (3) provide insights into the interplay between group
and individual selection in the evolution of life history traits in
metapopulations. These are issues of broad significance in ecology and evolution
and of relevance to the conservation of species in fragmented landscapes.