* 9707163
* Probing the Effects of Solute-Solvent Interactions and      Solvent Free Volume on the 13C Spin-Lattice Relaxation of   C60
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Art Rodriguez, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 05/31/2001
* USD 172,002.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Art Rodriguez of East
Carolina University and Ned H. Martin of The University of North Carolina at
Wilmington in their ongoing measurements of spin-lattice relaxation rates as a
function of temperature and field strength, in various organic solvents. Their
goals are (i) to determine the magnitude of the chemical shift anisotropy (CSA)
and spin rotation (SR) contributions to the spin-lattice relaxation rate of
buckminsterfullerene(C60) in various solvents; (ii) to determine the relative
importance of solute-solvent interactions and solvent free volume on the
magnitude of the CSA and SR contributions; (iii) to model C60 in the various
solvents; and (iv) to extend these studies to C70. Nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) relaxation measurements are one of the most powerful techniques for
investigating a variety of condensed phase phenomena. The discovery of
buckminsterfullerene and other related fullerenes has generated a great deal of
interest into the study of its chemical as well as its physical properties.
While a number of researchers have focused on investigating the solid state NMR
properties of this molecule, very few details are known concerning the condensed
phase carbon-13 spin-lattice relaxation rate and factors affecting this mode of
relaxation.