* 9707359
* Weighted Approximation in the Complex Plane and Iterative   Methods, via Potential Theory and Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Richard Varga, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 07/31/2001
* USD 84,827.00

9707359 Richard S. Varga The goal of this proposal is to attack basic problems
in polynomial and rational approximation, with varying weights, in the complex
plane, by means of potential theoretic techniques. Recently, the proposers have
begun fruitful initial investigations in this area, resulting in a number of new
research manuscripts, which we consider to be of break-through character. We
clearly feel that these initial investigations are so promising as to warrant
the submission of this research proposal to the National Science Foundation.
But, an important and novel feature of this proposal is that connections, with
the efficientsolution of large nonsingular systems of linear equations by
iterative methods, are directly associated with this theoretical work in the
complex plane by potential theoretic methods. Thus, the proposed research
bridges research in complex function theory and numerical analysis, and will
have a strong numerical component. Problems arising in large-scale circuit
design, oil recovery via petroleum reservoir machanics, and the design of
nuclear reactors for generating electrical power, all have the following item in
common: the modeling of these physical phenomena leads to massive nonsingular
systems of linear equations, whose unknowns can exceed one million. To
efficently solve these systems, iterative methods are commonly used. One aim of
this proposal is to use tools, from the fields of potential theory anddd complex
function theory, to theoretically attack a specific question on how best to
iteratively such large systems of equations.