* 9707154
* Dissertation Research:  Development of Early Neolithic; Use-wear Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Ofer Bar-Yosef, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Sho Yamada will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand one of the
most basic transitions in human prehistory: the Neolithic revolution which marks
the change from a hunting and gathering to a farming and herding way of life. It
was this shift which established the subsistence base from which civilizations
in many parts of the world arose. This project approaches the issue through
examination of the developmental of early agricultural society in the southern
Levant (Israel and Jordan), the region where plant domestication first took
place. Mr. Yamada will use lithic use-wear analysis, the microscopic study of
edge wear on stone tools. Different activities - cutting wood, scraping skins,
harvesting grasses - leave different microscopic traces on stone tool edges and
through their examination it is possible to infer the tasks for which particular
kinds of stone tools were used. Once specific tasks and their frequencies are
known it is then possible to reconstruct subsistence technology, gain insight
into social organization and see how these changed over time. A series of major
tool types from 19 sites will be examined. The sites derive from both woodland
and steppe zones and thus will allow Mr. Yamada to determine the effect of
environment on this cultural transformation. In use wear studies, it is
necessary to examine local raw materials and experimentally determine the wear
which results from a variety of activities. To accomplish this goal, Mr. Yamada
will have an Israeli flintworker duplicate archaeologically known tool types
from appropriate raw materials. These will then be used for a variety of
purposes in a carefully controlled context. This experimental program includes
harvesting wild grains and other plants under varying conditions with a number
of sickle blade types, sheep shearing and butchering, soil digging and a various
of domestic tasks. Mr. Yamada will conduct quantitative analysis of wear change
through the use of computer image processing. The results will then be applied
to a range of archaeological materials. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide insight into the development of agricultural and
pastoral societies in the Near East. It will also help to refine use wear
analysis an archaeological tool. Finally it will assist in training a promising
young scientist.