* 9707092
* Monitoring and Assessment of International Research and     Development
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Robert Shelton, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 12/31/2001
* USD 3,732,134.00

1. AWARDEE STATEMENT OF WORK a. Loyola College shall be wholly responsible for
the management and operation of the International Technology Research Institute
(ITRI), which operates the World Technology Evaluation Center (WTEC). ITRI will
plan, organize, conduct, and manage technology assessments, using the
methodology and procedures described in proposal ENG-9707092, dated December 9,
1996, submitted by Loyola College to NSF. b. The mission of WTEC is to provide
U.S. government, industry, and academia with technical studies of the best
research and development abroad. In addition to conducting new studies under
this cooperative agreement, center operations will provide information to the
public concerning past studies, World Wide Web service of studies concluded
under previous grants and agreements with NSF, and liaison with parties
interested in transferring technology gained since the establishment of the
centers at Loyola. c. WTEC will conduct up to 16 studies to benchmark
technologies in foreign counties. The studies will be divided among three types
that differ in the breadth of their objectives, the extensiveness of the final
report, and the methodologies for selecting the targeted technology and an
expert panel. The proposal forecasts six standard studies, five mission-directed
(agency) studies, and five CISAR studies. The actual blend of studies will be
determined by the interest of NSF and the sponsoring agencies, and may differ to
the extent that funding resources permit.