* 9707697
* The Evolution of Alleles Conferring Symbiotic               Specialization in Legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Matthew Parker, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9707697 Parker The symbiosis between legume plants and bacteria that form
nodules on their roots (rhizobia) is globally important in providing a key
nutrient (nitrogen) for both natural ecosystems and agriculture. However, the
ecology and evolution of legume-rhizobial interactions remain very poorly
understood. In particular, legumes are commonly found to be genetically variable
in their capacity to interact with different bacterial genotypes. The plant
genes affecting this mutualism typically cause differences in symbiotic
specialization: some plants can only interact successfully with a limited number
of rhizobial strains, while other plants achieve successful symbiosis with a
wide range of bacterial partners. Because rhizobia benefit plants by providing
an important nutrient, plants with restricted symbiotic abilities should be at a
disadvantage. Nevertheless, genes that cause symbiotic specialization are widely
prevalent in legume populations, suggesting that there are other evolutionary
processes that compensate for any natural selection against them. The nature of
such processes is currently unknown, so the primary objective of this research
is to experimentally test a series of hypotheses about why symbiotic
specialization has evolved to be common in natural populations of legumes. The
main significance of this research is that it will reveal the fitness benefits
and costs for legume plants associated with being specialized or promiscuous
toward bacterial symbionts. Genes that affect rhizobial specificity are also of
interest in efforts to improve the productivity of agriculturally-significant
legumes (such as soybeans, peas, beans, alfalfa, etc.). Thus, the results of
this project should also provide an important comparative perspective for an
improved understanding of legume-rhizobial interactions in agroecosystems as
well.