* 9707714
* Taxonomic Revision of Selected Sonoran Lichen Families
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Thomas Nash, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 55,000.00

9707714 Nash Lichens are symbiotic associations of a fungus and an alga, and
they are usually identified and classified on the basis of the fungal organism
in the partnership. They occur widely and at times abundantly on soil, rocks,
and as epiphytes. The classification of the several thousands of species of
lichens is complicated by their poor representation in museum collections and
their small size, resulting in an emphasis on a few supposed "key" characters
for discrimination. Unfortunately, it is now widely accepted that many of these
key features have evolved multiple times, in different groups or lineages of
lichens; thus, lichen classification requires more specimens and closer
attention to the acquisition of new morphological and molecular characters. For
the large lichen "flora" of the North American Sonoran desert and adjacent parts
of California with a mediterranean type climate, Prof. Thomas Nash has assembled
an international team of 50 or so specialists, students to senior researchers,
to complete a taxonomic inventory of the suspected 1700 species of lichens. Four
large and taxonomically troublesome genera, Arthonia, Buellia, Lecania, and
Solenopsora, are the main targets for field work, museum study, and taxonomic
revision; a fifth genus, Verrucaria, will receive preliminary study. This will
be accomplished in conjunction with young European workers who have specialized
on the mediterranean relatives of these groups, and who can test species limits
and diagnoses against the variation to be found in the North American groups.
The biodiversity and classification of lichens remain poorly known in most parts
of the world, and the research tradition for their study has emphasized narrow
national or regional studies by one or two specialists. Prof. Nash's
international consortium of colleagues, focusing on a large desert region of
North America, with taxonomic relatives in mediterranean climates of the world,
promotes two modern approaches that promise to revolutionize the study of
lichens. First, collaborative work by specialists drawn from an international
pool of talent; second, a global perspective in comparisons of morphological and
anatomical characters to assess the reliability of taxonomic features useful for
identification and upper-rank classification.