* 9707946
* Collaborative Research: The Chemical Speciation of          Dissolved and Particulate Selenium in an Estuary: Effects   on Trophic Transfer and Biogeochemical Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David C. Kadko
* 01/31/2001
* USD 199,431.00

9707946 Cutter/ 9714308 Fisher Collaborative Research: The Chemical Speciation
of Dissolved and particulate Selenium in an Estuary: Effects on Trophic Transfer
and Biogeochemical Cycling This proposal was submitted in response to the
Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (KGB) solicitation, NSF 06-152.
It is being jointly funded by the NSF Division of Ocean Sciences, the Division
of Chemistry and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. The proposed
research will improve our understanding of the speciation and trophic transfer
of selenium in San Francisco Bay. Estuaries such as this, are complex physical,
chemical and biological environments that are not only geochemically crucial
(e.g. elemental transfer from the trash water to the marine environment), but
are also economically vital (e.g. fisheries, transportation). The estuarine
geochemistry of trace elements has been well studied, but the linkage between
the chemical speciation of these trace elements and their cycling throughout the
whole estuarine food web is largely unknown. The combination of innovative field
and lab studies proposed here will allow researchers to more accurately predict
the impact of Se input and speciation on the entire trophic structure of these
environments. Moreover, the methods and approach used here for Se should be
applicable to other trace elements and other estuarine environments. Cuner,
OCE-9707946; fisher OCE-9714308