* 9707011
* Uniqueness for Multiple Trigonometric Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Marshall Ash, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 90,000.00

ABSTRACT Ash-Wang Ash and Wang first major goal is to generalized theorems of
Victor Shapiro and Jean Bourgain concerning uniqueness of representation by
spherically convergent multiple trigonometric series. Shapiro proved that if a
multiple trigonometric series is everywhere Abel spherically summable to an
integrable function and if Shapiro's condition holds, then it is the Fourier
series of that function. Shapiro's condition states that the ratio of the sum of
the absolute values of the coefficients lying in an annulus of unit thickness to
the radius tends to zero as the radius tends to infinity. A more natural
condition is Connes' condition: that the sum of the squares of the coefficients
lying on the surface of a sphere tends to zero as the radius tends to infinity.
Since Connes' condition is a consequence of everywhere convergence, Bourgain was
able to avoid any coefficient growth assumptions when he proved that a multiple
trigonometric series everywhere spherically convergent to zero is the zero
function. Ash and Wang will try to prove Shapiro's result with Connes' condition
replacing Shapiro's condition in the hypothesis. A corollary of this theorem
would be spherical uniqueness for trigonometric series that converge everywhere
to an integrable function. Furthermore, Ash and Wang would like to lighten the
hypothesis of everywhere convergence, by allowing an exceptional set on which
convergence is not assumed. Such a set is called a set of uniqueness. Ash and
Wang would like to show that all countable sets and certain uncountable sets are
sets of uniqueness. Almost any surface is composed of simpler ones by a process
called multiple Fourier analysis. A major long standing problem in pure
mathematics is to show that this construction can be accomplished in only one
way. This is called the problem of uniqueness. There are about a half dozen main
varieties of this problem depending on just how the simpler surfaces are c
ombined to make the general surface. In particular, Ash and Wang will try to
determine if uniqueness holds for square convergent double trigonometric series.
Ash and Wang will also try to show that certain thin sets may be ignored when
considering the question of uniqueness for spherically convergent multiple
trigonometric series. Since we live in a four dimensional world of space and
time, it is also necessary to study a higher dimensional version of a surface.
Such an object is called a manifold. Just as surfaces are associated with double
trigonometric series, manifolds are associated with multiple trigonometric
series. Thus, Ash and Wang will also try to determine if uniqueness holds for
spherically convergent multiple trigonometric series.