* 9707585
* Enhancement of Measurement Techniques and Preliminary Study of Magnetic and Electrical Properties of Novel Conducting   Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* M. Grayson Alexander, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,000.00

9707585 Alexander In this CAA project complex susceptibility and resistivity
measurements will be used to investigate electric and magnetic properties of
composites of quasi one- and two- dimensional molecular metal crystals in
conventional polymers. The effect of molecular dimensionality of the conducting
particles on the percolation threshold and conductivity of the composites will
be instigated. Data will also be related to bulk crystal shape and dimensions,
molecular metal composition and metal concentration in the composites. We will
investigate the properties of the composites when the conducting phase becomes
magnetic and look for evidence of proximity effect and tuneling when the
conductor becomes superconducting. Dielectric relaxation measurements will be
used to investigate interfacial chemical and electromagnetic interactions
between the conducting and insulating phases of the composites. These materials
have potential as coatings or extruded plastics for electromagnetic shielding or
electrostatic dissipation applications. %%% Composite materials made by
combining conventional polymers with carbon or metal powders or fibers are
currently used for industrial applications, because of their good electrical
conductivity and mechanical properties. In this CAA project, we plan to form,
for the first time, composites of conventional polymers with "molecular metals".
These are metallorganic or purely organic substances that conduct electricity.
Some are practically one-dimensional chains of molecules weakly linked together.
Others are almost two- dimensional "sheets" of molecules that are weakly linked
together. This work will yield results of both fundamental and practical
importance. We will gain understanding of the effect of molecular dimensions on
the electrical conductivity of a composites and study the effect of dispersing
one- or two- dimensional superconducting or magnetic crystals in an insulating,
non-magnetic matrix. These composi te magterials may exhibit good conductivity
and/or useful magnetic properties, making them important as materials for
electrostatic dissipation or electromagnetic shielding. In addition to journal
publications, a patent application is anticipated. Detailed study of these
composites will take several years and will provide the base for a long-term
vigorous research program. ***