* 9707263
* Ecological Consequences of Global Environmental Change:     Plant-Insect Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Sherry Roth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/2001
* USD 187,000.00

The investigators propose to examine the effect of elevated levels of carbon
dioxide and ozone on plant chemical composition and insect performance in common
tree and insect species of the midwestern deciduous forest. Experiments will
focus on the interaction between carbon dioxide and ozone. Estimates of the
effects on insect populations will be made by measuring performance over several
generations. The proposed research will provide insights into how elevated
carbon dioxide will affect species interactions in forest communities. It will
improve understanding of how trophic interactions will be altered and the
consequences of such changes for insect populations and tree productivity. As
part of a multidisciplinary Free Air Carbon Exchange (FACE) study this work will
enhance the development of increasingly realistic models of carbon budgets in
terrestrial ecosystems. Understanding the ecological consequences of enriched
atmospheric carbon dioxide is of considerable national and international
importance, especially as the international community becomes embroiled in
debate over emission restrictions. Although increasing concentrations of
atmospheric carbon dioxide are anticipated to exert significant impacts on
forest ecosystems over the next 50-100 years, little is known about how these
changes will affect ecological interactions, and how these in turn will feed
back to affect forest structure and function. This work is of critical
importance as the United States evaluates the environmental and economic
consequences of global environmental change, and implements policies to address
such issues. Moreover, this research will enhance our understanding of basic
ecological problems such as how resource availability alters chemical
composition and carbon partitioning in plants, and the effects of such changes
on plant-insect interactions.