* 9707701
* Critical Phenomena and Non Fermi Liquid Behavior in Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/02/1999
* Andrew Millis, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/02/1999
* USD 170,000.00

9707701 Millis This award is for theoretical research on non-fermi-liquid
metals. The main focus of the work will be on the theory of electrons
interacting via singular interactions caused by proximity to critical points and
for systematic comparisons of the results to experimental data. For the past
forty years the central concept on which metal physics is based has been
Landau's Fermi Liquid Theory, which holds that at temperatures or energies much
less than the Fermi energy, the physics of metallic interacting electrons is
isomorphic to the physics of non-interacting electrons. One of the key
experimental achievements of the past decade has been the demonstration that
many classes of materials (including the high temperature superconductors, many
heavy fermion materials and several transition metal compounds) exhibit low
temperature behavior which is metallic yet is inconsistent with Fermi Liquid
Theory. The physics of these non-fermi-liquid metals is not at all understood.
This grant will study this important problem based on the controversial
assumption that non-fermi-liquid behavior in metals is somehow related to
critical point fluctuations as might be observed in an equilibrium phase
transition. %%% This theoretical award will study the properties of metals which
are not explained by the theoretical foundation established many years ago. Many
materials of current interest, such as the high temperature superconductors,
exhibit metallic behavior which cannot be explained by present theory.
Consequently, new physical foundations need to be established. Successful
completion of this project will have wide impact on the way we interpret the
behavior of metals and other materials. ***