* 9707928
* Host Specificity and Species Richness of Tropical Insect    Herbivores in New Guinea: An Outcome of Ecological Factors  or Evolutionary History
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2002
* Scott Miller, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 09/30/2002
* USD 255,407.00

MILLER 9707928 Despite far reaching implications for rain forest conservation
and management, understanding of host specificity of plant-feeding tropical
insects remains more of a matter of conjecture than hard data. The
investigators' approach overcomes three major problems associated with previous
studies: (1) overlooking the importance of "transient" species that are not
actually part of the community under study; (2) inadequate sampling programs
without rearing and observation of live insects; and (3) need for "long-term"
presence in the tropics with sufficient sampling effort. The methodology of the
investigators, which includes testing live insects to see what plants they will
actually feed on, allows exclusion of transient species and builds on the solid
infrastructure, technical assistance and relationships developed with local
villagers near Madang, Papua New Guinea. The specific goals of the investigators
are to complete the sampling scheme initiated two years ago by adding 15 species
of Rubiaceae and 25 additional species of Moraceae, then (1) compare local
faunistic composition, species-richness and host specificity of leaf-chewing
insects feeding on the unrelated plant families (Moraceae figs , Euphorbiaceae,
and Rubicaceae); (2) compare species abundance distribution among the 45
communities of leaf-chewing insects studied; and (3) explore relationships of
local insect variables (species richness, host specificity and abundance) to
local host variables (abundance, leaf production patterns, other physical and
biological characteristics). Forest management and conservation strategies that
maximize maintenance of insect diversity depend greatly on how that diversity is
distributed, including how dependent the insects are on specific plants. In
other words, how much of the host plant diversity must be preserved in order to
maintain the insect community? Besides the obvious conservation importance, the
same principles extend to management of forest insect pests and biologic al
control agents. This project represents a significant example of the integration
of taxonomic expertise in answering essential questions in community ecology and
conservation biology, with links to training and resource management.