* 9707864
* International Research Fellow Awards:  Ecology, Behavior,   and Physiology of Four Neotropical Hylid Frogs
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Catherine Bevier, Philadelphia University
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1999
* USD 24,025.00

9707864 Bevier The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a six-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
Catherine Robb Bevier to work with Dr. Carlos Arturo Navas at the Universidade
de Sao Paulo in Brazil. This project involves field and laboratory studies of
two tropical and two subtropical Brazilian treefrogs, the Hylids. These frogs
exhibit variation in calling effort, habitat types along altitudinal and
latitudinal clines, and body temperatures during periods of activity, allowing
the study of their underlying physiological mechanisms from an ecological and
behavioral perspective. Brazil offers a unique and environmentally variable
field site, along with access to a population of closely related but
behaviorally and ecologically diverse frogs. Dr. Bevier brings her research
experience in the area of physiological and biochemical correlates of behavioral
performance in frogs, while Dr. Navas is an expert in metabolic physiology. The
results of their research will benefit scientists who have an interest in animal
adaptation to cold and exercise physiology. ***