* 9707808
* Sitio Conte, Panama Archaeological Expedition Records       Research Access and Archival Preservation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Douglas Haller, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2001
* USD 63,380.00

In 1940 the University of Pennsylvania Museum initiated archaeological
excavations at the site of Sitio Conte, located about one hundred miles west of
Panama City, Panama. This extremely important pre-Columbian site yielded about
thirty burials and caches ranging from grave lots with a few vessels to burials
of ten feet square containing hundreds of pottery vessels as well as objects of
stone, carved bone, gold and other materials. In the most elaborate burial
twenty three individuals were recovered. In sum, the materials afford an
unprecedented look into the elite ruling class of this complex stratified
society and in conjunction with the skeletons allow researchers to address a
number of significant anthropological issues. For example it is possible to
examine the relationships between social status, nutrition and gender. The
documentation in the form of written records and photographs is excellent and
forms an essential part of the research collection. However it is not well
catalogued and is difficult to use. This award permits the University Museum to
catalog the material and to enter it in digital form into an Argus storage
system. Both photographs and written records will then be made available over
the internet for research purposes. The project is important because it will
make an anthropologically significant research collection widely available for
research purposes. It also breaks new ground in museum storage and distribution
of information and, if successful, will provide a model of potentially wide use.