* 9707083
* Ship Operations Support
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Linda Goad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Emma R. Dieter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 1,667,177.00

9707083 Goad The University of Michigan will operate R/V LAURENTIAN during 1997
as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded research projects.
The LAURENTIAN is an 80' general research vessel constructed in 1974 and owned
by the University of Michigan. The ship is scheduled for 60 operating days in
1997, of which 35 days are in support of NSF-sponsored programs. The ship
operates primarily in the Great Lakes. The R/V LAURENTIAN is a capable vessel
for the work proposed. The program considers the ship important part of the
fleet due to its location. The Laurentian is the only UNOLS vessel that operates
in the Great Lakes, and the University of Michigan should be encouraged to
improve usage of the vessel. This vessel is part of a fleet used by the National
Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects. Most
oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and
extensive support from the ship's crew. Oceanographic projects require
permanently installed specialized equipment on specially designed vessels. This
equipment also requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and
operation. The ships do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or
fishing vessels. Therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels
specifically dedicated to oceanographic research. These vessels are operated by
universities and research institutions around the country. ***