* 9707995
* Synthesis and Physico-Chemical Characterization of          Molecular Optoelectronic Gates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Jonathan Lindsey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 07/31/2000
* USD 853,500.00

This new collaborative group award to Jonathan S. Lindsey at North Carolina
State University is supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry
Division, the Electronic Materials Program in the Division of Materials Research
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate. The collaboration is between Lindsey and David F. Bocian
at the University of California at Riverside and Dewey Holten at Washington
University. The expertise of the collaborators spans synthesis, static
characterization and dynamic photophysical studies of molecular electronic
systems. The focus of the research is the design, synthesis and physical
characterization of molecular optoelectronic gates based on multi-porphyrin
arrays. The gates are conceptual extensions of molecular wires where the signal
transmission can be turned on or off by placement of a magnesium porphyrin
moiety which by chemical, electrochemical, or photochemical oxidation opens a
channel that funnels excited-state energy to the ground state. These redox-
driven molecular gates parallel the operation of transistor switches. The scope
of the gating phenomenon, optical gating methods, and and the combination of
molecular gates to achieve logic functions will be studied. Static and transient
absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy, resonance Raman spectroscopy and
electrochemistry will be used to characterize the systems both in solution and
as thin films. Time-resolved absorption and fluorescence measurements will be
made on the new arrays to elucidate the rates and pathways of energy and
electron transfer. This research addresses the fundamental issue of whether
molecular electronics are a viable limit in the drive towards computer
miniaturization and whether information processing is possible at the molecular
scale. The molecular optoelectronic gates which will be prepared will simulate
the solid-state transistors in conventional circuitry. If successful, molecular
optoelectronic gates may find applications as sensors or as components of other
smart structures.