* 9707064
* Collaborative Research:  Quantifying the Fluid Dynamic      Processes Controlling Channelized Lava Flow Emplacement     Through Numerical, Experimental, and Field Analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Susan E. Sakimoto, Universities Space Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 42,318.00

9707064 Sakimoto Lava flows, present on all terrestrial planets, are the surface
expression of the thermal and chemical evolution of a planet. However, because
an active extraterrestrial lava flow has yet to be observed, emplacement
parameters (such as effusion rate and flow velocity) must be inferred from the
final flow morphology. Channelized, or leveed, lava flows (flows that solidify
only at their margins during emplacement) have relatively simple geometries, and
thus have been the subject of many numerical models attempting to relate
eruption and emplacement conditions to final flow dimensions. However, lava is a
complex fluid with temperature- and strain-rate-dependent behavior, and no
extant model accurately describes all aspects of the emplacement of channelized
lava flows. In contrast, computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations are
designed to treat complicated fluids such as lava. By combining CFD simulations
of lava flows with results from analog experiments using polyethelyne glycol wax
to simulate lava, a new model will be generated that relates the emplacement
dynamics of channelized flows with the morphology of the final lava flow form.
Once the CFD simulation is shown to accurately reproduce and predict the
behavior of simulated lava flows, it will be tested on the well-documented 1984
Mauna Loa, Hawaii flow.