* 9707473
* The Role of Senescence in Life History Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2003
* USD 458,618.00

9707473 Reznick Most current research on the aging process evaluates the
influence of environmental factors on the rate of aging or characterizes
individual genes that influence lifespan in two model organisms, the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. We propose
evaluating aging instead from an evolutionary perspective. Senescence is thought
to have evolved because the strength of selection declines with an individual's
age; natural selection will have the greatest influence on individuals that are
early in their reproductive lifespans because they have only begun to contribute
offspring to the next generation. The influence of selection declines to zero
when individuals are no longer reproducing or caring for offspring. Two genetic
mechanisms, mutation accumulation and antagonistic pleiotropy, can account for
the evolution of senescence due to this age-specific decline in the strength of
selection. Both mechanisms predict that high extrinsic mortality rates will
select for earlier senescence. "Extrinsic mortality" refers to death to external
causes, such as predation. We will test this prediction by evaluating the
lifespan and lifetime reproductive performance of guppies derived from high and
low predation environments. In our earlier work, we established that natural
populations of guppies from Trinidad experience high versus low mortality rates,
correlated with the species of predators present. Guppies from high predation
environments mature at an earlier age, smaller size, and devote more of their
resources to reproduction than their counterparts from low predation
environments. These differences were shown to have a genetic basis. They were
further evaluated by modifying mortality rates in natural populations, resulting
in the evolution of these same life history patterns over time intervals as
short as four years. These combined studies argue that predators and mortality
rates have selected for changes in the early life history, or that the
differences that we observed among populations in early life history represent
an adaptation to prevailing mortality rates. These results provide the rationale
for predicting that predation has also influences the evolution of the aging
process.! Evaluating aging in these fish potentially provides a new model system
for studying the aging process, a new way of identifying genes associated with
aging, and a means for answering a question that is not accessible in all lab-
based systems considered thus far, which is "why do we see such dramatic
differences in lifespan among species in nature?".