* 9707687
* Fabrication and Characterization of Multilayer              Nanostructures of Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,11/30/1998
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9707687 Li This Research Planning Grant(RPG) addresses synthesis and processing
issues in the fabrication of trilayer tunnel junctions and multilayer
nanostructures of manganites. Based on results of magnetoresistance effects, a
large spin-polarized tunneling effect is expected in manganites because of the
large degree of spin polarization in these materials. The approach is to use
artificially fabricated trilayer junctions and multilayer structures as tailored
systems with controlled junction parameters to systematically study the
phenomena. The objective during the planning period is to study the feasibility
of fabricating and characterizing small-area multilayer tunnel junctions using
the National Nanofabrication Facilities at Penn State. Principal research areas
to be pursued are: 1) epitaxial growth of artificial trilayer junction
structures consisting of two manganite layers separated by a thin insulating
barrier layer with sharp interfaces and low leakage. Different insulator layers
will be tested and the structural and interfacial properties of the junction
will be characterized; 2) lithographically pattern the junction into small with
the goal of achieving single magnetic domain in both manganite layers with the
magnetic moment in each layers antiparallel; 3) study spin-dependent magneto-
transport and magnetic properties of the junctions with different junction
sizes, manganite layer thicknesses, and barrier layer materials and thicknesses.
It is anticipated that the feasibility of the project will be ascertained, and a
systematic study on the effect of spin-polarized tunneling in manganites, their
relation with sample structures and parameters, and a comparison with
theoretical models will follow. %%% The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science having technological relevance to
electronics. These studies are important for greater understanding of spin-
polarized transport in general, and the anomalous magnetoresistance effects in
manganite thin films and polycrystalline samples in particular. At the same
time, the current research also addresses issues directly related to the
technologies and therefore has direct impact on the potential application of the
colossal magnetoresistance materials. ***