* 9707609
* RPG: The Evolution of Mixed Sex Allocation Patterns: A      Comparative, Phylogenetic Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Colette St. Mary, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1999
* USD 17,996.00

Colette M. St. Mary 9707609 ABSTRACT Sex allocation theory has provided a
powerful conceptual framework from which to understand allocation patterns in a
wide range of organisms, included those that have separate sexes, as well as
those that are hermaphroditic. However, there are some organisms for which
current theory is clearly inadequate. Individuals of two temperate species of
fish (gobies) in the genus Lythrypnus (L. dalli and L. zebra) simultaneously
devote energy to both male and female functions, although they reproduce via
only one sex at a time. Further, gonadal allocation varies with body size (i.e.,
ontogenetically). This overall pattern of sex allocation cannot be explained by
reference to existing theory. The PI's recent theoretical work in this area
suggests that costs of changing sex plays an important role in the evolution of
these mixed strategies. To examine this hypothesis the PI will conduct a
detailed examination of the pattern of sex allocation throughout the genus
Lythrypnus. This will be done in an explicitly historical context, integrating
studies focused on phylogenetic reconstruction and field and lab experiments
designed to quantify the costs of reallocation and associated patterns of
allocation and behavior. The genus Lythrypnus includes 20 species, which range
over both temperate and tropical seas, including the eastern Pacific, the
Atlantic and the Caribbean. Five species have been recently examined
histologically. All are simultaneous hermaphrodites; however, they differ
significantly in sexual pattern. Within the context of this proposal the PI will
initate collection of the additional data needed to understand the evolution of
complex allocation patterns in hermaphroditic organisms. The overall program
goals include 1) development of a phylogeny for Lythrypnus based on molecular
data; 2) documentation of variation in sexual patterns in Lythrypnus (i.e.,
ontogenetic and among-individ ual variation in sex allocation); and 3)
application of field and laboratory experiments to quantify the degree of sexual
flexibility, the costs and benefits of each sexual function, and the costs of
reallocation. Ultimately, the PI will map sexual patterns and potential
selective factors onto the phylogeny to provide an integrated test of the
hypothesis generated from the PI's dynamic model. This work and studies of this
sort provide a basic understanding of sex allocation patterns in hermaphroditic
species. Many fishes, invertebrates and plants are hermaphroditic and our
management, harvesting and control of such species is predicated on an
understanding of their sexual and mating systems.