* 9707209
* Evolution of the Attine Ant-Fungus Symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Stephen Rehner, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 07/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

9707209 Mueller Among the more fascinating cases of symbiosis in the American
tropics is the interaction between leafcutter ants of the tribe Attini (Family
Formicidae) and fungi of the mushroom family Lepiotaceae (Basidiomycetes) in
which the ants maintain "gardens" of freshly cut leaves on which the fungi are
tended and harvested for food. There are some 200 or so described species of
leafcutter Attini ants, and advanced members of the group are known to maintain
extensive gardens in which propagation of the fungi is obligately linked to
strict vertical transmission of inocula from parent to offspring nests. This
obligate transmission of food inocula raises the intriguing question whether
mutational changes and evolutionary diversification in the ants is mirrored by
change and diversification in their cultivated fungi, and leads to conjoint
patterns of speciation and coevolution. The interaction is known to be even more
complicated because other groups of putatively primitive Attini ants are
opportunistic in their acquisition of fungi for their gardens, and may regularly
harvest fresh inocula from wild sources. Which ant groups do this regularly,
which have switched over to the obligate mode of growth and transmission, and
which act in an intermediate fashion are all unanswered questions.
Correspondingly, which species and genera of Lepiotaceae fungi are associated
with the various ant cohorts in "open" or "closed" systems of inocula uptake and
transmission are also unknown. Preliminary molecular DNA analyses by Dr. Ulrich
Mueller at the University of Maryland and his colleagues Ted Schultz at the
Smithsonian and Stephen Rehner at the University of Puerto Rico have opened a
major technological door to the study of this conceptually challenging case of
symbiosis. Molecular methods are particularly necessary in study of the fungi
because the cultivated forms rarely if ever sporulate, and in the absence of
spore-bearing structures, taxonomic identification is difficult if not
impossible. Diagn ostic DNA markers, from nuclear or mitochondrial genes, hold
hope for solving this problem, while providing data that can be used to infer
phylogenetic or genealogical associations among the fungi. This collaborative
team of entomologists and mycologists continues field collecting in Central and
South America, to augment the nearly 140 ant species thus far collected, and in
parallel to collect fungal material from ant nests. Field work with Brazilian
and Argentinian colleagues will facilitate collecting in rich areas in South
America. Molecular DNA sequencing and morphological analyses of the ants and of
those fungi that can be induced to sporulate in culture will provide additional
taxonomic and phylogenetic information. Study of the phylogenetic patterns and
ecological habitats of associated ants and fungi will create an accessible model
of symbiont evolution in tropical terrestrial ecosystems, comparable in its
richness of interactions with the coral reef symbioses involving corals and
photosynthetic dinoflagellates.