* 9707899
* Woods from a Tropical Forest Region (Peru) as Climate       Indicators and Development of a Preliminary Model for       Reconstructing Climates Based on Fossil Wood
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Deborah Woodcock, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 149,268.00

Abstract ATM-9707899 Woodcock, Deborah University of Hawaii Title: Woods from A
Tropical Forest Region (Peru) as Climate Indicators and Development of a
Preliminary Model for Reconstructing Climates Based on Fossil Wood Fossil wood
has a high potential to yield information about past climates and may prove to
be particularly important as a record of climates in continental interiors where
few other types of plant remains are found. Fossil wood can also provide
environment information independent of leaf physiognomy and other climate
indicators; and maybe an important source of information about past
precipitation variability. Climate interpretations are hindered, however, by our
limited understanding of the way in which climate affects wood structure. This
award supports a project designed to examine woods from wet and montane tropical
forest trees and to construct a database relating climate to wood
characteristics. The project will systemize the characters used to describe
wood, particularly vessel size and distribution, which have been shown to
display climate sensitivity; and compare of woods from forest/climate types to
data from elsewhere in the world to identify those characters most promising as
climate indicators. This work will also develop a multivariate model expressing
the wood:climate response that will permit detailed reconstruction of
quantitative climate estimates to be carried out on fossil wood.