* 9707281
* Vegetation Dynamics of Isolated Forest Fragments
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2001
* John Terborgh, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 09/30/2001
* USD 230,000.00

TERBORGH 9707281 A number of recent studies document dramatic losses of plant
species in isolated forest fragments, but the mechanisms of species loss remain
largely unknown. The investigators will examine ongoing compositional change in
the tree communities of 10-year old land-bridge islands in Lago Guri, a 4,300
km2 hydroelectric impoundment in the State of Bolivar, Venezuela. Lago Guri
islands range in size from &lt; 1 ha to &gt; 650 ha and are covered by tropical
dry forest. Preliminary work has shown that the animal communities of small (1
ha) and medium (10-15 ha) Lago Guri islands are strikingly imbalanced from a
functional standpoint: they are deficient in vertebrate predators, seed
dispersers, large seed predators, and pollinators, and contain abnormally high
densities of small seed predators (rodents) and arboreal folivores. The proposed
research will test the overall hypothesis that imbalanced animal communities are
generating forces that will result in transformation of the tree communities of
Lago Guri islands as the existing canopy is replaced by trees that established
subsequent to isolation of the land-bridge islands. A better understanding of
the mechanisms that drive extinctions in habitat fragments will facilitate
conservation planning in managed and fragmented landscapes. The investigators'
results suggest that the absence of top predators in forest ecosystems leads to
runaway growth of prey populations, especially herbivores, which then severely
alter the pattern of tree recruitment. Forests affected by herbivores are
destined to change inexorably in composition with a resulting loss of diversity
of both plants and animals.