* 9707861
* U.S.-Czech Research on Developmental Genetics of Amphioxus: Insights into the Origin and Evolution of the Vertebrate    Body Plan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/2001
* USD 39,806.00

INT 9707861 Holland This U.S.-Czech research project between Linda Holland and
Nicholas Holland of the University of California, Scripps Institute, and Zbynek
Kozmik of the Czech Institute of Molecular Genetics will examine developmental
genetic data to indicate homologies between body regions of distantly related
animals. Specifically, this project focuses on cephalochordate amphioxus as a
plausible, more simple model for the proximate invertebrate ancestor of
vertebrates. The collaborative work features the developmental expression and
function of the Pax gene family in amphioxus which is involved in morphogenesis
of the vertebrate pharynx, nerve cord, eyes, axial musculature, and kidneys. The
researchers intend to isolate cDNA and genomic DNA clones of amphioxus homologs
of the Pax family and use them as templates for the synthesis of antisense
riboprobes to determine by in situ hybridization where and when these homologs
are expressed in developing amphioxus. From the observed localization patterns
inferences can be made about homologous genes. The combined expertise in
embryology and expression patterns (U.S.) and cloning and gene analysis (Czech)
are expected to yield new insights into the evolution of the vertebrate body
plan and the mechanisms involved in shaping a chordate embryo. The information
will contribute to our basic understanding of how genes interact to create an
organism. This project in developmental biology fulfills the program objective
of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??