* 9707033
* Magnetic Microstructure and Information Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Ronald Indeck, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 319,927.00

9707033 Indeck Magnetic information storage density is still some three orders
of magnitude from the room temperature superparamagnetic limit, but the volume
of storage medium per stored bit is shrinking rapidly. The research proposed
here addresses issues of storage density and stability related to the magnetic
microstructure of storage media. A microstructural magnetic unit of a medium is
the smallest piece of the medium whose magnetization can be altered. Magnetic
units may or may not coincide with the medium's physical microstructural units
(particles, grains). Each stored bit in most existing or proposed magnetic
storage systems comprises many microstructural magnetic units, and in all
practical and economically viable systems the microstructural units have widely
varying characteristics (particle, grain, or cluster size, orientation, etc.).
In a given medium we can infer the size of the micromagnetic unit from electron
or probe microscopic images, or indirectly from macroscopic experiments or
modeling results. We propose to develop an additional direct measurement using
the anomalous H the storage medium environment the stored bit is subjected to
forces that shorten its thermal decay lifetime. We will all effect. In
experimentally quantify the effect of temperature on the write process, medium
noise, and stability. The experimental work will be paralleled by sophisticated
modeling. In this modeling a planar medium is represented as a tessellation of
uniformly magnetized tiles. We have pioneered a new (Voronoi) tessellation that
avoids the artifacts introduced by the almost universally used regular tiling,
and we will use our model for studies of the temporal and thermal effects on the
write process, noise, and stability. We are working on ways to deduce the
intrinsic medium properties required for modeling from measurements of extrinsic
parameters. Our demonstration of the determinism of medium noise has been the
seed of a separate noise precompensation that offers the promise of a major
storage capacity increase. This program will be supported with experimental
results on media and transducers. ***