* 9707165
* The Use of 4-Dimensional Lidar Data to Evaluate Large Eddy  Simulations: A Lake ICE Project
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Edwin Eloranta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 431,866.00

9707165 Eloranta Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations is
obtained through exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum with the surface.
Lake-effect weather events, where cold air masses are rapidly modified over the
Great Lakes, are excellent natural laboratories for studying these exchanges.
The Lake-Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a multiple-Principal
Investigator project which seeks to use this natural laboratory to determine how
boundary layer growth processes are controlled by mesoscale boundary layer
convective structures and how the modified boundary layer effects the production
of precipitation and the larger scale meteorological conditions. In this
research effort, the Principal Investigator will study the four dimensional
characteristics of the evolution of the boundary layer near the upwind shore of
Lake Michigan. To accomplish this, the Principal Investigator will deploy and
operate a Volume Imaging Lidar (VIL) on the west shore of Lake Michigan during
the Lake-ICE project. The lidar will observe the growing convective boundary
layer over the lake as cold air passes over the warm water. These observations
will complement airborne and ground-based radar measurements planned for mid-
Lake area and the eastern shore and will be coordinated with other research
meteorological measurements. During a typical data session, the VIL will
repetitively scan a three-dimensional volume extending to 21 km downwind. These
images of aerosol backscatter will record the growth of convection as the air
moves downwind. Specifically, the lidar data will be analyzed to provide: 1) the
depth of the boundary layer as a function of distance downwind, 2) the wind
speed and direction as a function of downwind distance and altitude, 3) the
dimensions and aspect rations of the convective plumes, 4) the spatial
organization of the convective cells in the convective field, 5) the
decorrelation time for convective structures, 6) the d ownwind distance and
altitude of first cloud formation. The primary application of the lidar data
will be to evaluate numerical models of the boundary layer over the lake. In
addition, the Principal Investigators will evaluate the ability of a large eddy
simulation to derive an explicit description of the convective field. Successful
completion of this research will increase fundamental understanding of the
evolution of the lake boundary layer which is crucial to understanding and
forecasting the very disruptive lake-effect snow events. ***