* 9707077
* Support for the 60th Annual Meteoritical Society Meeting,   Maui, Hawaii, July 21-25, 1997
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Klaus Keil, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,000.00

Keil OPP 9707077 Abstract This award supports travel for students and scientists
from the Former Soviet Union to participate in the 60th Annual Meeting of the
Meteoritical Society, which will be held in the Maui Prince Hotel, Maui, Hawaii,
from July 21-25, 1997, under the organizational sponsorship of the Hawaii
Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Honolulu, Hawaii, 96822. Additional support is being provided by NASA, The
Barringer Foundation, JEOL USA, Inc., Cameca, Inc., and Pallasite Press. The
principal scientific focus of the meeting is on meteorites as clues to the
origin and evolution of the solar system. Annual meetings of the Meteoritical
Society are technical conferences, not conventions, and are international in
nature. Because of the latter the venue generally alternates between Europe and
the US, reflecting the sub-equal Society membership from the two continents.
Countries represented at most of the meetings include: Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands,
Russia, Switzerland, the UK, and the United States. Attendance at the meetings
over the past 14 years has mostly been in the range 250- 400 persons, including
guests. The largest meeting on record was Vienna, with 449 participants plus
guests. Because of the location of the 1997 meeting in Maui, Hawaii, attendance
is expected to be very high, probably in excess of 400. The subject matter of
the conference is dominated by mineralogic, isotopic and chemical studies of
meteorites, theoretical studies of early solar system processes, and field and
theoretical studies of impact phenomena. The overall scientific theme is
learning about the formation and evolution of our solar system and its
components, and solar systems in general. Recent topics of great interest at
Meteoritical Society meetings have included the nature and origin of
interstellar grains that have been found preserved in chondrite mete orites; the
distribution of short- lived radionuclides in the newly-formed solar system and
their possible role in early planetary melting; the nature of volatiles in
Martian (SNC) meteorites and their implications for the volatile budget on Mars;
the possible astrophysical sites (star types) from which isotopically-anomalous
material known to be present in the early solar system was derived; and possible
secular variations in the meteorite population bombarding Earth over the past
several tens of thousands of years. The Maui meeting is comprised of five days
of two concurrent technical sessions, as well as Poster Sessions. Most of the
papers are contributed rather than invited; many are given by students. The
usual format is 10 minutes for presentation followed by 5 minutes for questions.
All sessions, will be held in the Maui Prince Hotel, which has new, superb
lecture facilities. The Meteoritical Society Meeting will be preceded by an LPI-
HIGP-sponsored Workshop on "Parent body and nebular modification of chondritic
materials", and it is anticipated that many of the participants of the
Meteoritical Society Meeting will also participate in the Workshop. Special Data
Elements A. 7 N - - B. F 4 - - C. 1 0 D. 6 1 - - E. O - F. - - I P G. - - - - H.
- - - - I. N P - - J. 0 0 - - N. 0 0 1 0 O. 0 0 0 0. Foreign/International
Implications (Block 41 on Form 1036) Country 1 2 3 4 5 6 Antarctica X Former
Soviet Union X X