* 9707464
* RPG:  Tactical Defensibility: Landmarks and Territorial     Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Perri Eason, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 02/28/1999
* USD 17,610.00

9707464 Eason Many animal species are territorial, with individuals defending
areas against conspecifics. Territory owners incur costs from defending the
territory, but also benefits from the territory's resources; benefits must
outweigh costs for defense to be feasible. Previous work has ignored a
characteristic of territories that may be critical in determining the costs of
their owners: tactical defensibility, or the relative difficulty of defending a
particular site. One factor that may be the primary determinant of defensibility
is the presence or absence of landmarks in the habitat. Anecdotal reports from a
wide variety of taxa (insects, fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals) have
suggested that animals use naturally occurring and man-made features as
territorial boundaries. This common phenomenon has received very little
attention from scientists, and this study will address this lapse. The system to
be studied is the territorial behavior of the cicada killer wasp (Sphecius
speciosus). Males of this species defend mating territories on flat, featureless
ground. This species responds strongly to landmarks: male wasps will move their
territories so that the boundaries coincide with landmarks, if landmarks such as
dowels are provided. This study will determine the degree to which the size and
shape of territories can be manipulated by introducing landmarks. For
experiments, grids will be constructed of dowels, and the size and shape of the
units in the grid will be varied. Behavioral data will also be collected. The
data obtained will be used to examine the effects of tactical defensibility on
defensive costs and male mating success in cicada killers. The results will
provide information about the effects of habitat heterogeneity on territory size
and thus on the density of males. Such data are of value to theoretical
ecologists and in addition will be of practical use to conservation biologists:
an understanding of how habitat heteroge neity affects territorial species may
enable wildlife biologists to create habitats that are more suitable to
threatened or economically important species.