* 9707648
* SGER:  Analysis of Flood Flows:  November 1996 Johkulhlaup  on Skeidararsandur
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Basil Gomez, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 48,553.00

SBR-9707648 At the end of September 1996, an earthquake of magnitude 5.0
preceded an eruption of the Grimsvotn volcano, beneath Vatnajokull, Europe's
largest glacier, in SE Iceland. Glacial meltwater drained into a subglacial
lake. An early November earthquake resulted in a tremendous flood of meltwater
(such a flood is called a Jokulhlaup in Icelandic and to the relevant scientific
community). The November Jokulhaup had an estimated peak flow of 45,000 cubic
meters per second, compared to regular (5-10-year) flows of 3,000 cubic meters
per second. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) entails
investigation of the geomorphic impacts of such a massive, sudden flood, toward
the larger purpose of improving paleo-hydrologic models of flood events based
only on the post-flood geomorphology. The research supported entails the use of
remotely sensed data to estimate the total flood discharge, measure pre- and
post-flood digital elevation models and sediment patterns in the outwash plain
(sandur), and identify the appropriate field sites for field measurement.
Spectral mixture analysis will be used to estimate the concentration and
composition of sediment in the flood water. The summer field work, conducted by
the PI along with colleagues Francis Magilligan at Dartmouth College, Leal A.K.
Mertes at UC-Santa Barbara, and Laurence C. Smith at UCLA, will test the
accuracy of the digital elevation models and obtain information of the nature,
type, and distribution of sediment deposits on the surface of the sandur.
Subsequent work will model the relationship between hydrologic energy of the
flood (extrapolated from the volume estimates and the temporal record) and the
nature and magnitude of the geomorphic change. This work complements several
other studies by international scientists on the nature of the flooding and the
rates of geomorphic change, but not on the specific relationships among flood
energy, sediment suspension, sedimentation, and geomorphic change. The basis for
th is award as a SGER is the necessity of a relatively rapid request to NASA to
plan a special geodetic airborne laser resurvey of the sandur surface in March-
April 1997.