* 9707056
* Experiments in Building Distributed Applications Through    Compositional Programming
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Lorenzo Alvisi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anthony B. Maddox
* 08/31/1999
* USD 128,452.00

Past failures in building large-scale distributed applications in areas such as
avionics and telephony are painful reminders of the difficulty of developing and
debugging distributed programs. As applications become more ambitious in both
scale and functionality, these problems will only be compounded. The Seuss
project is based on the premise that this complexity can be managed by adopting
a simpler model of computation. The Seuss programming model builds distributed
applications from large sequential components which interact through small but
complex interfaces. This project has the following goals: (1) to develop
conceptual tools for reducing the complexity of these interfaces, (2) to reuse
sequential pieces of code written in standard languages, (3) to achieve
efficiency by executing the various components concurrently. More specifically,
the Seuss model of concurrent object oriented programming reduces the complexity
of concurrency by allowing programmers to reason about distributed applications
as if they were sequential programs. At the same time, Seuss allows programs to
be executed with multiple threads of control. Finally, Seuss provides a logic
for proving the equivalence of sequential Seuss programs and their multi-
threaded executions. This project will allow programmers to build qualitatively
more complex distributed applications with the assurance that they are both
efficient and correct.