* 9707495
* An Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Free Radical Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2001
* USD 260,000.00

The proposed experimental methods will allow: (1) the use of novel laser flash
techniques for unprecedented levels of control of polymerizing systems; (2)
measurement of concentrations of free radical polymerization living chains over
a broad range of conditions by a multitechnique approach; (3) measurement of
molecular weight distributions of living chains by a novel `photocopying`
technique; (4) characterization of structures and dynamics of the radical end-
groups; and (5) controlled generation of well-characterized monodisperse
macroradicals to test fundamentals of polymer reaction kinetics by specific
syntheses of monodisperse macroradicals. A range of theoretical predictions will
thus be tested by these experiments. With this award, the Organic Dynamics
Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities are supporting the
research of Drs. Nicholas J. Turro and Ben O'Shaughnessy of the Department of
Chemistry at Columbia University. The project is an interdisciplinary joint
experimental-theoretical effort with an object of obtaining a mechanistic
understanding of free radical polymerization and the closely associated
phenomena of interpolymeric reactions. The expertise of a photochemist and a
theoretical polymer physicist will unite to allow theory to proceed in close
collaboration with experiments employing novel methods to measure various
fundamental properties of free radical prolymerization and other reacting
polymer systems.