* 9707692
* RPG:  Mechanisms of Integrin Gene Regulation during         Trophoblast Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Ann Sutherland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Sutherland 9707692 The overall goal of this research is to understand the
molecular mechanisms that regulate trophoblast differentiation in the implanting
mouse embryo. After reaching the blastocyst stage, the mammalian embryo must
develop an external source of nutrients in order to continue its development.
The mouse embryo accomplishes this by implanting into the stroma of the uterus
and forming connections with the maternal blood supply, a process that is
mediated by a specialized population of cells known as trophoblast. Trophoblast
cells have many functions: they anchor the embryo in the uterine stroma, they
form blood vessels that connect with the maternal system and direct nutrient-
rich blood to the periphery of the embryo, they secrete hormones that redirect
the maternal endocrine system to maintain the pregnancy, and they form part of
the definitive chorioallantoic placenta. Trophoblast cells are absolutely
essential for the further development of the embryo; they are the first lineage
to be established during mammalian development, and it is only after they have
successfully differentiated that the embryonic lineages begin to develop.
Therefore, it is important to understand the process of trophoblast
differentiation, both from the standpoint of knowing more about these cells
themselves, but also from the standpoint of understanding a critical regulatory
event in the development of the embryo. A major aspect of trophoblast function
is invasive interaction with the extracellular matrix of the uterus; to
facilitate this they express a unique repertoire of extracellular matrix
receptors of the integrin family. The expression of several integrin receptor
subunits is associated with trophoblast differentiation: two subunits are first
expressed at the time of commitment ((7, (6), while the expression of two others
((1, (6) is appositely regulated at the onset of invasion. Very little is known
about the molecular mechanisms that control their differentiation, despite their
importance to d evelopment. The hypothesis being tested is that the
developmentally regulated action of specific transcription factors on these (and
other) promoters results in the differentiation of epithelial trophectoderm
cells into invasive trophoblast giant cells. The specific aims of the overall
grant will be 1). to characterize the promoters of integrin genes that are
specifically expressed at different stages of trophoblast differentiation, 2).
to define the transcription factors that regulate their expression, and 3). to
identify the external factors that control their activity and/or expression
during the peri-implantation stages of development. In order to prepare for the
full research proposal, the following aims are proposed for the planning period:
1). to clone and identify the promoter regions of the integrin al and a6
subunits, and 2). to test the ability of the cloned regions to direct
trophoblast-specific expression in the rat trophoblast cell line Rcho-1.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying integrin gene regulation in
differentiating trophoblast will provide a broader understanding of the process
of trophoblast differentiation as well as new tools with which to probe the the
developmental regulation of trophoblast motility, and the cellular mechanisms
underlying invasive behavior more generally.