* 9707953
* Closing the Global Water Cycle in Fully-Coupled Climate     System Models: Terrestrial Hydrology and River Transport for the NCAR CSM Land Component
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Charles Vorosmarty, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/2000
* USD 129,689.00

Abstract ATM-9617980 ATM-9707953 ATM-Supplement UCAR CA Famiglietti, James
Vorosmarty, Charles Schimel, David University of Texas University of National
Center for New Hampshire Atmospheric Research Closing the Global Water Cycle in
Fully-Coupled Climate System Models: Terrestrial Hydrology and River Transport
for the NCAR CSM Land Component The global hydrological cycle plays a central
role in the interactive functioning of the Earth's climate. However, the current
representation of the hydrological cycle in GCMs is inadequate to properly
characterize its important role and interactions within the climate system. A
critical shortcoming is that the global water cycle is not closed so that the
land and oceans remain uncoupled, i.e. river runoff from the continents is not
added as an input to the oceans. The purpose of this research is to close the
global hydrological cycle in the CSM under development at NCAR by incorporating
horizontal transport of water across the continents (i.e river transport) into
its land component. A grid-scale land surface parameterization will be coupled
to algorithms for subgrid-scale runoff generation and an explicit representation
of global river networks to accurately route river flow across the continents to
the oceans. We refer to this coupled land parameterization - subgrid algorithm -
river transport scheme as a Global Land Hydrology Model (GLHM). The board scope
of this work includes the development and testing of a GLHM which
comprehensively models the cycling of water over and through the continental and
surfaces; coupling this model to the CSM to link the land and the oceans; and
using the CSM to improve our predictive understanding of the role of the global
hydrological cycle in the Earth's climate system. Specific near-term objectives
are to: develop a prototype version of the GLHM from existing or simplified
model components; test the ability of the prototype GLHM to reproduce observed
continental hydroclimatology; and to perform initial coupled model experiments
to determine the effect of closing the global water cycle on CSM simulations.
Specific contributions of this work to the NCAR (or any other) CSM effort
include: conservation of fresh water balance simulation due to water cycle
closure; computation of physically realistic river hydrographs along continental
margins for input into ocean, sea ice, and later, biogeochemical transport
models; the ability to simulate subgrid soil moisture distributions and subgrid
fractions of inundated floodplain, both of which are intimately linked to the
generation of grid-scale water, energy, and biogeochemical fluxes; an improved
ability to validate CSM performance since streamflow is the most observable and
well documented of the land surface fluxes; and an improved framework for
understanding the global water cycle and its complex interactions within the
Earth's climate system. This is the first attempt at a coordinated effort to
build a state- of-the-science GLHM that explicitly resolves the vertical and
horizontal circulation of terrestrial water for the specific purpose of closing
the global water cycle in CSMs.