* 9707859
* Magnetostatic Modes and Losses in Planar Microwave Ferrites with Inhomogeneous Magnetization Distribution
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Martha Pardavi-Horvath, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 57,571.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9707859 Principal Investigator: Martha Parvidi-Horvath/
George Washington University Title: Career Advancement Award: Magnetostatic
modes and losses in planar microwave ferrites with inhomogeneous magnetization
distribution An extension of the Principal Investigator's research in magnetism
and magnetic materials to microwave phenomena and measurements, and microwave
magnetism in monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMICs) will be performed.
A key problem in MMICs, the performance of the ferrite devices within such
circuits as the circuits become smaller in size, and as they are required to
operate at higher frequencies, will be investigated. It is known but not
understood that the performance of the ferrite circulator within the MMIC
depends very strongly on the ferrite thickness. The Principal Investigator will
calculate analytically and numerically the magnetostatic modes in the microwave
spectra of planar ferrite with inhomogeneous magnetization distribution. The
validity of the theoretical work will be also checked by measuring the thickness
dependence of the Ferromagnetic Resonance Spectra of a series of thick single
crystal ferrite films. The results will be disseminated through journal
publications, conference participation and the development of an undergraduate
research program and revised laboratory course which includes microwave
magnetism.