* 9707179
* Travel Grants for Students to Attend American Power         Conference.  To be Held in Chicago, Illinois, April l997.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1997,11/30/1997
* V Ramesh, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 11/30/1997
* USD 9,975.00

9707179 Ramesh The American Power Conference (APC), sponsored by the Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT), is an annual national forum the discussion of the
broad overall aspects of generation, transmission, distribution and utilization
of power. APC has significant educational value particularly for undergraduate
students who aim to learn more about the industry with a view towards deciding
their career options. In recognition of this fact, IIT has been conducting a
special program for faculty and students in conjunction with APC. This program
is called the Ben Elliott Sponsored Student Faculty Program (BESSF). The program
features special breakfast sessions and other events for students (like plant
tours) in addition to the regular APC sessions. Through utility sponsorship, the
program has been successful in enabling over 120 students and faculty to
participate in APC each year. However, many undergraduate and graduate students
are currently unable to attend due to lack of industry sponsors. The emerging
competitive utility environment makes it difficult for existing sponsors to even
maintain their current levels of sponsorship. In this proposal, we request
travel funds, for 35 students to attend APC and participate in the BESSF program
for the APC- 97. The amount will be cost-shared with funds from utilities and
from universities of the students. The students will be selected from among
those enrolled in U.S. universities per the following criteria: o Undergraduate
students, in particular, sophomores and juniors will be given priority. o Women
and under-represented minorities will be given first preference. o U.S. citizens
and permanent residents will receive greater consideration than non-citizens. o
Students who have demonstrated prior interest in the power industry either
through power engineering courses or through internships will receive additional
consid eration. o Graduate students who intend to present papers at APC will be
given preference over other graduate students. This grant will significantly aid
the BESSF program in its mission of encouraging more students (especially
undergraduates) to pursue careers in power engineering. ***