* 9707067
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Holocene Evolution of the          Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta:  Implications of Floodplain/Delta Plain Development for Deltaic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Mead Allison, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 107,387.00

9707067 Allison Funds are requested for a two-year collaborative study to
examine the Holocene evolution of the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta. The Ganges-
Brahmaputra (G-B) river system carries a billion tonnes of sediment annually,
yet the fate of this material past the upstream gauging stations, as in most of
the world's rivers, is not known. This study will test the hypothesis that at
least half of the rivers' sediment load is being sequestered in the floodplain
and delta plain, resulting in an evolution and facies architecture significantly
different from classic deltaic models. Such magnitude of sediment sequestering,
in the Ganges Brahmaputra as well as in other river systems, has important
implications for our understanding of the global flux of riverine particulates
to the world ocean. The specific objectives of this study are to: 1) Construct a
sediment budget for the Holocene floodplain/delta plain: 2) Detail the
stratigraphic architecture and history of infilling for the Sylhet, a large
tectonic basin located along the previous course of the Brahmaputra: 3)
Characterize the nature and magnitude of recent floodplain sedimentation in
other portions of the Bengal Basin, including small sub-basins, and bil
(wetland) areas; 4) Determine the stratigraphic architecture and magnitude of
delta plain sedimentation, focusing on the tidal distributary channels of the
Ganges; and 5) Link results from 1-4 above with our previous offshore studies to
develop a holistic conceptual model for G-B delta evolution during the Late
Holocene. Deep borings (~100 m) and cores will be collected from the floodplain
and the delta plain during the dry season in order to construct the sediment
budget and to constrain seismic observations. Water-based, high-resolution
seismic-reflection studies would be conducted in the Sylhet Basin during the
summer monsoon, when the basin is deeply flooded, in order to detail the
stratigraphy of the Late Holocene basin fill. Geochronological and
sedimentological studies of c ores collected from the floodplain and delta plain
will enable us to determine the sediment process rates and stratigraphic
architecture of extant sedimentary environments for the G-B system. The
completion of the above tasks will enable us to construct a conceptual model of
deltaic evolution which will represent an important end-member for deltaic
styles, one for which floodplain/delta plain sediment sequestering likely plays
a major role. In addition to the aforementioned geological and global
implications, the understanding of recent deltaic evolution attained during this
study would contribute to a rational strategy for development of one of the most
densely populated, low-lying areas of the world