* 9707741
* Long-Term Support for the National Elections Studies        1998-2001
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Donald Kinder, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2003
* USD 3,954,259.00

This award provides continued support of the Foundation's long-term commitment
for the National Election Studies (NES). The National Science Foundation's
Political Science Program supports the NES research program to sustain and
enhance the diversified data base that undertakes basic research on voting,
public opinion, and political participation in the United States. The current
award provides support for the 1998 Congressional elections and the 2000
Presidential election. The award provides for continuation of the core time-
series data collection which has been supported in part by the NSF since 1970
and completely since 1978. The Board of Overseers will continue to function as a
very real partner in study planning and will maintain its full role as trustee
and representative of the larger community of users of the NES data. There are
opportunities for the diverse national social community to participate directly
in the design and execution of NES studies. There are resources for improving
the quality of the core NES time-series data and for testing innovations in
theory, measurement, and data collection. This research constitutes the most
important data base for the study of American politics and American political
behavior.