* 9708049
* Computational Studies of Collision-Induced Polymerization   and Thin-Film Growth
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Susan Sinnott, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 04/30/2001
* USD 149,700.00

The Theoretical and computational Chemistry Program is supporting Professor
Sinnott at the University of Kentucky. This work is also cofunded by funds from
the Division of Materials Research. This research will investigate the
mechanical and chemical processes which occur when organic molecular clusters
impact surfaces at hyperthermal (about 5-80 eV/molecule) and keV incident
energies. The approach will be molecular dynamics simulations where the forces
on the individual atoms in the clusters and surfaces are obtained from many-body
empirical potentials. These results will be checked by repeating the smaller
simulations using tight-binding approximation methods and comparing to
experiment. This study will provide information about the types of chemical
reactions that occur under the high pressure conditions of cluster-solid-
surface impacts, detail the mechanisms of these reactions, reveal the types and
yields of chemical products, and document any structural changes to the surface.
They will also reveal how the chemical reactions depend on a number of factors
including surface reactivity and cluster molecular species, size and incident
kinetic energy. Cluster-solid-surface collisions are one of the most interesting
topics in the area of particle-surface interactions. Some of the possible
outcomes include chemical reactions within the cluster to make new chemical
products and the growth of thin coatings of the cluster material on the surface.
However, there is much that is not known about the chemistry that occurs during
such collisions, especially those that involve clusters of carbon and hydrogen,
despite the scientific and technological importance of hydrocarbon materials
(such as petroleum products and diamond). This research will use computational
simulations to investigate the mechanical and chemical processes which occur
when these molecular clusters impact surfaces at speeds comparable to those that
occur during explosions and in interstellar space. The results will provide
information about the types of chemical reactions that occur under the high
pressure conditions of cluster-solid-surface impacts and reveal the variety and
yields of chemical products. They will also show how the chemical reactions that
take place vary with changes in the reaction conditions.