* 9708543
* Financial Support for BIOGEOMON, The Third International    Symposium on Ecosystem Behavior (Conference Date June 21-25, 1997)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1997,10/31/1998
* R. Kelman Wieder, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1998
* USD 14,800.00

Wieder 97-08543 .BIOGEOMON, Third International Symposium on Ecosystem Behavior,
co-sponsored by Villanova University and the Czech Geological Survey, will be
held on the campus or Villanova University on June 21-25, 1997. BIOGEOMON is the
third in a series or meetings; the previous two were held in Prague in 1987 and
1993. The 1993 conference attracted nearly 200 scientists from 27 countries on
five continents. The rationale behind BIOGEOMON has been and continues to be
that there is a need for biogeochemists to occasionally meet in a setting that
allows recent research findings to be presented i9 an atmosphere that rosters
formal and informal discussion. BIOGEOMON's major focus is the biogeochemistry
or terrestrial ecosystems (mostly, but not exclusively, temperate forests), and
the 997 conference will feature sessions on watersheds as units for
biogeochemical investigation (watershed monitoring, manipulation, and modeling),
emerging tools for and approaches to biogeochemical research (natural abundance
stable isotopes, natural abundance radioactive and cosmogenic isotopes,
geographic information systems), and selected current topics (acidification and
its reversal; nitrogen cycling, limitation and saturation; carbon gas fluxes
across the land/atmosphere boundary; nutrient cycling as related to global
climate change). In addition to six keynote speakers and 36 invited speakers,
pre-registration forms have been received from over 170 individuals in 32
countries, indicating a desire to present an oral or poster contribution at
BIOGEOMON in 1997. BIOGEOMON' s primary goals are to provide a forum for the
dissemination and discussion of recent research findings, to explore future
directions for biogeochemical research, and to foster interdisciplinary,
collaboration between researchers or all ages at regional, national, and
international scales. The conference abstracts will be published in the Journal
of Conference Abstracts, and participants will have the option of sub mitting a
manuscript four consideration for publication in a special issue of Water, Air,
and Soil Pollution.