* 9708580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Dimensions or RuralUrban Subsistence Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,10/31/1999
* Uli Linke, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 10/31/1999
* USD 11,490.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Rutgers University, studying the national development policy of the Thai
government as it affects the work choices made by rural village women. The
student will examine the development policies and rhetoric of the Thai
government, as well as the opportunities for women to make a living in two rural
northern Thai provinces. The specific focus of the project will be to explain
the role of unique cultural factors in Thailand's heritage as well as the social
and political factors in the twentieth century which have facilitated the rapid
growth of the sex industry (some estimates of as much as 10 percent involvement
of women in the age group 14-24) with the concomitant growth of STDs in general
and HIV/AIDS in particular. Using ethnographic methods the student will try to
understand how families in the north, a source area for commercial sex workers,
justify this work with reference to the traditional alternatives. The project
will evaluate different theoretical rationales for this prevalence, from the
cultural tradition of lower female status associated with Theravada Buddhism, to
the change from matrilineal to patrilineal resource flows associated with
western-style capitalist development, to the national development policies of
the government which have decreased economic opportunities in the north with
respect to the south. This research is important because it will advance our
understanding of the causes of the extraordinary commercialization of female
sexuality in the case of Thailand, which will help our general understanding of
this process in other cultures.