* 9708207
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Mesozoic Nonmarine Sedimentary     Record of Transition from Contractile to Extensional        Deformation, Southern Mongolia
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Stephan Graham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2001
* USD 100,095.00

9708207 Graham The Mesozoic tectonic evolution of southern Mongolia includes a
poorly understood transition from contractile to extensional tectonism and
associated sedimentary basin development. Only in its broadest outline has this
transition become apparent in recent years, as a consequence of recognition of a
major north-verging early Mesozoic fold-thrust belt in adjacent north-central
China, reconnaissance description of syn-tectonic coarse-grained strata in
southern Mongolia, and limited geophysical and geological documentation of late
Mesozoic rift basins in southern Mongolia. Major aspects of the kinematics,
rates, and styles of structural and sedimentary systems associated with the
tectonic transition remain unresolved, and form the basis for this research
proposal. From such issues stem a suite of exciting questions: How do
sedimentary basin systems formed atop heterogeneous crust respond to fundamental
changes in tectonic deformational style? Do previously unrecognized basin types
occur, as recently documented for collisional foreland basins formed atop
accreted terranes in western China? What role to metamorphic core complexes,
documented across the border in north-central China and apparently structurally
continuous with similar though undocumented structures in the proposed field
area, play in the transition from a contractile to extensional tectonics? These
questions are but several among many to be addressed by this proposal.
Specifically, this proposal seeks three years of funding to investigate and
document the sedimentary response to a rapid and fundamental transition from
compressional tectonics of early Mesozoic age to extensional tectonism of late
Mesozoic age. In answering each of the above questions, we propose first to
document the fundamental geology of the contractile and extensional systems to
fill the very large gaps which exist presently in the geologic understanding of
Mesozoic southern Mongolia. The principal tools and means of investigation we
propose to employ involve an integrated structural and sedimentary geologic
approach in which structural data and detailed mapping will serve as backdrop
for detailed depositional systems and stratigraphic architectural analysis,
provenance analysis, and reconnaissance thermochronologic studies. Importantly,
subsurface data will be incorporated into the investigation, thanks to access to
vital core material from a small oil field currently in development. After
fundamental documentation of each tectonic system and its sedimentary record has
been completed, the important broader scientific questions posed above can be
addressed. Beyond its scientific importance, the proposed research will enable
continued scientific exchange between U.S. institutions and the Mongolian
Academy of Sciences. An important additional educational dimension of the
proposal lies in its support for one Post-doctoral Research Associate, one Ph.D.
student, and two M.S. students.