* 9708540
* Molecular Evolution of Floral Homeotic Genes in the         Hawaiian Silversword Alliance (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Robert Robichaux, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9708540 Purugganan The MADS-box regulatory gene family represents a group of
genes that control crucial aspects of flower development. The molecular
evolutionary dynamics of these developmental control genes remain poorly
understood. This project seeks to investigate the molecular evolution of members
of this regulatory gene family in the Hawaiian silversword alliance (Madiinae,
Asteraceae), the premier example of island plant adaptive radiation. Three
floral control genes - APETALA1, APETALA3 and AGAMOUS - will be isolated by
molecular techniques in 14 silversword alliance species and their mainland
California relatives, the tarweeds. Analysis of these gene sequences will be
used to infer the rates and patterns of gene evolution in these rapidly-evolving
taxa, and will provide information on the evolutionary forces that shape the
diversification of these regulatory loci. This study will assess the dynamics of
change in floral homeotic genes associated with a recent adaptive
diversification, and may lead to the development of new nuclear markers for use
in sequence-based, plant phylogenetic studies at low taxonomic levels.
Determining mode and tempo of regulatory gene evolution is vital to
understanding the genetic basis behind differences in morphologies between
species. Studying these genes in the context of a well-studied adaptive
radiation permits a greater knowledge of how genes that control developmental
traits evolve in rapidly diversifying species. By dissecting the mechanisms
behind the evolution of these control genes, it may be possible to determine the
extent to which changes in gene regulation contribute to the diversity in floral
structures we see in the natural world.