* 9708237
* Photochemistry and Photophysics of Sulfoxides and Related   Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* William Jenks, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2001
* USD 277,600.00

Professor William S. Jenks, of the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State
University, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate for his studies of the photochemistry and photophysics of sulfoxides
and related species. Through a combination of experimental and calculational
studies, Professor Jenks targets the characterization of the photochemically
active excited states of alkyl and aryl sulfoxides and their dynamics, the
determination of the mechanisms by which sulfoxides quench traditional triplet
sensitizers in cases where energy transfer is unlikely due to energetic
considerations, and the determination of mechanisms by which other molecules can
quench sulfoxide excited states, with particular emphasis on development of
electron transfer reactions. Through the study of a variety of photochemical
reactions of sulfoxides, including stereomutation, alpha cleavage, and
deoxygenation, a predictive paradigm will be constructed to assist in the
analysis of photochemical properties of sulfoxides and the development and
exploitation of their photochemical reaction chemistry. With the support of the
Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, Professor William S. Jenks, of
the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State University, studies the interactions
of light with a class of organic molecules known as sulfoxides, containing a
bond between oxygen and sulfur. Such compounds occupy an important niche in
organic chemistry due to their unique combination of chemical and physical
properties. Whereas the thermal reactions of sulfoxides have been well-studied
and have been exploited for the preparation of a variety of significant
products, the light-initiated reactions of sulfoxides are still in the discovery
and development stages. By applying a variety of experimental and calculational
techniques, Professor Jenks explores the ways in which sulfoxides interact with
light, the structures and reactions of the species generated by such
interactions, and the products which may be obtained as a result of these
reactions. These studies contribute to our fundamental understanding of
photochemical reactions and may lead to the development of useful new strategies
for the synthesis of important organic molecules.