* 9708187
* Computerization & Reorganization of the Robert S. Peabody   Gulf of Maine Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Malinda Blustain, Phillips Academy, Robert S. Peabody Museum of Archaelogy
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2000
* USD 92,649.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Robert S. Peabody Museum of
Archaeology will upgrade storage and access to their Gulf of Maine
archaeological collection. These materials which include approximately 80,000
artifacts were excavated from sites extending in an arc from maritime Canada to
Cape Cod Massachusetts. The Museum was established in 1901 and Warren Moorehead
who served as first curator was a major figure in Northeast US archaeology. The
earliest collections therefore date to the founding of scientific archaeology in
this broad region and they played a central role in the construction of the
culture/historic sequence. They have grown significantly and constitute a
central corpus of data which is widely consulted. The archaeological materials
extend chronologically from the earliest paleoindian cultures of North America
to historic times and allow researchers to examine human environmental
interactions from early postglacial periods onwards and to address issues such
as the causes and social consequences of the shift from a hunting and gathering
to a settled village way of life. Because the collections are poorly curated,
are stored in a non-systematic fashion and are unevenly catalogued, they are
extremely difficult for researchers to use. With NSF support the museum will
conduct a series of activities. Collections will be sorted by material type and
stored by geographic region. They will be reboxed and organic and fragile
objects such as bone, shell, textile and animal and plant remains will be
buffered from acidic drawer surfaces. Structural supports will be produced for
objects which need them. Collection records will be verified against objects,
updated and then input into a computerized data system. The project will result
in a well conserved, organized and readily available collection for scientific
research.