* 9708342
* Acceleration of Phosphine Exchange in Metal Carbonyl        Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Richard Keiter, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 08/31/2001
* USD 144,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research on phosphorus exchange reactions by Dr. Richard L. Keiter of
the Chemistry Department, Eastern Illinois University. Kinetic and thermodynamic
studies of phosphine exchange in dangling ligand complexes of chromium and
molybdenum will be carried out. The study is prompted by the observation that
phosphorus ligand exchange in some tungsten complexes is faster than previously
assumed. In cases where one dangling phosphine arm of a ligand is capable of
associating with a cis carbonyl ligand on the tungsten, the second phosphine arm
can displace the coordinated phosphine more readily. This idea will be tested in
other metal complexes using a variety of ligand combinations in various
solvents. NMR and X-ray crystallographic methods will be employed. The
significance of this reaction is that it results in isomerization, that is,
structural modification, of the complex and affects subsequent reactivity. While
repulsive forces are often taken into account in understanding reactivity,
attractive forces often are not. This opens the possibility of controlling
substitution rates by employing ligands with dangling groups that have an
affinity for other ligands attached to the central metal of the complex.