* 9708194
* Stochastic Linear Modeling of the Planetary Wave Climate of the Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Walter Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sumant Nigam
* 08/31/2001
* USD 117,334.00

9708194 Robinson Dr. Robinson will study stratospheric planetary waves - their
variability, spectra, and interactions with the zonal flow - using a
stochastically forced linear model. This approach, which recently has been
successfully applied to tropospheric storm tracks, will permit the PI and
colleagues to examine the influence of tropospheric and stratospheric zonal
flows and stationary planetary waves on a full and unbiased spectrum of
transient and traveling stratospheric waves. Specific issues that will be
explored are: (1) the relative importance of transient and stationary wave
activity in driving the zonal flow; (2) the extent to which stratospheric wave
activity is controlled by stratospheric and tropospheric zonal flows, and the
importance of interannual variability of the zonal flow in determining
interannual variability in wave activity; (3) the importance of wave-wave
interactions in regulating stratospheric wave activity; and (4) the expected
interannual variability in wave-driving and the zonal flow in the absence of
interannually varying boundary conditions. Dr. Robinson is a theoretician with a
history of effectively employing linear theory in the study of atmospheric
dynamics. He will evaluate the success of this approach by comparing his
theoretical results with observations. This award is supported jointly by the
Climate Dynamics and Large-scale Dynamic Meteorology Programs.