* 9708311
* Dissertation Research: Social Construction of Gender        Idenity in South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Donald Donham, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 11/30/1999
* USD 3,300.00

This project, supported both by the Social, Behavioral and Economic Research and
the International Divisions of NSF, involves the dissertation research of an
anthropology student from Emory University. The student will investigate the
relationships between indigenous Xhosa-speaking South African adolescents and
their parents and other members of the adult generation. Focusing on households
containing adolescent s aged 10-19, the student will interview how young
peoples' and their parents' definitions of adolescence versus adulthood vary in
light of changing religious, social and economic circumstances. The student will
first survey about 100 households in two sites with different socio-economic
characteristics in a large suburb of Cape Town, and go on to conduct structured
interviews, individual case studies and intensive observation of adolescents in
different social contexts. The focus will be on the cultural meanings of
adolescence in relation to male and female intimate practices, contraceptive use
and adolescent pregnancy. This research is important because it will advance our
understanding of the cultural meanings behind behavior causing acquired immuno-
deficiency disease and adolescent pregnancy. Improving our knowledge of the
sources of adolescent behavior will be an important step towards designing
programs to change that behavior and reduce the prevalence of disease and
adolescent pregnancies.