* 9708616
* Human Paleoecology in the Western Great Lakes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* David Overstreet, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 12,509.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Overstreet will coordinate
the analysis of the skeletal remains of two woolly mammoths excavated from the
Hebior and Schaefer sites, located in southeastern Wisconsin. At the start of
the last glacial retreat, the region contained many small ponds and lakes
surrounded by encroaching wetlands. They eventually were infilled by peats and
mucks which afford excellent preservation of faunal remains. The two mammoths
discovered in this context both date by radiocarbon to slightly older than
12,000 years ago and this may provide possibly the oldest evidence of humans in
North America. Several worked pieces of stone were found in possible association
with each specimen and this suggests, but does not prove humans were present at
that time. To reach a more definitive conclusion, Dr. Eileen Johnson will
conduct a careful taphonomic analysis of both skeletons. This will include
identification and mapping of various marks on the bone, and examination of the
condition of the cortical surface and patterns of breakage. Dr. Johnson's
methodology will incorporate gross morphology, low and high power magnification
and selected samples for scanning electron microscopy. These analyses will
generate sufficient empirical evidence to evaluate relative roles of predation
and/or scavenging, carcass utilization patterns, bone resource utilization and
the effects of natural forces which also can alter bone. In addition a further
suite of materials will be subjected to radiocarbon analysis. The strongest
evidence for early humans in North America comes from numerous sites in the
Southwestern United States. Worked stone tools are clearly associated with
animal remains and all date to younger than 12,000 years. All are associated
with a stone tool tradition known as `Clovis` after the site where it was first
identified. Clovis is characterized by finely worked spear points and has been
widely viewed as the earliest lithic tradition in North America. The few stone
implements which have been recovered in possible association with the Wisconsin
mammoths, according to Dr. Overstreet, do not appear to be Clovis. The materials
then are of particular interest both because of their age and the fact that they
may represent an unknown cultural group. If successful this research may set the
stage for a large scale project.