* 9708424
* Models and Model Checking for Spatially-Varying             Environmental Hazards and Decision Problems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 227,074.00

Decisions concerning public health and public expenditures must often be based
on highly uncertain data; for example, consider the uneven quality of
measurements of individual economic decisions and effects of public programs and
policies. In the field of environmental policy, data such as pollutant
measurements that are required for informed decisions are usually sparse,
spatially dispersed, and subject to substantial measurement error. One response
by regulators and other policy makers to the large uncertainties typical of
environmental and other public decision problems has been the use of
`conservative` (often inflated) estimates of exposure, risk, etc. However, the
recognition that policy should be based on assessment of both likely costs and
benefits has led to increased use of benefit-cost analysis in recent years. A
key step forward that needs to be made, especially for spatially-varying
environmental hazards, is to calibrate risk estimates: this means recommending
different courses of actions and also different data-gathering strategies in
different areas. In order to do this effectively, it is useful to spatially
model the relevant exposures and risks. The goal of this project is to develop
more reliable methods of models and model-checking for spatially-varying
hazards, in settings with uncertainty (due to incomplete information) and also
true underlying variability. In recent years, much progress has been made in the
field of statistics in modeling complex data structures using Bayesian methods.
Areas in which more progress needs to be made and on which the investigators
plan to work include model fitting, computation, model checking, and display of
inferences using graphs or maps. The investigators plan to particularly focus on
the use of model-checking and graphical methods to build confidence in the
results of the modeling fitting, so that individuals and policy-makers will have
trustworthy tools to allow them to take better account of uncertainty and
variability when making decisions. As an important example, the investigators
propose to develop their model in the context of remediation of risks from home
radon, based on a combined analysis of home radon data from many sources.