* 9708475
* The Conservation of Trans-National Marine Fish Stocks: A    Game-Theoretic Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Robert McKelvey, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 198,835.00

Page 1 Date JUN 25 97 Abstract for Proposal/Award DBI-9708475 PI NAME: McKelvey
International treaties for achieving conservation and sustainable harvest of the
world's marine fish stocks have proved to be elusive and unstable. Astonishingly
violent "fish wars" have erupted, leaving cooperative arrangements in disarray,
fishing communities economically depressed, and fish stocks at risk of collapse.
This project is designed to reexamine, in the light of modern game-theoretic
concepts, the core reasons for this instability of cooperative management, and
to identify new institutional arrangements which might prove to be more stable.
The work proposed involves formulation and analysis of game-theoretic models of
a bi- national jointly managed ``shared'' fishery, where the stocks are
harvested sequentially as they migrate across national boundaries. The models
are necessarily dynamic, since strategic interactions are conditioned by past
performance, as well as by projected future circumstances. Emphasis is placed on
pervasive uncertainty and the role of incomplete information that is common in
decision making. Specific issues to be studied are: 1)institutional incentives
which have led to over-investment in fleets and processing facilities; 2)
tradeoffs between long term goals of conservation and sustainability and short
term goals of socioeconomic stability; 3) strategic interactions, conditioned by
the particular ecological structure of the ecological community of harvested
fish species; and 4) the design of institutional arrangements which can promote
stable cooperative joint management of a marine fishery in uncertain and
unanticipated circumstances. Funding for this project is provided by the
programs of Computational Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS, and by the Computational Biology Activity
in BIO.