* 9708375
* Collaborative Research:  Evaluating Species Redundancy in   Stream Detrital Processing
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Kinzie, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 205,357.00

9708375 Kinzie Detritivores in headwater streams of forested catchments obtain
their energy and nutrients primarily from riparian leaf litter input. In the
process of shredding and scraping leaf litter they transform microbially
conditioned leaves into organic particulates used by downstream suspension
feeders. This proposal will investigate the following questions. Do some
detritivore species play essential roles in this processing? Are other species
redundant in determining the rate of leaf processing and export of suspended
particulates to downstream consumers? The loss of one or more detritivore
species may alter leaf processing in fluvial ecosystems, yet stream ecologists
lack an empirical, stream-based approach for determining if species have unique
roles in leaf litter processing or if their interactions are important to other
detritivores. The loss of one or more species will not influence overall rates
of processing if detritivore species are redundant and have no interactive or
unique species-specific role in leaf-litter processing. Alternatively, rates of
instream leaf-litter processing will decrease with the loss or replacement of
certain benthic detritivore species if these species perform key functions. This
research will determine if different detritivore species function either
independently of each other, as substitutes or replacements for one another, in
a negative, inhibitory manner, or in a positive, facilitative manner. Results of
this research in isolated streams will provide data for cross-site comparisons
among different species of detritivores from on-going studies of leaf-litter
processing at the Luquillo LTER site. In addition, this research will provide
insight into the effects of introduced species on ecosystem function in
comparison to the functional role on apparently similar, native species.