* 9708114
* Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens      capensis:  Genetic Variation and Fitness Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9708114 Schmitt Many plant species exhibit characteristic morphological
responses to crowding and vegetation shade, such as stem elongation and reduced
branching. This "shade avoidance response" is cued by a reduction in the ratio
of red to far-red wavelengths (R:FR) in light transmitted or reflected from
green vegetation; this R:FR signal is perceived by light-sensing molecules
called phytochromes. It has been hypothesized that phytochrome-mediated shade
avoidance responses are beneficial to plants by enabling them to anticipate and
avoid competition for light in dense stands. Recent results from this project
strongly support this hypothesis. In a field experiment, stem elongation
increased the reproduction of the common annual Impatiens capensis in dense
stands, but plants induced to display the shade avoidance response at low
density suffered reduced fitness relative to nonelongated plants, apparently due
to an unmeasured physiological cost. The goals of the proposed research are to
examine the genetic basis of the shade avoidance response and potential
mechanisms for selection on the response in the field, and to test for
physiological, ecological, and genetic costs of the response. Replicated inbred
lines differing in the magnitude of morphological response to R:FR will be
planted into a natural population at manipulated densities and group
compositions to study the level at which selection acts on shade avoidance
traits. Elongated and nonelongated seedlings will be grown under different
levels of water and nutrients, to determine the conditions under which shade
avoidance traits may be costly. This research will integrate genetic,
physiological, and population biology approaches to the study of phytochrome-
mediated shade avoidance responses in plants. It will provide important insights
into the role of these responses in natural populations. The results will also
provide an ecological and evolutionary context for current research by plant
molecular biolog ists and developmental biologists on the underlying genetic
basis for plant responses to light. Since most crops are grown in dense stands,
this study will also provide insight into possible selection strategies for
improvement of agricultural yields.