* 9708007
* Template Polymerized Chelating Liposomes for Separation and Recovery of Biomolecules from Aqueous Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 09/30/2001
* USD 190,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9708007 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigators: Roberto F. Guzman, David F. O'Brien Affiliation: University of
Arizona This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program
sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigators are Roberto
F. Guzman and David F. O'Brien of the University of Arizona. The research
explores the feasibility of a method of protein purification that combines the
advantages and unique selectivity of molecular imprinting, immobilized metal ion
affinity chromatography, and the high surface area of unilamellar liposomes
modified with surface associated templated metal ion-chelators. The method aims
to provide the means to purify proteins from complex media with high yields,
selectivity and maintenance of native protein conformation. The method is a
highly selective use of metal ion affinity chromatorgraphy that has the
potential to be developed as an efficient purification scheme for biomolecules
with multiple binding sites. The production of bioactive macromolecules such as
diagnostic enzymes, antibodies, hormones etc., is central to biotechnology. A
major issue is the purification of these biomolecules with retention of
bioactivity. The technology to be developed here has the potential to address
these issues.