* 9708246
* RUI:  Dielectric, Calorimetric, and Nonlinear Optical       Properties of New Structurally-Predicted Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Sidney Abrahams, Southern Oregon University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 165,436.00

9708246 Nielson This research project entitled Dielectric, Calorimetric, and
Nonlinear Optical Properties of New Structurally-Predicted Ferroelectrics will
continue the search for new ferroelectric materials based on predictions
obtained from a structural analysis of current crystal structure data. After
identification of potential ferroelectric materials is established, verification
involves high temperature synthesis of the materials in polycrystalline form;
structural confirmation by x-ray diffraction analysis; material processing, and
subsequent measurement of the dielectric and thermodynamic properties of the
materials as a function of frequency and temperature. The research topics for
undergraduate students involve solid-state synthesis, calorimetry, dielectric
measurements, computer programming and interfacing, x-ray diffraction and
crystallography, all of which are designed to meet the graduation requirements
for students of chemistry and physics. %%% Ferroelectrics are of increasing
importance in the fabrication of electrooptic devices, integrated circuits,
pyroelectric detectors, piezoelectric transducers and actuators, pyroelectric
detectors, piezopositioning devices, and non-volatile memory elements. The
technological importance of this area and the considerable industrial need for
new ferroelectric materials for an increasing range of applications indicate
significant job opportunities for students educated in these areas. ***