* 9708140
* Dissertation Research:  An Archaeological Investigation of  Baking Pot, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2001
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 11,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews MS Jenifer Piehl will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at the
Mayan site of Baking Pot, located in Belize, and analyze the materials which she
and other researchers collect. She will focus on the relative status of women at
this Classic Mayan site and the results of her study will provide insight into
how this complex society was organized. It is clear that the Mayans divided
themselves into lineages and residential units and that clear status
distinctions existed between individuals. However is not known whether status
distinctions cut across lineage groups or whether entire lineages were ranked as
units relative to each other. Through the study of females and variation of
status within this gender based group, underlying principles of Mayan
organization can be addressed. Past work at Baking Pot has yielded a series of
burial remains but the number of individual graves is not great enough to permit
statistical analysis. MS Piehl will participate in the excavation of domestic
areas in order to increase sample size. She will then study both new and old
material and analyze the skeletons themselves as well as associated grave goods.
On the basis of the amount and nature of the latter insight into status is
possible. Elite individuals are buried with non-utilitarian objects crafted from
rare materials often imported from considerable distances. Analysis of skeletal
remains also provides extremely important information. Stress indicators such as
defects in tooth enamel, caries, premortem tooth loss and thickness of cranial
bone provide insight into health and nutrition. Isotopic analysis of bone can
indicate relative access to valued food resources such as corn. Through such
analyses ranges of variation within and between genders can be determined. This
research is important for several reasons. It will shed light on how Mayan
civilization arose and was maintained. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.