* 9708631
* GOALI: Advanced Process Control Techniques for Large-Area   Extrusion Coating
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Edward Kamen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 115,863.00

ECS-9708631 Kamen In this proposal, The Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia
Tech) and FAStar, Ltd. (FAS) will collaborate to advance polymer deposition
technology for large area substrates used in integrated circuits, flat panel
displays, multichip modules and solar cells. The advances will be made in
extrusion coating process control with the effect of the work being to enhance
the performance of the deposition tool and significantly reduce the cost of
polymer material through waste minimization by applying FAS's deposition
technique to microelectronics fabrication. Polymer deposition is not only
essential to the manufacture of integrated circuits, it is repeated many times
in the making of each circuit. Spin coating is the most prevalent method used in
industry today to deposit polymers onto microelectronic substrates. As the
industry increases substrate size, the cost of each circuit decreases because
more circuits are fabricated each time a substrate is processed. However,
spinning large substrates is challenged by rotational inertia, coating
uniformity and again material loss. Tool vendors have developed and recently
begun to market alternative coating methods. These deposition methods include
curtain coating, meniscus coating and extrusion coating. Process control
improvements are a vital need for these new, low per-unit cost production
methods to be accepted and utilized by the microelectronic industry.