* 9708055
* Instantaneous Normal Mode Analysis of Liquids
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Thomas Keyes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 11/30/2001
* USD 370,833.00

Thomas Keyes is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his research in the area of instantaneous normal
mode (INM) analysis of liquids. Instantaneous normal modes are the harmonic
modes of a representative configuration of a liquid, and they provide an
intuitive description of liquid state dynamics. Keyes will further develop INM
theory to treat relaxation in supercooled liquids. The self diffusion constant
will be calculated from the double well modes and the distinct behavior of
strong and fragile supercooled liquids will be related to the form of the double
well density of states. Other properties of supercooled liquids including the
Boson peak in scattering, a possible growing correlation length, stretched
exponential decay of correlation functions, breakdown in the Stokes-Einstein
law, and the role of spatial heterogeneity will be calculated from INM. An
extension of the current theory will be investigated to introduce time-dependent
adiabatic and diabatic normal mode treatments. This would extend the INM
treatment to dephasing and motional narrowing. There are excellent theoretical
models which explain the behavior and properties of gas phase systems where the
motion is chaotic, collisions frequent, and interactions are weak. Theoretical
models for the solid state are also quite well developed since periodic order in
crystalline systems provides the necessary simplifications to lead to tractable
solutions. The properties of liquids and supercooled liquids or glasses still
present quite a challenge to theoretical interpretation. Keyes is one of several
theoretical chemists who is making significant headway on developing a molecular
interpretation of the physical and chemical properties of liquids. The long
range impact of this work could be significant in helping to understand
chemistry in condensed phases.