* 9708970
* Analysis of an Olmec Piedmont Center
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Thomas Killion, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 06/30/1999
* USD 88,179.00

The Olmec, one of Mesoamerica's first complex societies, developed along
Mexico's Southern Gulf Coast during the period of ca. 1,400 - 400 BC. Olmec
archaeology has traditionally focused on the spectacular achievements of this
culture, most notably the colossal heads and other sculptures carved of basalt
and displayed or interred within the monumental precincts of their largest
centers. Olmec scholars have concentrated on the riverine sites in the Olmec
heartland where most of the monuments were first discovered and endeavored to
understand the iconography expressed. The chronology and economic organization
of settlement in piedmont and upland sectors which provided the source area for
the basalt used in the monuments consequently is still poorly understood. Laguna
de los Cerros, long considered one of the four principal centers of the Olmec
heartland lies within the basalt bearing source zone for these monuments at the
base of the Tuxtlas Mountains in southern Veracruz. The site produced numerous
sculptures in pure Olmec style. Surprisingly almost no research has been
conducted at Laguna since its initial exploration although it is known that a
monument workshop exists within six kilometers of the site's center. This
suggests that Laguna may have been the center of a local piedmont prestige
economy specializing in monument production either for local use or for export
to larger riverine sites. Dr. Killion has postulated that control of a piedmont
prestige technology in the production of carved monuments necessary for Olmec
ceremonialism would have enhanced the site's elite status and power, created
economic and political opportunities for local leaders, encouraged the growth of
regional power and helped further the process which led to a stratified form of
social organization. To examine this proposition Dr. Killion and his colleagues
will conduct a survey to produce basic settlement pattern data and to trace
changing patterns of settlement over time. They will also undertake a program of
stratigraphic testing and intensive surface artifact collection. Petrographic
analysis of basalt sources and workshop localities will allow the reconstruction
of the organization of basalt production within Laguna's hinterland and its
potential role as a monument producer throughout the heartland. This research is
important because the Laguna sites present a unique opportunity to acquire new
information on a key piece of the puzzle of Olmec cultural dynamics. It will
shed new light on the processes which led to the rise of the first Middle
American civilization. ¢ ?¢?/%%` %Á/?Á _??Á ?Á?_/>Á>¥ />? ??¢??%Á ?Á_/?>¢
??Á©?¢¥???/>¢ ©/?Á Â???¢Á? ???_/??%` ?> ¥©Á?? ??%Á ?> ¥©Á ????%?:/¥??> ????Á¢¢
/>? ?/¢¥??/%?¢¥¢ ©/?Á ?ÁÁ> ÀÁ>Á?/%` ?À>??Á? ñ???Á>?Á ?>???/¥Á¢ ¥©/¥ ¼Á% % í/>/¥
?/¢ ???_/??%` / ?/¢¥??/% ¢?¥Á />? ¥©Á _?>?_Á>¥¢ _/` ?> Â/?¥ ?ÁÂ%Á?¥ ¥©Á ¢/_Á
????Á¢¢ Á???Á>?Á? ?> /À????%¥??/% ?ÁÀ??>¢ (?(%Á%%/> ??¢¥?%/¥Á¢ ¥©/¥ ¥©Á ?`>/_??
?©??© %Á? ¥? ????%?:/¥??> ?> ¥©Á +Á/? ñ/¢¥ ?¢ _?? ??_?%??/¥Á? ¥©/> _?¢¥
/??©/Á?%?À?¢¥¢ ? Á/%?:Á />? ¥©/¥ ¥©Á ?/¢¥??/%?¢¥ ?>??¥ ©/¢ ?ÁÁ> ?>?Á?Á¢¥?_/¥Á?
¼©Á ?>Â??_/¥??> ??%%Á?¥Á? /¥ ¼Á%% í/>/¥ ?¢ ???Á?¥%` ?Á%Á?/>¥ ¥? ¥©?¢ ??Á¢¥??>
¼©?¢ ?Á¢Á/??© ?¢ ?_???¥/>¥ ?Á?/?¢Á ?¥ ??%% ?>??Á/¢Á ??? ?>?Á?¢¥/>??>À ?Â©??
??_?%Á? ????%?:/¥??>¢ /??¢Á ¿¥ ??% % ?Á¢??Á Â??_ ?__?>Á>¥ ?Á¢¥???¥??> ?_???¥/>¥
/??©/Á?%?À??/% ?>Â??_/¥??>