* 9708035
* The Agaricales: Molecular Systematics and Evolution of      Mushrooms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 218,044.00

9708035 Vilgalys Mushrooms are among the most conspicuous groups of fungi found
in nature, and are of ecological and economic importance. This project by Dr.
Rytas Vilgalys of Duke University and his colleagues in Canada and the U.S.
supports the development of a DNA sequence data base for taxonomic studies of
mushroom fungi and their allies (usually placed in the order Agaricales, of the
basidiomycetes). Although there has been much speculation about the
relationships of diverse mushroom groups (gilled or poroid forms, underground
"truffle" forms, etc.), little is known about their phylogenetic origins or the
characters that reliably define each of the lineages. The taxonomy of mushrooms
has traditionally relied on morphological features that are known or suspected
to be subject to parallel or convergent evolution, or are phenotypically plastic
within species or genera; as a result, many families are considered artificial
assemblages, keyed to easily recognizable characters that nonetheless do not
correlate with other features of their biology. An independent data set of DNA
sequences from the nuclear ribosomal genes, from more than 500 representative
species sampled from tropical, temperate, and boreal regions, provides for
measurement of mutational differences that can then be used to construct
phylogenetic trees for mushroom groups. When compared and integrated with
traditional morphological and life-history characters of the fungi, the
molecular sequence data will aid researchers in the identification of new or
poorly known species, and provide a comparative basis for studies on mushroom
ecology and biology. The evolutionary origins and diversity of "fruit body"
formation in mushrooms, of their enzymatic capabilities for digesting wood and
carbohydrates, and of their general nutritional modes (saprophytic, parasitic,
mutualistic) can be studied in a rigorous comparative manner in the context of a
well-supported phylogenetic framework that establishes the genealogical
connections among species. Dr. Vilgalys is one of the leaders in this new
comparative biology of fungi.