* 9708319
* CRHCT: Reducing Health Care Costs Using 3-D Time-Resolved   Contrast-Enhanced MR Angiography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* D.G. Fryback, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 784,395.00

9708319 Grist Cardiovascular disease costs an estimated $151.3 billion in the
U.S. annually, and atherosclerosis is the leading cause of these expenditures.
The treatments for atherosclerotic vascular disease require an accurate
diagnosis of the degree and extent of arterial vascular disease. Diagnosis of
atherosclerotic vascular disease currently relies on digital subtraction
angiography (DSA), in which an intraarterial catheter is placed at the vessel of
interest, and iodinated contrast is injected during the acquisition of images
depicting the arterial lumen. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has recently
been widely advocated as a noninvasive method for imaging arterial disease. The
method can be performed at a much lower cost than DSA, since it does not require
arterial catheterization and is nearly risk free. Cost savings using the MRA
techniques have been estimated at from $800 (aorta studies) to $3,430 (carotid
studies) per examination. For the carotid arteries alone, this could account for
$1.5 billion in medical savings. However, the expected savings would exceed this
value because the MRA methods can be used in several different anatomic regions,
including the renal, carotid, aortic, peripheral, and pulmonary arteries. The
investigators have developed a method called 3D MR-DSA that combines a number of
the positive attributes of MRA and digital subtraction angiography. The method
has been shown to be very powerful, but the operational aspects need to be
improved by research. Results from this project are expected to : 1) Improve
operational aspects of 3D MR-DSA data acquisition and processing to provide an
examination procedure as close as possible to X-ray DSA, 2) Improve image
quality for 3D MR-DSA, 3) Identify, methods to reduce the dose of contrast agent
required for 3D MR DSA, 4) Develop a strategy for disseminating 3D MR-DSA to 5
study sites, and 5) Determine the costs of 3D MR-DSA relative to conventional
angiography. The ultima te goal of the investigation is to develop a robust, low
cost MRA technique that provides accurate diagnostic information and has
operational characteristics similar to conventional angiography. This requires a
collaborative research effort between medical physicists, engineers, and
radiologists to define the performance requirements and identify technical
solutions to the existing problems. The educational component of the project is
directed towards developing a seminar series course that teaches engineers and
medical physicists the basics of cost analysis and technology assessment. The
initial implementation of the course will be performed at the University of
Wisconsin and is to be presented at the 1999 International Society for Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM) meeting. ***