* 9708452
* Modeling of Contaminant Dispersion in Complex-Terrain Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,05/31/2000
* James Anderson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John F. Foss
* 05/31/2000
* USD 425,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9708452 FERNANDO This proposal was submitted to the environmental
Geochemistry and Biochemistry (EGB) solicitation NSF 96-152. The aim of this
research program is to utilize the complementary expertise of laboratory
experimentalists, turbulence modelers, numerical analysts and field
observationalists to carry out an interdisciplinary study of air flow and
pollutant dispersion, including chemical and physical transformations, in rugged
(complex) terrain. As a result of restricted vertical mixing, pooling of air
during nocturnal cooling and absence of background meso-scale wind flow to flush
the basins, urban developments in complex terrain are prone to severe air
pollution problems. Often the important surface features which influence the
local wind flows are of the order of 100 meters while the valley diurnal air
motions are governed by scales of more than 100 km. These scale disparities pose
a difficult problem for numerical models. In addition, during morning and
evening transitions from cooling to heating of the ground and vice-versa
(turnover or transitional periods), wind motions are intermittent with wind
speeds of the order of one meter per second, thus posing problems for field
measurements. The existing models for the prediction of flow and dispersion in
these areas are known to yield unsatisfactory results, especially during
turnover periods. The proposed work will be directed primarily toward the
development of a robust, general-purpose, geo-chemo-physical numerical model for
complex-terrain flows and its validation. Laboratory and theoretical studies
will be conducted to improve the fundamental understanding of and develop new
parameterizations for complex-terrain, non-equilibrium turbulent flows. Detailed
analyses of particle samples taken in selected field sites at 10 minute
intervals will be used for the validation of turbulence parameterizations and
the development of an aerosol model. An available meteorological model will be
significantly m odified to incorporate these new parameterizations, including
unsteady vertical mixing and aerosol transport and chemistry. This new complex-
terrain model will be tested and calibrated against available and new field
data. The wind fields during transitional low-wind periods will be deduced by
using properly scaled laboratory complex-terrain models; a physical model of the
Phoenix, Arizona area will be used for this purpose. The numerical model will be
run for specific areas -- with realistic initial and boundary conditions and
source distribution -- for operational forecasting of wind fields, pollutant
levels, impacts on soil, interaction between indoor and outdoor air and
assessment of human exposure.