* 9708557
* Copper Bioavailability on Microbial Degradation of          Trichloroethylene
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Kim Hayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2002
* USD 440,000.00

9708557 Semrau This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 96-152, and is being funded
jointly by the Divisions of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Chemistry and
Earth Sciences, and by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. This
research will determine how soil surfaces limit the bioavailability of copper to
methanotrophs and the resulting effect on the expression and activity of both
forms of methane monooxygenase (MMO). Copper to biomass ratio is a key factor in
regulating expression and activity of soluble and particulate methane
monooxygenases (sMMO and pMMO, respectively) in liquid cultures of
methanotrophs. To determine how different soil surfaces can limit the
bioavailability of copper and the resulting effect on MMO expression and
activity, two representative methanotrophs, M. trichosporium OB3b and M. albus
BG8 will be grown in pure cultures in the presence of aluminum oxide (a
representative of commonly occurring metal oxides) and montmorillonlte
(representative of an important ion-exchange site bearing mineral) under a
variety of solution conditions. These organisms were chosen for initial study
because M trichosporium OB3b can express both forms of MMO while M. albus BG8
can express only pMMO. Experimental measurements include: speciation and amount
of aqueous, adsorbed and cell-associated copper using atomic adsorption
spectroscopy or a copper ion electrode; copper sorption by X-ray absorption
spectroscopy; sMMO and pMMO expression by naphthalene oxidation assays and
Western blots; propylene oxide assays of soluble and particulate fractions to
localize and measure MMO activity; GC-MS analysis to determine the ability of
these cells to oxidize methane and trichloroethylene. In subsequent experiments,
artificial mixed cultures of both organisms will be grown in similar
soil/solution conditions to understand how surfaces can cause population
fluctuations by acting as a sink for copper. Experimental mea surements include:
expression and activity of sMMO and pMMO; population composition by Western
blot, acridine orange direct count, and PCR amplification of the genes for 16s
rRNA, sMMO and pMMO; and the ability of mixed cultures to oxidize methane and
trichloroethylene. This multidisciplinary research incorporates approaches from
molecular biology, biochemistry and geochemistry, and is a model system for
examining the effect of bioavailability of other metals on microbial degradation
of both aromatic and aliphatic halogenated hydrocarbons. ***