* 9708535
* Biogeochemistry of Anaerobic Sedimentary Environments:      An Integrated Geochemical and Microbiological Study of      Dissimilatory Iron and Sulfate Reduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 255,000.00

9708535 Van Cappellen A combined geochemical and microbiological approach is
proposed to investigate the kinetic controls of dissimilatory iron (III) and
sulfate reduction, two of the major respiratory pathways in anaerobic
environments. Experiments will be performed using sediments collected in the
saltmarsh of Sapelo Island, Georgia, where sulfate and iron reducing bacteria
are major components of the microbial population. The co-investigators will use
16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes to detect sulfate- and Fe(III)-reducing
bacteria, in conjunction with activity assays, phylogenetic screening, and
kinetic flow-through reactor experiments. The molecular probes will establish
the relative abundances of sulfate and iron reducing bacteria in the sediments
core sections, and provide independent information to differentiate chemical and
microbial pathways. The flow-through experiments on undisturbed sections of
sediment cores will provide the kinetic data needed to derive rate expressions
for the two dissimilatory pathways, as a function of temperature, substrate
availability (organic matter, iron(III) oxyhydroxides, sulfate) and the
composition of the pore solution (sulfide, nutrients, pH). The analysis of
phylogenetically informative gene sequences will assess the similarity between
the iron and sulfate reducing bacteria that propagate on the reactor systems and
the naturally-occurring populations. This proposal was submitted in response to
the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation, NSF
96-152. The proposed research is being jointly supported by the Divisions of
Earth Sciences and Ocean Sciences.