* 9708057
* An Integrated Graduate Program to Prepare Educators Who Will Train the Materials Technologists of the Future
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/2002
* USD 486,000.00

9708057 Chang An interdisciplinary master's graduate program is under
development at the Materials Research Center at Northwestern University which
will prepare educators for teaching Materials Science and Technology at the high
school and junior college levels. A total of six masters degree students will be
jointly supported by the NSF and Northwestern University for a period of four
years. A multi- disciplinary team of Northwestern faculty members act as project
mentors, and participating industrial partners act as advisers. Graduate
students in this program take courses in science, education, and engineering
with a core of materials related subjects. In addition to course studies,
students engage in a year of hands-on research and gain active teaching
experience in regional colleges or high schools. The students also participate
in organizing summer institutes with participants from colleges, high schools,
and regional industries. This program is linked to existing educational programs
of the Materials Research Center like the Research Experience for Science
teachers (REST) program and the Materials World Modules (MWM) program. In
addition, a network will be formed to cooperate with other innovative graduate
programs at Northwestern University and elsewhere. This education grant is
funded through the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division
of Materials Research. %%% This grant promotes novel opportunities for students
to prepare for academic, industrial, government and non- traditional roles (such
as communication, business, leadership, ethics, mentoring) and assists in
integration of research and training with curricula. ***