* 9708944
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research:  Nanofabrication     Techniques Based on Two Levels of Molecular Self-Assembly   Self-Assembled Monolayers & Ordering of Block Copolymers
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Paul Nealey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9708944 Nealy, Paul F. U of Wisconsin, Madison The proposal's
short-term research goal is to demonstrate the enabling technology for the
resist system described below. This proposal for a Small Grants for Exploratory
Research supports the investigation of the interfacial phenomena that govern the
ordering of thin films of amphiphilic block copolymers on patterned
hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces. Optical lithography, the most widespread
technique for the fabrication of microelectronic devices, is approaching the
lower limit (>100 nm) in the size of features that it can produce. At the same
time, there is little doubt that the need for denser, faster and more powerful
circuits will continue. Smaller features (50nm) can be produced with electron
beam writing or stylus lithography. These processes, however, are currently
serial and will require significant development for high-volume commercial
applications. Lithographies based on shorter wavelength radiation, for example
extreme ultra violet (EUV) and X-ray lithography (XRL), have the required
resolution. but no satisfactory resist materials exist for applications below
100 nm. Current resist systems rely on kinetic processes such as diffusion and
dissolution. The principles that govern these systems cannot be blindly
extrapolated in the nanometer regime because of vanishing small tolerances and
margins. New resist systems for the nanometer regime must be able to produce
features of molecular dimensions with tolerances and margins of atomic
dimensions. The proposed long -term research goal is to develop a
nanofabrication technique based on interfacial phenomena and two levels of
molecular: self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and ordering of thin films of block
because it leads to equilibrium structures that are at (or close to)
thermodynamic minimum. Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) will be formed on the
surface of a substrate, and the SAMs will patterned in the plane of the
amphiphilic block copolymer will be depos ited on the substrate, and surface
energy will govern the ordering of the strongly segregating copolymer upon
annealing. If the dimensions of the patterned SAMs are of the same order of
magnitude as the dimensions of the polymer molecules, then structure in the
polymer film will be induced normal to the substrate. Regions of low surface
energy will be covered with the hydrophobic block of the polymer, and regions of
high surface energy will be covered with the hydrophilic block of the polymer.
It is expected that the order to propagate will pass through the entire
thickness of the deposited film. One of the blocks of the block copolymer will
be selectively etched. Arbitrarily shaped patterns with lateral dimensions of
tens of nanometers will be transferred from the patterned SAMs to resist
material (the remaining block of the copolymer) at the resolution of X-ray
lithography.