* 9708531
* GOALI: Feature Extraction for Mesh Generation in Virtual    Prototyping: A Distributed Industrial Traineeship Site
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Rajit Gadh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1999
* USD 99,760.00

This grant provides funding for a GOALI project between the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Ford Motor Company and ALCOA Technical Center to establish a
graduate student traineeship site. The project is done in a distributed setting
between three locations: (1) Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, MI; (2) ALCOA
Technical Center, Pittsburgh, PA; and (3) University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
Internet-related technologies will be used for achieving synchronicity in
research and adequate levels of collaboration. The graduate student traineeship
site is focused on research and development of feature recognition and
subsequent decomposition of such shapes into simpler shapes to support automatic
finite element mesh generation. Creating meshes for simpler shapes and combining
them is easier and results in better meshes than creating meshes for complex
shapes. In the present research, these simpler shapes are called BLOBS (Basic
Logical Bulk Shapes). BLOBS represent the basic elements into which an object
must be decomposed. This project will result in a systematic methodology for
decomposing a shape feature into BLOBS and the creation of a BLOB tree which can
be used to sequence the generation of the mesh for efficiently generated and
high quality meshes go beyond finite element mesh generation. This project, if
successful, will educate the students about the value and needs of industrial
research in the field of shape decomposition for mesh generation. By this
technological and methodological exchange, industry will learn the constraints
of academic research as well as the opportunity to influence university
research. Finally, due to the university-industry collaboration, this project
will create a conduit for technology transfer of university research into a
company environment.