* 9708489
* Dissertation Research: Archaeological Excavation of the     Xunantunich Maya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Wendy Ashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 10,708.00

Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, MS Angela Keller will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. For the last several years she has participated in
the survey and excavation of Xunantunich, a Mayan site located in lowland
Belize. It consists primarily of a core cluster of monumental architecture with
walkways, roads, public plazas and terraces as well as larger more impressive
temple mounds. The site is particularly interesting for several reasons. First,
it dates to relatively late in the Maya sequence with only Late Postclassic and
Terminal Classic components. This means that the architectural layout can be
viewed as essentially synchronous and minimal segregation of features by time
period is necessary. Secondly, a curious disjunction exists between the site
itself and the surrounding hinterland which maintained a large and prosperous
population both before the site was occupied and after its abandonment. This is
unusual in a Mayan context. Ashmore, Keller and other team members have examined
the spatial organization of the Xunantunich core and compared it to
ethnohistoric documents which describe how Mayan villages, when first described
by the Spanish, were arranged. They believe that major buildings and causeways
were organized along ritual lines and that the arrangement in space reflected
Mayan beliefs about cosmic order. Only portions of the site have been excavated
and detailed mapping has not been completed. During one season of NSF supported
fieldwork MS Keller will do both. She has determined what configuration of data
is necessary to support a `cosmic` model and will collect the necessary
information to test this idea. Archaeologists wish to understand how the Mayan
civilization arose and was maintained by people who lived in an extremely harsh
environment and who possessed a simple level of technology. How was it possible
to integrate large numbers of people into widespread social and economic
systems? Many archaeologists have postulated that political and ritual power
were essentially synonymous and through control of important rituals rulers were
able to exercise considerable power. Were Xunantunich spatially organized along
ritual lines, this fact would strongly support this hypothesis. This research is
also important because it will assist in training a promising young scientist.