* 9708095
* Exploration of the Manufacture of Protein Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Youqi Wang, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

The purpose of this project is to explore a manufacturing process for a high
strength fiber reinforced composite with protein based polymer matrix. The major
advantages of the new composite include: Compared to the petroleum based
polymer, which is widely used in fiber reinforced composites, the protein based
polymer is tough and ductile. These are the key factors affecting impact
strength. It should be expected that the protein based polymer composite would
absorb more energy created by collision and have a greater impact strength than
the petroleum based composite. The manufacturing process proposed for the new
composite is environmentally friendly. Little toxic chemical materials will be
involved in the manufacturing process. The cost of the protein polymer is
relatively low. There are abundant natural resources for the protein polymer,
such as soybean and various grains in the U.S. Protein polymer has never been
combined with high strength fibers to manufacture composites. Therefore, a
preliminary study is necessary. During the preliminary research period,all the
polymer behaviors related to manufacturing process will be examined and a test
run of the prepregging process will be carried out. The outcome will determine
the feasibility of developing a high strength fibrous composite with a protein
polymer. By the end of the project period, a follow up proposal will be
submitted. The research conducted following the proposed planning period will
include two phases. Phase I concerns each step of the manufacturing process and
its effect on the mechanical properties. An effective strategy will be proposed
for the development of the manufacturing process of the new composite. In phase
II static, dynamic and impact tests will be conducted to examine the properties
of the new composite, particularly the toughness and impact strength. composite.
An inexpensive high toughness composite will have a big potential market in the
automobile, civil engine. This is the first employment of a protein based
polymer as the matrix of a high strength, light weight composite. An inexpensive
high toughness composite will have a big potential market in the automobile,
civil engineering and infrastructure fields. However, this research is still in
a fundamental stage.