* 9708205
* SBIR PHASE II: Electronic Beam Steering for Ground Probing  Radar
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Scott Thompson, ChT Engineering Systems
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1999
* USD 304,759.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
marketable beam steering transmitter array for ground probing radar (GPR).
Research conducted under Phase I demonstrated feasibility of forming a focused
beam, from the superposition of multiple antenna elements, that can be steered
to targets beneath the subsurface. Beam steering opens opportunities for
enhanced target discrimination, increased depth of penetration, and broader area
of coverage from a single location. Through post processing, three-dimensional
images may be created of an area under investigation. The beam steered array
product will be positioned as a hardware accessory that enhances the operation
of existing GPR systems. Therefore, it is important that such an "add-on" be
versatile, cheap, easy-to-used, and compatible with as many of the existing GPR
systems as possible. In Phase II, testing of a prototype in as many realistic
GPR environments as possible will be done to extend capabilities to the
operational domain of typical GPR systems. To facilitate analytical
understanding of subsurface beam-forming, the Phase II effort will extend the
modeling of Phase I (which was done without targets and in an homogeneous
subsurface) to more realistic media. The analysis will employ finite difference
time-domain methods in order to model more complex media. In addition,
refinement of the array hardware and its associated software will be
accomplished in order to enhance end-user features. Markets exist in subsurface
exploration; geophysical and hydrological studies; location of underground
facilities, hazardous wastes, and unexploded ordinance; non invasive exploration
of subsurface tunnel systems such as mining tunnels and subway systems;
detection of fluid front migration from underground spills; and large areas
surveys (added coverage from beam steering). This award is supported by the SBIR
Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCOR).