* 9708913
* Software Evolution and Interleaving
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Jon Spencer Rugaber, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

9708913 Complex, evolved software is constructed from a tight-knit composition
of computational structures, called strands, each of which is responsible for
achieving some requirement, goal, or subset of system functionality. Program
strands are interwoven and sometimes even merged in order to share resources.
This phenomenon is called interleaving, and understanding how interleaved
strands compose is the purpose of the proposed work. There are two key
objectives to the research: to formulate a rigorous characterization of the
compositional relationships among interleaved strands and to design a new
representation for expressing their composition. To form a rigorous
characterization, a case study of an existing corpus of software will be
performed in which interleaving of design patterns will be investigated and
compositional mechanisms will be classified. Existing formalisms for
representing strands and their relationships will be surveyed and extended to
create a new formalism that expresses strand composition. The understanding
gained will suggest what types of documentation, programming language features,
and design abstractions are needed to enable software engineers to make
interleaving decisions explicit. This will alert future maintainers of
interleaved software to the fact that the interleaving was intentionally
introduced and mitigate problems with understanding it. ***