* 9708627
* "PRESSS Phase III: Analytical Predictions of Five-Story     Precast Superassemblage Test Structure Performance"
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Le-Wu Lu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 03/31/2002
* USD 93,764.00

9708627 Sause This project is part of the third phase of a coordinated program
of research on Precast Seismic Structural Systems (PRESSS). The PRESSS program,
funded by the National Science Foundation has two goals: (1) to develop new
materials, concepts, and technologies for precast concrete construction in
seismic zones; and (2) to develop comprehensive and rational design
recommendations for precast concrete construction in seismic zones. The first
two phases of the PRESSS program are near completion. He remaining work to be
done to achieve these objectives is the testing of a large-scale precast
structure design according to preliminary design recommendations and analyzed
using models developed in the earlier phases of PRESSS program. The PRESSS Phase
III program requires three components to achieve these objectives: (1) design
studies; (2) analytical studies; and (3) superassemblage tests. Englekirk and
Nakaki, Inc. and the University of Washington will conduct design studies, Leigh
University will conduct analytical studies, and the University of California,
San Diego will conduct experiments on the five story superassembage test
structure. The objectives of the Leigh University component this project of the
PRESSS Phase III program are: (1) to use nonlinear static analysis to predict
the monotonic and cyclic lateral force displacement behavior of prototype
buildings, and to assess this behavior of the five-story superassemblage test
structure using nonlinear dynamic analysis, and assess the behavior; (3) to
compare the predicted performance and the experimental performance and assess
the models and methods used in the analytical prediction; and (4) to develop
design recommendations for precast seismic structural systems. Analytical models
of precast structures developed at Lehigh will be used. The dynamic analysis
will use a set of earthquake ground motions representing various site
characteristics compiled at Lehigh. Comparisons with the performance of the
prototype buildings anticipated in design, and with the experimentally observed
performance of the five-story superassemblage test structure will be made. The
analytical studies will be carefully coordinated with the Phase III design
studies and superassemblage tests.