* 9708341
* The Archaeology of Kahikinui, Hawai'i
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Michael Kolb, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 103,484.00

With National Science Foundations support Dr. Michael Kolb will conduct two
seasons of archaeological excavation and survey in the Kahikinui district on the
island of Maui. The goal of the work is to understand how stratified chiefly
society developed and what mechanisms chiefs used to accrue and consolidate
their power. The rise of complex society in Hawai'i occurred over an 800 year
period which witnessed the rapid development of chiefdoms. Hawai'ian temples and
large-scale dryland and pondfield agricultural systems attest to significant
central leadership and social ranking and the first Westerners to visit the
island encountered a ranked society with a noble ruling class. In the
anthropological literature Hawai'i stands as one of the most important
archaeological and ethnographic examples of a complex chiefdom. The rural nature
and arid climate of Kahikinui provide an excellent venue to examine this
development process since the entire archaeological landscape has been preserved
essentially intact. Thousands of stone features, including habitation sites,
agricultural terraces, shrines and temples are still visible and until recently
the region has received scant archaeological attention. Through study of
individual temples and the contents they contain and through comparative
analysis across sites it is possible to build up a broad picture of how society
was organized and how this changed through time. Kolb is particularly interested
in how chiefs used ideology to consolidate their power and can gain insight into
this through the study of pig remains. In addition to their role as food, pigs
served important ceremonial roles and most often they were slaughtered in ritual
contexts. Through the analysis of such faunal remains across sites and
examination in how their distribution changed over time it is possible to relate
ideology to political power. Kolb and colleagues will make detailed maps of
individual temple sites. These will provide data for measuring labor investment
costs. Excavation will be conducted at all of them to recover cultural and
faunal remains as well as materials for absolute dating. Archaeological evidence
indicates that civilization arose independently in many parts of the world and
that similar stages of development are common across all cases. This strongly
indicates that a basic developmental process underlies these common trajectories
and anthropologists wish to understand the forces involved. Because of the
excellent ethnographic and ethnohistoric data available as well as the presence
of well preserved archaeological remains Hawai'i provides an excellent context
in which to examine this question. The results of this research will be
generalizable well beyond an individual group of islands.