* 9708098
* The Impact of New Deal Relief Spending on Local Labor       Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Price Fishback, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 176,469.00

The growth of government is the most dramatic change in the American economy
during twentieth century. The greatest peace-time expansion of the federal
government occurred during the 1930s, when New Deal programs added significantly
to the nation's infrastructure while employing millions of unemployed workers.
Policy makers today, faced with the simultaneous problems of crumbling
infrastructure and the public's demand for welfare reform, often cite New Deal-
type relief projects as a potential model for an effective solution. Many of
these proposals are based on views of the New Deal's successes, but these claims
have rarely been tested quantitatively. Given the importance of the modern
debate over welfare reform, and despite numerous studies of the politics of the
New Deal, there are surprisingly few micro-level analyses of how New Deal
expenditures affected local economies in the 1930s. To help fill this gap, this
research examines how relief spending during the New Deal affected private wages
and employment in urban labor markets throughout the United States. This project
involves both the collection of data on wages, employment, and relief spending
and the quantitative analysis of the interaction between these and other
variables. The research will explore how New Deal spending on work relief
influenced private employment and wages in local labor markets during the 1930s.
A wide variety of data sets will be constructed from a combination of state
reports, federal reports, and archival sources that will allow an examination of
the effect of work relief on private labor markets, the geographic and
industrial variations in the timing of downturns and recoveries during the
Depression, as well as the factors that contributed to the distribution of work
relief projects across the United States. The most extensive data collection
effort will be the construction of a panel data set that will contain monthly
information on private employment and average monthly earnings, and spending on
relief programs and other forms of social insurance for at least 131 cities
during the 1930s. The data will be combined with a combination of monthly and
annual data on labor demand and supply determinants, as well as variables that
portray the political climate in each of the cities. A second data set will be
constructed that will contain monthly information on employment and earnings in
the building construction industry in 62 cities between 1932 and July 1935. This
sample will allow much closer inspection of the impact of work relief and public
building projects on employment in the building industry, the industry that was
presumably most closely affected by the New Deal building projects. Further
study of the building trades will be performed using a third data set containing
annual contractual wage rates and hours worked, which the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics published for about 100 cities throughout the 1930s