* 9708219
* Dissertation Research: Self Medication with Antibiotics     of Women in Zaire
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Janet McGrath, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Case Western Reserve University. The project is to study the nature of self-
medication with antibiotics by women in a regional city in Zaire. The student
hypothesizes that self-treatment with antibiotics has become the preferred
therapy among women regardless of variation of illness conceptions or severity
of symptoms. The study will collect data from women of reproductive age using
in-depth interviews, systematic elicitation techniques and open ended questions
from a relatively small set of women. Based on the knowledge gained a survey
will be designed and administered to about 250 women selected through a
multistage sampling method. From this sample a subsample of 15 women who report
having experience with STD symptoms will be interviewed in-depth in order to
examine the actual context of decision making. Pharmacists and other antibiotic
drug vendors will also be interviewed. This research is important because
powerful antibiotic medications are commonly sold without prescription or other
expert medical control all over the developing world, leading to the development
of drug-resistant strains of disease. The new knowledge from this project about
how and why people self-medicate will be valuable to health planners and
decision makers in designing programs to address health needs while minimizing
inappropriate use of antibiotic medicinal drugs.