* 9708446
* Isotope Fractionation Effect During Soil Uptake of Methane, Carbon Monoxide, and Hydrogen
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2000
* USD 110,000.00

Isotope fractionation effect during soil uptake of methane, carbon monoxide and
hydrogen This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation, NSF 06-152. It is being
jointly funded by the Divisions of Ocean Sciences and Atmospheric Science. The
objective of this proposal is to measure isotope fractionation during soil
uptake of carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4) and hydrogen (H2). These
fractionation effects are important to quantify so that continued atmospheric
measurements of these greenhouse gases can take full advantage of isotopic data
to fingerprint specific sources and sinks. This will allow for a significant
advancement in our understanding of the global cycles of these radiatively
important trace gases. The PI's propose to empirically measure the isotopic
fractionation effect using soil enclosures and measuring air samples collected
as a time-series in the headspace. The site specific data will be extrapolated
to regional and global scales using soil characteristics (e.g. temperature,
moisture, porosity, composition, etc.). Overall, the proposed measurements, when
coupled with on-going time series measurements of the isotopic composition of
CH4, CO and anticipated measurements of H2, will provide the framework needed to
determine the influence of soil uptake on the seasonal changes in the
concentration and isotopic composition of these gases in temperate northern
latitudes and on the interhemispheric asymmetry of their isotopic composition.