* 9708433
* Paleontology in the 21st Century Workshop, September 1997
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* H. Richard Lane, Society of Sedimentary Geology SEPM
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 15,000.00

9708433 Lane Paleontology is a diverse science. Flanked by Biology and Geology,
it stands as the study of biotic diversity and life history. Its close relations
with Biology and Geology are both a strength and a liability. A strength because
of the rich information shed by both sister sciences on paleontologic
interpretation and knowledge. A liability because paleontology is commonly
treated as a subset of both and therefore a "second string" player in funding
and integrated project planning. This latter liability cuts across all
organizations where paleontology is practiced. Paleontologists are gainfully
employed in academia, industry, government, museums and institutes and represent
knowledgeable specialists of the gamut of biotic groups within the plant and
animal kingdoms. As important as paleontology is to societal and human needs, a
truly representative assembly of paleontologists has never met to consider
problems facing the science and to establish agreed strategic directions for its
livelihood and betterment. Now is the time for such a meeting because many
aspects of Paleontology are in transition as it approaches the millennium.
Funding for academic and government research and staff positions worldwide has
decreased significantly over the last ten years, and continues to do so with no
end in sight. Academic geology departments, by and large, are not replacing
retiring members of our profession in kind, and experienced stratigraphic
paleontologists are being laid off in record numbers as the petroleum industry
continues to reel from adverse world-wide business and political climates.
Ironically, all this comes at a time in which the science of paleontology is
undergoing a period of unprecedented progress as new technologies and data
analytic approaches are integrated with its rapidly growing and increasingly
detailed database. It is hard to imagine a geological discipline that has made,
and, despite these problems, continues to make, as many different practical
contribut ions to the earth sciences as paleontology. Yet, for a variety of
reasons, continued access to these data and individuals trained to expand and
interpret them is in serious jeopardy. Because problems facing paleontology
today span the entire science and the world, a global, pan-paleontological
effort is needed to address them. For this reason, a one week workshop is being
organized for September 3-9, 1997 at Senckenberg Museum, Frankfurt, Germany. The
workshop entitled "Paleontology in the 21st Century" is a Senckenberg Conference
and co-sponsored by SEPM, The Paleontological Society, American Association of
Stratigraphic Paleontologists, Paleobotany Section of the Botanical Society of
America, The International Paleobotanical Organization, the Society of
Vertebrate Paleontology, the International Paleontological Association, Gulf
Coast SEPM and additional society sponsorships will be secured, especially those
representing other specialties of paleontology. The Workshop will identify and
address issues impacting paleontology and the paleontological community as they
enter the 21st Century. The following are seven possible positive outcomes of
the workshop. 1. Identification of broad scientific initiatives for the 21st
century that would maximize paleontology's relevance and impact on technology,
society, and industry. 2. Development of an overall, unified, direction(s) for
paleontology as it enters the 21st Century. 3. Evaluation of the current
organizational structure of paleontology and recommend/implement changes for the
future, if judged needed. 4. Better communication between the various
specialties/fractions in Paleontology. 5. Development of a stronger public
support base. 6. More effectively structure and use government regulation and
enhance paleontology's interface with governments. 7. More effective interfaces
with sister sciences. Senckenberg Museum will provide the space, equipment,
publications support and $20,000 travel moneys for participants from third world
countries. Additional moneys to support other participants will be raised from
private, public and government sources in Europe and the United States. In North
America, $7500 have already been raised and there are known commitments in
western Europe. DFG and ESF are expected to contribute $14,000 and $10,000.
Revenues generated in North America will be dispersed by the SEPM Foundation to
Western Hemisphere participants; those generated in western Europe will be
dispersed by Senckenberg to Eastern Hemisphere attendees (see attached budget in
Appendix A). At this time, 104 invited delegates are spread among 29 countries
(see attached list of delegates, Appendix B).