* 9708963
* Project Kaleidoscope:  Science Facilities Evaluation and    Publication Project
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Jeanne Narum, Independent Colleges Office
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 106,547.00

Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL), under the auspices of the Independent College
Office, is the recipient of funds to evaluate the impact of improving physical
infrastructure on undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering, and
technology (SME&T) education. Since 1991, PKAL has been instrumental in
assisting colleges and universities in all parts of the country strengthen their
programs in the field of SME&T. Central to this effort has been the
organization's focus on facilities planning, challenging institutions to explore
the relationship between space and programs. Through workshops and publications,
PKAL has been a catalyst in helping institutions articulate their vision of
student learning that gives direction to curricular, facilities, and financial
planning needs. Funds will also be used to prepare a supplement to the
comprehensive PKAL Volume III, Structures for Science--A Handbook on Planning
Facilities. As the only publication of its kind, the Handbook features case
studies of successful renovations and new structures illustrating innovative and
creative approaches to planning and designing of space. The supplement will be
distributed both in print and electronically, including new information on
facilities planning, building systems, and equipping new or renovated science
facilities. Both projects will address the continuing infrastructure needs at
colleges and universities, ensuring that the physical environment for faculty
and students is safe and accommodates new approaches to conduct research and
research training activities.