* 9708504
* Trifluoroacetic Acid:  Its Environmental Occurrence and Its Effects in Biota in Seasonal Wetlands Downwind from Sources of Precursor HCFCs and HFCs
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1997,12/31/1999
* James Seiber, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/1999
* USD 350,000.00

9708504 Seiber This proposal was submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation NSF 96-152. The project described below is
being jointly supported by the Divisions of Atmospheric Sciences and Earth
Sciences. This project addresses the environmental occurrence of trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) and its effects in biota. TFA is a product of the atmospheric
degradation of certain hydrochlorofluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons, which
are replacement compounds for chlorofluorocarbons. The primary objectives of
this project are: (1) To measure environmental concentrations of TFA in air, wet
deposition, dry deposition, surface waters and plants at selected sites downwind
from source regions, and to relate them to atmospheric concentrations of the
precursor compounds; (2) To determine the uptake and effects of TFA in higher
plans and the effects of TFA on microbes representative of seasonal wetlands
under controlled exposure conditions. In addition, the experimental data on TFA
occurrence and distribution will be compared with modeling efforts carried out
at Harvard University. Seasonal wetlands in California and Nevada will be
identified which might be particularly susceptible to effects of TFA from
buildup over time. Environmental sampling will include both proximate downwind
sites and more remote sites in the Sierra Nevada and Great Basin. TFA will be
analyzed as its methyl ester using GC/MS, a technique recently developed by the
PI. Controlled exposures of plants to known amounts of TFA will be conducted
using misting chambers and long-term hydroponic exposures for selected wetland
and crop species. The flux of gaseous and fog-dissolved TFA to and from plant
surfaces, and the root uptake and emission of TFA from selected crop and wetland
plant species will be measured to determine bioconcentration and toxic effects
of TFA. For the microbial study, soils collected from wetland environments will
be amended with TFA at several concentrations and the effect on microbial
communities monitored by measuring microbial respiration.