* 9708093
* Biologically-mediated Manganese Oxide Deposition and its    Effects on Trace Metal Cycling in Aquatic Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* William Ghiorse, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 07/31/2001
* USD 290,000.00

This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry program
supports research on trace metal cycling in the environment by Drs. Leonard W.
Lion, Michael L. Shuler, and William C. Ghiorse of the Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Cornell University. The research is supported by the
Divisions of Chemistry and Earth Sciences and the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. The long term goal is to develop an accurate
mechanistic model for predicting formation of biologically-mediated surface
coatings and their subsequent influence on transition metal distribution in
natural and engineered environments. This project focuses on identifying the
role of manganese oxides in controlling transition metal cycling and on
developing a quantitative model for the process. In particular, the influence of
bacterial processes and biofilm formation on both manganese oxidation and metal
binding by manganese oxides will be included in the model. Manganese oxidation
and manganese oxide deposition will be measured in cultures of bacteria in a
bioflim reactor system where pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration,
fluid shear and light intensity can be controlled. Manganese oxide surface
properties and adsorption of lead and cadmium for biologically oxidized samples
will be compared to results obtained for abiotic chemical redox processes. The
result will be an integrated computational model to predict manganese oxidation
and manganese oxide trace metal binding, including cellular growth, biofilm
accumulation, manganese redox reations, and trace metal speciation and
adsorption. Adsoprtion of lead and cadmium to iron and manganese oxide particles
is thought to be an important means of transport of these toxic metals in the
natural environment. This study is directed toward understanding the role of
manganese oxide adsorption, including the role of biologically-mediated
manganese oxidation and cycling, in the transport process. The results will also
be relevant to development of remediation strategies for toxic metals.