* 9708936
* Collaborative Research on Variation in Legislative          Entrepreneurship in Presidential Systems: Data from Beyond  the U.S. Case
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Bradford Jones, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/2000
* USD 81,004.00

Legislators from the same party can entrepreneurially seek to serve particular
constituencies, they can work together to pursue common programmatic goals, or
they can more commonly, strike a balance somewhere along the continuum between
the two. Entrepreneurial behavior by legislators to promote their own electoral
survival can include breaking party discipline on the chamber floor, initiating
constituency focused legislation, seeking district-targeted committee
assignments, and allocating resources to local offices and staff. The extent to
which they seek votes by stressing their own individual attributes (the
`personal vote`) has profound consequences for whether representation will be
particularistic or programmatic, whether or not regional and parochial concerns
will be delegated to other levels of government, and whether or not interbranch
stalemate and democratic instability are likely. This project measures
legislative entrepreneurship in four Latin American presidential democracies:
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela. Until now, virtually all comparative
studies of entrepreneurship have included detailed data from only one
presidential system - the United States. while comparing presidential and
parliamentary systems is important, the fact that the executive and legislative
branches in parliamentary systems do not have independent electoral origins
dramatically changes the nature of interbranch relations, theories of
representation, and the prospects for entrepreneurship. The researchers test
their hypotheses using data on nomination procedures, electoral systems, and
entrepreneurship collected during field work stays in each of the four
countries. The resulting data base of information on behavior within legislative
chambers is analyzed using quantitative and qualitative methodologies designed
to exploit the variance in legislative entrepreneurship both cross-sectionally
and time serially. The research fleshes out a recently developed model for
explaining the likelihood that legislators will behave entrepreneurially and
develops a research design for testing the model empirically. The findings
should enhance our knowledge of the institutional incentives of politicians and
offer ideas about how to explicitly design particular forms of representation,
decentralization, and interbranch relations in presidential systems. The
resulting data base will be of use to numerous scholars interested in the topic.