* 9708418
* Paleoenvironmental Reconstructions and Paleoclimate         Implications for the Last Interglacial and the 40 to 10 ka  Time Windows in the Eastern Canadian Arctic
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Alexander Wolfe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract ATM-9708418 Miller, Gifford H., Steig, Eric J., and Wolfe, Alexander P.
University of Colorado, Boulder Paleoenvironmental Reconstructions and
Paleoclimate Implications for the Last Interglacial and the 40 to 10 ka Time
Windows in the Eastern Canadian Arctic This award supports a project addressing
two major paleoclimate questions: (1) What characterized terrestrial conditions
in the Arctic during the Last Glacial Maximum? (2) Were previous interglacials
stable warm periods, or were they interrupted by periods of more severe climate?
The former addresses key biological concerns related to biotic refugia, as well
as paleoclimate unknowns regarding the stability of the LGM climate system. The
second question addresses Heinrich events. Originating only a few hundred km
from the field area, Heinrich events resulted in dramatic climate oscillations
throughout the Last Glacial Maximum; however, the impacts of these oscillations
on terrestrial ecosystems in the Arctic is entirely unknown. The interglacial
sediments apparently record a climate state that results in a more northerly
limit of shrub tundra than in the Holocene (i.e., warmer summers), and allow an
assessment of climatic stability under warmer-than-present conditions. This
award will support the completion of analyses of the biological proxies
preserved in cores previously recovered and provide improved chronological
control using AMS 14C dating of organic material in the lake sediments of
eastern Baffin Island, Canada.