* 9708624
* Applications and Tools for Configurable Computing in        Sequential and Parallel Computers
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Foster
* 06/30/2001
* USD 400,000.00

Configurable computing can customize the hardware of a computing environment for
each application. Recently some configurable machines based on field-
programmable gate arrays have shown significant performance improvement over
more traditional processors. However, this performance has come at the cost of
meticulous and time-consuming algorithm mapping. This research consists of two
projects that attempt to lower the cost of entry to configurable computing. In
the uniprocessor domain, performance monitoring and compilation techniques are
under investigation for systems that integrate configurable hardware with
traditional processors. Drawing on SUIF compiler technology, this project is
working toward identification and optimization of code sections that are both
time consuming and implementable using configurable hardware. Such code includes
stream-oriented data processing, irregular logic operations, and short integer
arithmetic. In the multiprocessor domain, FPGAs are being used to implement
application- specific cache coherence protocol processors. The key contribution
of this work will be studying the performance tradeoffs of application-specific
software, configurable hardware, and custom hardware. These may lead to expanded
benefits for application-specific protocols.