* 9708153
* Development of a Non-Radioisotopic Method to Measure        Bacterial Production in the Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9708153 Azam Bacterial production, via 3H-thymidine incorporation, is a "core"
parameter in biological oceanography and marine biogeochemistry. No non-radio-
isotopic method is currently available but one would be highly desirable for a
variety of logistical, safety and scientific reasons. This project will develop
a non-radioisotopic method based on the use of the thymidine analog, 5-bromo-
deoxyuridine (BrdU), for measuring the rate of bacterial DNA synthesis in
seawater samples. BrdU behaves as a thymidine analog and becomes incorporated
into newly synthesized DNA in place of thymidine. Its incorporation into DNA is
quantified by an immunochemical method. After BrdU incorporation, the cells are
permeabilized and treated with an antibody which binds to BrdU in the DNA. A
second antibody, conjugated with a fluorochrome or a dye, is then used to
quantify BrdU incorporation. Many different procedures for quantifying BrdU
incorporation into DNA have been employed. Current protocols will be tested and
modified as necessary to provide the simplest reliable method for aquatic
microbial assemblages. An additional benefit of this approach is the possibility
to estimate growth rates of individual bacteria in a sample in situ
hybridization. The fluorescent signal of individual bacteria could be determined
by epifluorescence microscopy or by flow cytometry. In principle, the BrdU-
labeling could even be combined with rRNA gene probing and, using flow
cytometry, growth rates could then be estimated for any specific group of
bacteria in a complex assemblage. Such a capacity would revolutionize the study
of microbial ecology, providing information on growth rates in microbial
populations at a level of detail not possible with the current radiolabeling
procedures.