* 9708995
* The Heterogeneous Oxidation of Sulfur Dioxide on Alkali     Halide Surfaces: Kinetics and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Jane Ganske, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 06/30/2000
* USD 43,978.00

This Career Advancement Award is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program. Professor Ganske will spend a sabbatical year at the
University of California at Irvine working with Professors Hemminger and
Finlayson-Pitts studying the heterogeneous oxidation chemistry of sulfur dioxide
that occurs on salt surfaces. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and quadrupole
mass spectrometry will be used to analyze the products of these oxidation
reactions. This work will expand on the experience gained by Professor Ganske
using diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy to study these
important reactions in her own laboratory. Following her sabbatical leave a new
quadrupole mass spectrometer is planned for new space in a science annex at
Pepperdine University. This sabbatical will substantively enhance the future
research experiences of Professor Ganske and her undergraduate students at
Pepperdine University in the areas of heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry. The
reactions of gaseous sulfur dioxide on inorganic surfaces is important in many
areas of air pollution caused by the burning of fossil fuels. In this work the
oxidation of sulfur dioxide on inorganic surfaces will be characterized using
several techniques new to Professor Ganske of Pepperdine University. This
experience will be gained during a sabbatical leave at the University of
California at Irvine working with Professors Hemminger and Finlayson-Pitts. The
aim of this project will be to develop processes that efficiently remove sulfur
dioxide from gaseous samples in an economical way and to introduce undergraduate
students to this important research area.