* 9708138
* Dissertation Research: Language and Ideology and Local      Identity in Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* George Collier, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/1999
* USD 5,661.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Stanford University. The project explores the relationship between language and
identity in Guatemala, focusing on the tension between the model of pan-Mayan
identity supported by urban intellectuals versus the model of local-language-
group Mayan identity supported by most rural dwellers. The student will do a
community study in a highland town whose residents claim to be Tzutujil Maya
even though they speak Kiche, a different but related Maya language. The student
will census the households of the town; conduct participant observation in
school programs and language workshops focusing on Mayan language as well as in
normal social settings like the marketplace; conduct focused interviews on
people's beliefs about language; and conduct some sorting tasks from cognitive
anthropology to elucidate the local model of language groupings. After this
intensive study in one community the student will conduct briefer comparative
research in 10 communities speaking 6 different Mayan languages. This research
is important because it will advance our understanding of how local `folk` use
scientific discourse, in the context of historical arguments as well as
contemporary social behavior, to further their nationalist goals. This case
study will provide valuable information to advance theories of language
nationalism in other parts of the world. In addition the project will add to our
expertise about this important region of the hemisphere.