* 9708643
* Experimentation Platform for Detecting and Resolving        Interoperability Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Rosanne Gamble, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9708643 The goal of this research is to devise and perform component integration
experiments at the software architectural level that determine (1) what
component interoperability problems exist, (2) what are solutions to those
problems, and (3) which strategies for integration can perform those solutions.
The value of this research is that it can provide developers with early
knowledge of potential interoperability problems among software components. With
this knowledge, developers can treat integration as a design decision, instead
of only an implementation task. With the increased use of COTS applications,
developers can choose between applications with similar functionality but fewer
interoperability problems with in-house components, speeding productivity. Using
research on software architecture, design patterns, and reports on integrating
actual applications, the proposed research will define a catalog of
architectural characteristics of software that contribute to interoperability
problems. Integration strategies will be associated with their respective
solutions to the conflicts that result from interleaving component
characteristics. A knowledge based system will serve as an experimental testbed
to determine the best integration strategy based on predefined conflict
resolutions among characteristics. The research results, i.e., characteristics,
conflicts, solutions, and strategies, will be provided to the developer to
enhance design decisions and to formulate implementations. ***