* 9708619
* Trait Impressions Predicted from Connectionist Modeling of  Facial Metric Information
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Leslie Zebrowitz, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 243,865.00

Considerable research demonstrates that people have a strong tendency to use
facial appearance when forming first impressions of others' psychological
traits, and that these impressions show considerable consensus across
perceivers. The aim of the proposed research is to explain consensual first
impressions of faces. The explanation to be tested is that social attributes
revealed by the facial qualities that mark babies, fitness, or emotion are
overgeneralized to people whose facial structure resembles that of babies, a
particular level of fitness, or a particular emotional state. Research
investigating relationships between facial qualities and trait impressions has
provided indirect support for the overgeneralization hypothesis. However, the
assumption that these impressions actually happen because of the
overgeneralization of reactions to faces has not been tested. Connectionist
modeling will be used to test the overgeneralization hypothesis. This technique
may reveal whether the physical similarity between two faces is sufficient to
account for similar impressions of them independent of similarities in the
social or semantic implications of the faces. A series of experiments will
provide facial metrics as input to standard back-propagation neural networks.
Additional experiments will be conducted to determine whether human perceivers'
impressions of the faces can be predicted from the responses of the networks.
The proposed experiments will test the overgeneralization explanations for
consensual first impressions of faces, and they will help identify the qualities
that distinguish among faces that vary in emotional expression, genetic fitness,
and maturity. The research will contribute to a better understanding of how
people form impressions of one another, and ultimately how such impressions
influence social interaction and interpersonal relationships.