* 9708221
* CRHCT: New Ultrasonic Techniques for Managing Kidney Disease
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Michael Insana, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 09/30/2001
* USD 744,131.00

9708221 Insana Quantitative ultrasound (QUS) techniques are to be developed to
detect early changes in renal microstructure that ultimately lead to end-stage
renal disease (ESRD). QUS involves analysis of echo spectra in frequency
channels corresponding to scattering from various anatomical scales to measure
the size, number density, and collagen content of essential tissue
microstructures. These are among the first techniques for analyzing histological
properties of tissues in vivo and noninvasively. The incidence of ESRD in the
United States is increasing geometrically. Average medicare costs were $46,117
per ESRD patient for a total of $9.5 billion in 1992. A definitive diagnosis of
progressive injury leading to ESRD is now based on clinical findings and biopsy;
that often occur late in the disease process. Currently no test exists to
establish the presence of early kidney injury or to identify populations at risk
for whom prevention of progressive injury should be attempted. This
investigation will examine the potential of QUS as a safe, inexpensive, and
noninvasive method for early detection of renal injury caused by several common
conditions including diabetes, hypertension, and cystic kidney disease. This
three-year, multidisciplinary research project aims to develop new biomedical
instrumentation, experimental techniques, and models of disease processes. If
QUS can successfully identify patients at risk for ESRD, the potential to
prevent disease would be improved, the net cost of treating the disease would be
reduced significantly, and the quality of life for those patients affected would
be improved. This research program is part of a new graduate-level Biomedical
Engineering Program at the University of Kansas. ***