* 9708649
* Synthesis of Ion Channel Forming Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,12/04/1998
* Karin Akerfeldt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/04/1998
* USD 225,000.00

With the support of a Research in Undergraduate Institutions award from the
Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, Professor Karin S. Akerfeldt, of
the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey,
Camden Campus, carries out the synthesis and analysis of ion channel forming
peptides. Structurally well-defined artificial proton selective channels are
synthesized as models to study the fundamental mechanisms involved in proton
transport. The models are designed to form amphiphilic alpha helices which, in a
membrane and in the presence of an applied electrical field, self-associate to
form conducting helix bundles. Following design of suitable peptide sequences to
allow convenient handling, covalently linked dimers of the designed sequences
are prepared to probe the factors influencing channel stability, while
incorporation of norvaline derivatives into specific positions of the sequences
permits evaluation of their effects on the packing properties of the peptides.
Membrane channels, permitting the transport of ions or small molecules,
constitute one of the critical modes of communication across cell membranes. In
addition, they are critical in cell regulation and mediate all electrical
excitability of the nervous and muscle systems. Professor Karin S. Akerfeldt, of
the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey,
Camden Campus, with the support of a Research in Undergraduate Institutions
award from the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, prepares
comparatively small model polypeptides designed to serve as transmembrane ion
channels. Through the synthesis and study of these model compounds, Professor
Akerfeldt explores various factors influencing the flow of ions across
membranes. These factors are difficult to explore with the naturally occurring
channel-forming peptides given their complexity, instability in the absence of
membranes, and often limited availability in significant quantities.