* 9708351
* Exploration of Solvent Mediated Electronic Coupling in      Electron Transfer and Energy Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Matthew Zimmt, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2001
* USD 320,000.00

Professor Matthew B. Zimmt, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University,
is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for his
exploration of solvent-mediated electronic coupling in electron transfer and
energy transfer reactions. The mediation of electronic coupling between an
electron donor and an electron acceptor by the surrounding medium represents an
essential element in chemical and biological electron transfer. Through the
synthesis of a family of molecules bearing donor and acceptor moieties attached
to a common rigid spacer, Professor Zimmt explores the role of intervening
solvents in electron transfer processes, addressing the generality of solvent-
mediated coupling in electron-mediated and hole-mediated processes, the
dependence of solvent-mediated coupling on solvent properties and on donor-
bridge-acceptor electronic symmetry, the effects of interference between
solvent- and bond-mediated coupling, and the relevance of solvent-mediated
electronic coupling to triplet energy transfer. Reactions in which an electron
is transferred from one molecule to another form the basis of a wide range of
important chemical and biological processes, including the photosynthetic
capture and utilization of energy from sunlight by plants. With the support of
the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, Professor Matthew B. Zimmt,
of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University, studies chemical factors
influencing the transfer of an electron from one molecule to another. By
constructing molecules designed to hold the donor and the acceptor of the
electron with a well-defined orientation and spacing with respect to one-
another, Professor Zimmt examines the role of intervening solvent molecules in
mediating the electron transfer process. These model studies shed light on the
fundamental factors controlling biological electron transfer reactions and are
of additional relevance to areas such as the design and construction of
molecular-scale electronic devices.