* 9708399
* Research Needs Workshop: Building Systems Integration for   Performance and Environmental Quality
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Vivan Loftness, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,060.00

9708399 Loftness There is a major need for advancing the scientific
understanding, technological innovation, and design/engineering standards for
integrating building systems to improve overall building performance and
environmental quality; such concerns exist equally for new construction and for
retrofitting of existing buildings. Advances in scientific and engineering
understanding will focus on the performance of integrated systems - thermal,
visual, acoustic, spatial, and air quality, as well as long term integrity.
Advances in technological innovation would focus on innovation in structure,
enclosure, thermal conditioning, ventilation, lighting, power and networking,
and interior space definition; the anticipated advances will be present both in
individual products and in integrated systems. Advances in practice would focus
on the building delivery process, incorporating issues such as codes, design
standards, education, quality assurance procedures, and prototyping of flexibly
integrated systems to ensure organizational flexibility, technological
adaptability, and long term environmental quality. The strategic research needs
may vary significantly between advancing building systems, integration for
performance, indoor environmental quality, global resource utilization, and the
competitiveness of the United States building/construction industry. This NSF
Research Needs workshop will be held in 1997, assembling key researchers,
practitioners, government and industry participants to map out state-of-the-art
conditions and to identify research needs and priorities. The workshop report
will be distributed to institutions, organizations, and individual researchers
active in this research area: the report will also be available electronically
over the World Wide Web.