* 9708001
* Strontium Isotope Analysis and Prehistoric Residential      Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Jane Buikstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 297,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Douglas Price and James Burton
will conduct three years of laboratory based research. Their goal is to develop
strontium isotope analysis as a tool to address significant anthropological
questions. Strontium has two isotopes and these are present in soils, plants and
animals in varying ratios. This ratio is ultimately determined by the relative
amounts of each isotope in underlying bedrock and because this varies by region,
ratios show geographic patterning. These ratios are also reflected in human
tooth and bone and if an individual lives their life in one area and eats local
foods the relative amounts of strontium will bear a regional imprint. Isotope
ratio analysis is a potentially valuable tool because ratios in different parts
of the dental and skeletal system turn over at different rates and thus provide
locational information for different times in an individual's life. Teeth for
example have no turnover and the ratio is set at the time of formation. In bones
strontium is replaced during an individual's lifetime but the rate varies by
skeletal element. Likewise, permanent teeth are formed at different times. Thus
it is theoretically possible to trace an individual's movement over major spans
of their life and to determine, for example what percentage of a skeletal
population were born locally and what percentage were immigrants. Migration,
residence and marriage patterns can be examined in this way. Drs. Price and
Burton will use three well controlled archaeological skeletal populations to
refine and develop the technique. They will establish intrinsic isotopic
variability in populations and relate this to geological diversity. They will
develop criteria for establishing significant threshold values for migrant
individuals. The case studies come from the late Neolithic of Central Europe
(Bell Beaker populations), Mesoamerica (the Classic period of Highland Mexico)
and South America. This research is extremely important because the strontium
isotope tool, if refined, will be useful in a wide range of archaeological
situations.