* 9708170
* Gravity Waves, Lee Cyclones and Precipitation               Bands
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2001
* USD 396,631.00

9708170 Rauber The proposed research relates to the organization and evolution
of phenomena associated with mid-latitude cyclones and their influence on
clouds, precipitation and other meteorological elements. Specifically, research
will focus on three phenomena: mesoscale gravity waves, lee cyclones, and
mesoscale precipitation bands. The high spatial and temporal resolution data
sets obtained during the Stormscale Operations and Research Meteorology-Fronts
Experiment, Systems Test (STORM-FEST) provides the Principal Investigators with
a unique opportunity to further understanding of mesoscale gravity waves. It is
suspected that these gravity waves are sometime associated with locally heavy
snowfalls. Analyses of observations and ongoing numerical modeling studies will
enable the investigation of the mechanisms that generated and maintained a well-
defined mesoscale gravity wave that occurred on 14-15 February 1992, as well as
the interaction between the wave and the convection. Analyses by the Principal
Investigators of observations for four STORM-FEST cyclone cases have raised
important questions concerning the variability in the pre-storm low level
environment and its influence on the structure and evolution of fronts, embedded
precipitation and associated mesoscale phenomena within lee cyclones.
Understanding the influence of pre-storm environmental conditions on the
formation and subsequent structure and evolution of lee cyclones is critical
toward developing a comprehensive model of mid-latitude cyclones. The focus of
the proposed research is to investigate the mechanisms behind the variability of
the structure and evolution of upper-level precursor disturbances, surface and
upper level fronts, lee cyclones, and mesoscale precipitation bands. Research on
heavy snowbands will be conducted in association with the Lake-Induced
Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) scheduled in the Great Lakes region in the
winter of 1997-98. The Lake-ICE is a large, multi-investigator project that is
designed to further understanding of the impact of the Great Lakes on different
weather phenomenon. The research activities of the Principal Investigators
within Lake-ICE will consist of detailed observational and modeling studies of
the evolution of winter cyclones and embedded mesoscale processes as the
cyclones interact with the Lakes. Successful completion of this research will
lead to better conceptual models of wintertime weather and could eventually lead
to better forecasts. ***