* 9708447
* Student Paper Competition at the 1997 IEEE MTT-S            International Microwave Symposium, Denver, CO, June 8-13,    l997
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Roger Marks, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 01/31/1998
* USD 9,720.00

Proposal: ECS-9708447 Principal Investigator: Roger Marks (Conference Chair)
Title: Student Paper Competition at the 1997 MTT-S Interantional Micorwave
Symposium The IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS) is the annual
meeting of the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S) of the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). The IMS is also the major
international symposium in the microwave field and a focus of research results
in wireless communications. Each year the MTT-S promotes students education in
microwave theory and techniques through a number of mechanisms. One of the most
important is the Student Paper Competition at the IMS. This is a selective
program which brings the world's best students together in an integrated program
in which they present their work not only to a technical audience but again to a
group of judges. The program helps to develop the student's technical acumen,
introduces them to the international research community and helps to build a
community of students who will lead the next generation of microwave engineers.
The Student Paper Competition Program is open to any full-time student,
typically, although not necessarily, a graduate student. First author student
papers are judged by the Technical Program Committee along with regular
submissions, using the same standards. These are presented in regularly
scheduled oral or poster sessions for optimum dissemination to the research
community, followed by a separate presentation before a panel of judges. Each
winner will receive a certificate and a cash prize provided by MTT-S. First,
Second, and Third Place winners will be selected. Due to the high standards of
this conference, winning such a prize can have a real and highly beneficial
impact in a student's career.