* 9708910
* Rigidity and Flexibility in Social Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Joseph Harrington, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2000
* USD 156,681.00

Johns Hopkins University Project Abstract The defining question of this research
proposal is: within a social system such as a corporation, government, or even
society at large, what determines the behavioral pattern of its members
regarding how they respond to change? Are certain features of the external
environment conducive to agents being rigid in their behavior? Are certain
features of the internal structure of the social system conducive to promoting
rigidity or promoting agent's to respond to internal rather than external
conditions? The theoretical approach developed to address these questions is
predicated upon three observations. First, people differ in how they respond to
change. Heterogeneity along a rigidity-flexibility dimension has long been noted
and documented in the psychology literature. Based on this observation, it is
assumed that agents are heterogeneous in how they respond to change-some are
relatively rigid and some are relatively flexible. Second most social systems
are hierarchical. While this is clearly true for corporations and governments,
it is applicable to many informal systems for which status is an operative
force. A second element of the theoretical formulation is a model of the process
by which agents move up through a hierarchical system. A key factor behind
behavioral patterns within a social system is conjectured to be the selection
process which determines whether rigid or flexible agents survive and occupy a
system's higher levels. Third, part of people's behavior is learned by imitating
others. Imitation as a form of social learning is well-documented for many
species. While how a person responds to change may be partly endowed (that is,
due to factors external to the social system under consideration), it is also
influenced by the level of rigidity exhibited by others, and especially those
with high rank (that is, high social status). The third element of the
theoretical formulation is a model of social learning with imitation being the
mechanism. Imitation is modeled as a two-step procedure: i) identification of a
set of role models worth emulating; and ii) drawing inferences from a role
model's behavior and integrating what one learns into one's own behavioral rule.
Selection and social learning are then intertwined processes in that selection
influences who survives and advances within the social system and thus
determines the set of role models. Social learning affects the characteristics
of those at the bottom of the hierarchy and thus influences the population upon
which selection operates. With this model, new and substantive insight is to be
provided into how features of the meta-environment influence the way in which
people respond to change. By under- standing the determinants of individual
behavior, new insight into organizational behavior will be possible. Why do some
established firms fail to adequately respond to significant changes in market
conditions (notable recent examples include IBM, Sears Roebuck, and Kmart)? In
response to a drastic change in economic or social conditions, why are some
governments unresponsive and ultimately collapse? This research should
contribute to answering such questions.