* 9708494
* (EGB) Development and Compilation of Geochemical Kinetic    and Biochemical Data Base and Numerical Modeling of         Reactive Transport in Subsurface Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Gour-Tsyh Yeh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2000
* USD 288,410.00

9708494 Yeh Experimental investigations of biogeochemical processes must be
transformed into quantitative data bases to further scientific advances. While
thermodynamic data bases can be found in many geochemical equilibrium models,
biogeochemical kinetic data bases are meager. Conceptual models derived from
scientific understanding must be solidified with mathematically and
computationally sound numerical models to include coupled biogeochemical
reactions and hydrological and thermal transport for practical applications. It
is therefore, proposed to conduct research to: develop a kinetic data base for
better physical-biogeochemical coupling by synthesizing experimental data
available in the literature to extract rate constant and reaction parameters.
make the kinetic data base freely on a web site as a forum for continuous
compilation and refinement. create efficient and robust numerical algorithms for
solving nonlinear advective-dispersive-reaction transport equations, and develop
and verify a coupled model of hydrological, thermal, geochemical, biochemical
processes, incorporating the numerical algorithms and kinetic data base. The
significance of this research is two fold. First, it initiates development of
geochemical kinetic rate constants and biochemical reaction parameters, which
should become the forum for the continuous compilation of a data base. Second,
the numerical software will be instrumental in the identification of reaction
paths and in the interpretation of biogeochemical and hydrological processes
affecting the fate, mobility, treatability, and transport of wastes found in
field sites. This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF-96-152, and is being funded
jointly by the Divisions Earth Sciences and Mathematical Sciences.