* 9708533
* Prediction of Toxic Semi-Volatile Organic Gas-Particle      Partitioning in the Atmosphere with the Use of Activity     Coefficients
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Richard Kamens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2001
* USD 319,999.00

9708533 Kamens The main objective of this research is to dramatically improve
our ability to calculate the equilibrium partitioning of semi-volatile organic
toxic compounds, which distribute between gas and aerosol phases. This will be
done specifically for particles which have organic liquid layers, such as
particles from diesel fuel, wood combustion, and secondary organic aerosols. The
partitioning of compound classes which contain environmentally emitted or
created organic acids, carbonyls, chlorinated organics, alkanes, polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyclical siloxanes, will be investigated. The
activity coefficients of the organics in given liquid particle mixtures will be
calculated using the group contribution method. These activity coefficients will
then be used along with vapor pressures and other aerosol properties to
calculate equilibrium partitioning constants. Outdoor chamber measurements will
be performed to provide gas-particle partitioning data. Since aerosol chemical
composition and atmospheric humidity strongly influence activity coefficient
predictions, initial experiments will be carried out with known aerosol
compositions at constant humidities. Later experiments will investigate more
complex particle systems.