* 9708016
* The Impact of Childhood Family Background, School Resources, and Curriculum on Black and White Women's Educational      Attainments, Labor Market Experience, Occupational Mobility
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,09/30/2000
* Lori Kletzer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2000
* USD 49,500.00

This research will examine differences between black and white women in economic
status. The poject,while while focused methodologically within economics in
general and multivariate statistical techniques, will draw from a number of
other disciplines, including sociology, psychology, and education. Several
longitudinal data bases will be used to develop anindividual-level approach to
questions of educational attainment, occupational status, and earnings. The
focus on family background and school inputs will highlight issues of the
intergenerational transmission of wealth and poverty. The investigation will
permit insights into the following questions: How do secondary school inputs
affect educational attainment such as high school graduation, the extent and
quality of post-secondary schooling, major selected, occupation, and earnings?
How do family background characteristics, such as parental education and income,
family size, birth order, and presence of one or two parents affect these
outcomes? How do school resources and family background affect measured
secondary school academic achievement or cognitive skills? How do college
characteristics affect labor market success? How important are college resources
per student and the quality of college peers for learning of the type that is
rewarded in the labor market? How can the effects of college per se be separated
from the effects of pre-college education and ability? What is the role of
educational attainment in occupational mobility? How much of occupational
convergence between black women and white women is explained by rising
educational attainment amongst blacks? What is the role of anti-discrimination
legislation and affirmative action? How can these questions about human capital
accumulation be related to the special concerns of low-income women,
particularly black women? What is the impact on black females of the
deteriorating economic status of black men? Black women face both disadvantage
and discrimination and their economic status is more precarious than the
economic status of white women. This project will provide a basis for a deeper
understanding of the factors that explain advances, stagnation and decline in
relative economic status for black women. It will also contribute to our
understanding of changes in the economic status of white women.