* 9708176
* Research Conference: Computing Science and Statistics Interface Symposium to be held May 14-17, 1997 in Houston, Texas
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* David Scott, Interface Foundation of North America Inc
* Standard Grant
* James M. Davenport
* 04/30/1998
* USD 14,400.00

Scott 9708176 This proposal requests funding to support young researchers and
speakers to attend the 29th symposium on the Interface of Computing Science and
Statistics in Houston, May 14-17, 1997, along with related conference expenses.
The theme of this year's interface is "Mining and Modeling Massive Data Sets In
Science, Engineering, and Business," which is related to other special NSF
initiatives. The Symposium is designed to bring together top researchers and
workers in several related disciplines to focus on a breaking theme, and to
bring younger researchers, graduate students, and interested scientifically
minded individuals from a wide cross-section of fields and industries to
interact and exchange information and ideas. This year's program has drawn a
field of invited speakers from an international group, as well as some of the
best minds in the American academic, computer, and business worlds. Furthermore,
a large and diverse group of young individuals will attend. The conference also
has a sub-theme of the environment and quantitative environmental science. The
conference is sponsored by the Interface Foundation of North America, a non-
profit educational corporation. The Statistics Department at Rice University is
hosting the meeting with David W. Scott as organizer and program chair. Co-
hosting institutions include M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and U. Texas School of
Public Health. The Symposium has a number of cooperating societies. Data mining
holds the promise of dramatically improving our utilization of massive data
records accumulating in all areas of government, industry, business, and
research. Some of the best statisticians, computer scientists, federal
researchers, businessmen, and others are contributing to providing new
algorithms and ideas for finding structure in massive data sets. Over 27 invited
and 12 contributed paper sessions will be offered. Keynote speaker Jerry
Friedman of Stanford will discuss the role of statistics in data mining
research. This work poses serious hardware and software problems for computer
vendors, and speakers from IBM, SGI, Oracle, AMS, and others will discuss
hardware and software issues related to massive data sets management and
analysis. Other sessions will describe case studies and war stories. A number of
marketing researchers have won permission to describe usually proprietary work
that should have educational scientific value. Special luncheon presentations
will offer a more informal atmosphere and interaction with leading researchers
in computing, genetic and molecular modeling, and network understanding.
Visualization is a common thread, with sessions on the uses of virtual reality,
exploration, and spatial statistics for massive data sets. The CEO's and chief
scientists of some of the leading data mining and statistical software houses
will be speaking at this year's meeting. Large scale optimization and wavelet
techniques will also be covered among the many sessions. Each speaker will
provide a manuscript for a proceedings of the conference, which is to be
published in the early Fall. Thus the results and information provided during
the session will be available to a very wide audience at low cost.