* 9708554
* Reducing Properties of Anaerobic Sediments:  Molecular      Probe Studies of Biogeochemistry and Contaminant Fate
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,03/31/2000
* David Boone, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 03/31/2000
* USD 290,000.00

This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program is made
to Drs. Paul G. Tratnyek, V. Renganathan, and David R. Boone of the Department
of Environmental Science and Engineering, Oregon Graduate Institute, for studies
of contaminant fate in anaerobic sediments. The research is supported by the
Divisions of Chemistry and Earth Sciences and the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. Some contaminants undergo reduction in anaerobic
soils, but the biochemical and geochemical factors controlling the chemical
reaction are not well understood. The goal of this research is to develop
molecular probes that can elucidate reduction processes in sediments from
coastal, estuarine, and freshwater environments. Initial work will use
2-chloroacetophenone (2-CAP) to monitor the reduction process. This chemical is
reduced to 2-(chloromethyl)benzyl alcohol when it reacts by electron transfer,
and to acetophenone when reduced by hydride transfer. By measuring the amount of
each of these three compounds present in the sediment, the rate of reduction and
the capacity of the soil for reduction will be determined. The formation of
acetophenone implies reaction with extracellular nicotinamide, one of the few
possible sources of hydride in such systems. Results will be correlated with
microbiological studies to develop a model of the biogeochemical reduction
process in various soils. Additional molecular probes will be studied as means
of more fully characterizing the reducing capacity of real environmental
materials. Pollutants such as chlorohydrocarbons, sulfoxides, and quinones can
be transformed in soils by chemical reactions in which electrons are added to
the contaminant from environmental sources, both organic and inorganic. The
details about how these reactions occur as well as the rates and extent to which
they occur in various types of soils are not sufficiently understood to predict
contaminant fate in the environment. In this research a general method to test
the environmental relevance of various models will be developed with the long-
term goal of providing a predictive tool useful to regulatory decision-making.