* 9708046
* Taphonomy and Site Structure at Bois Roche
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Paola Villa, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2000
* USD 69,830.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Laurence Bartram and Paola Villa
will conduct three seasons of archaeological/paleontological research at the
cave site of Bois Roche which is located in the Charente region of France. Based
on previous work the investigators have determined that it served as a den for
hyenas during the last Ice Age. In addition to large amounts of bone, it
contains hyena coprolites and juvenile hyena bones. Although a few worked stone
artifacts are also present, it appears that humans played a negligible role in
the faunal accumulation. The goal of the research is to excavate a large faunal
sample with fine scale horizontal control and develop criteria which serve to
characterize a hyena derived faunal assemblage. The team will: test the
hypothesis that significant spatial patterning exists in hyena-generated bone
accumulations; develop methods to distinguish bone tools from hyena-gnawed bone;
evaluate current methods for quantifying archaeofaunal bone assemblages;
determine whether hominids occupied the cave at other periods of time; and
provide training for American and French archaeology students. Analyses will
include comprehensive study of taxonomic, skeletal part, bone modification, and
examination of spatial data including conjoining. Sedimentological and
palynological analyses will elucidate site formation processes and electron spin
resonance dating will be conducted on tooth enamel. The earliest evidence for
human occupation of caves in Europe dates to over 100,000 years ago and
stratified caves with abundant stone tools and faunal remains have played a
crucial role in archaeological investigations. Through analysis of food remains
researchers can gain insight into prehistoric diet, hunting ability and spatial
organization of activities. However the problem arises since caves are often
alternatively occupied by humans and other species such as hyena and cave bear.
It is surprisingly difficult to assign faunal remains unambiguously to collector
species and to gain information on human behavior it is necessary to do so. Bois
Roche is one of the few cave sites in Europe where one can be reasonably that
hyenas are the responsible agent. Through their research Dr. Bartram and Villa
can determine what constitutes a `hyena signature` and the criteria they develop
can be employed by archaeologists not only in Europe but also in other parts of
the world.