* 9708957
* A Smart Programming Environment for Java
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2003
* Robert Cartwright, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2003
* USD 194,080.00

9708957 This project will focus on constructing a "smart" programming
environment for Java that uses semantic analyses to statically debug, validate,
and safely optimize programs. The principal investigators have already developed
an early version of such an environment for a dialect of Scheme. A safe
implementation prevents the misuse of primitive program operations, such as
taking the head of the empty list, through a combination of compile-time
analysis, run-time checking, and automatic storage management. Safety, however,
is not a panacea: all safe languages defer checking some preconditions until
run-time. When a run-time check fails, program execution is aborted. Hence,
programmers try to ensure that misapplications are impossible by analyzing what
forms of data can appear as input to each primitive operation. Unfortunately,
programmers are not very good at this task and frequently make mistakes. The
primary goal of the proposed smart programming environment is to prove the run-
time checks required for safety never fail. This property, called "total
safety," is a much stronger property than ordinary safety. For any interesting
programming language, total safety is undecidable; nevertheless, semantic
analyses like set-based analysis can prove many of the preconditions checked at
run time never fail. Moreover, for any unproven precondition, an environment can
construct program "slices" identifying the execution paths violating the
precondition. Given this information, the programmer can decide if the failing
paths are feasible and, if so, repair the code. ***