* 9708451
* Proton and Ligand Interactions at Single Crystal Mineral/   Water Interfaces Using Scanning Probe Microscopy and        Optical Second Harmonic Generation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 07/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biochemistry Program is
supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Chemistry and the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Dr. Carrick M. Eggleston and
Dr. Steven R. Higgins of the Geology and Geophysics Department, University of
Wyoming, will develop methods to achieve crystal-face specificity in the
measurement of mineral surface charge. The goal of the research is to move
beyond a surface-average approach to information helpful to understanding
mineral surface reactivity. The surface charge and potential as a function of pH
and ionic media will be measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and in-situ
optical second harmonic generation (SHG) spectroscopy for representative mineral
surfaces, such as, corundum, hematite, rutile and quartz. These measurements
will be compared to results obtained after the adsoprtion of organic molecules
at the mineral-water interface. Of interest are citric, oxalic, p-nitrobenzoic,
and 4,5-dinitrobenzene-1,2-dicarboxylic acids and rhodamine. Understanding
reactions of organic and biological compounds with mineral surfaces are
increasingly important to complete characterization of complex geological and
environmental processes at the molecular level. The methods currently used in
mineral surface geochemistry are not adequate. Here, the capabilities of AFM and
SHG instrumentation will be tested as means of characterizing the surfaces of
mineral surfaces found in `real world` samples.