* 9708092
* Physiological and Molecular Diversity of Atmospheric CH4    Oxidizers in Soil
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Paul Steudler, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 07/31/2001
* USD 600,000.00

ABSTRACT STEUDLER (97-08092) Atmospheric CH4 contributes substantially to the
greenhouse effect and has increased dramatically in the past century because of
human activity associated with agriculture and industrial expansion. Consumption
of atmospheric CH4 in well-drained soils is an important regulator of
atmospheric CH4 concentration. The significance of the soil sink lies not in its
magnitude relative to the global CH4 budget, but rather in its potential to
mediate long-term, anthropogenic effects on atmospheric CH4 through its response
to disturbance. Soil CH4 consumption is very sensitive to land-use changes, such
as agriculture and forest clearcutting, and also may be sensitive to climate
change factors, such as drought or soil warming. Because the amount of
atmospheric CH4 consumed annually in soil is comparable to the annual increase
in atmospheric CH4 over the past decade, the cumulative effects of disturbance
on the soil CH4 sink over time could contribute significantly to CH4
accumulation in the atmosphere. However, the biology of this process is poorly
understood because researchers have yet to determine what type(s) of soil
bacteria actually oxidize atmospheric CH4 in situ. This project will investigate
the physiology and molecular ecology of atmospheric CH4 oxidizers in four
temperate and taiga forest ecosystems where disturbance effects on soil CH4
consumption have been well characterized. The study focuses on the following
questions: (1) What are the physiological characteristics of the atmospheric CH4
oxidizers in a given soil?, (2) What types of organisms oxidize atmospheric CH4
in a given soil: Methanotrophs or Nitrifiers? and (3) How does the ecosystem
type and disturbance regime affect which group of organisms is active in a given
soil? A number of laboratory and field process-level measurements including CH4
starvation and enrichment experiments, kinetic studies and differential
inhibitors will be used to access the microbial community response across the
suit e of study sites. Phylotype distribution and functional gene studies will
be used to characterize the methanotropic and/or nitrifier communities within
and across the study sites. This research will provide an estimate of the
biodiversity among soil atmospheric CH4 oxidizers, examine how this diversity is
distributed in nature and assess how important this diversity is in controlling
the ecosystem-level response of soil CH4 consumption to disturbance and climate
change. The strategy is scientifically unique in that it will bring the power of
modern molecular biology to bear on ecosystem-level process ecology. It will
allow the qualitative quantitative examination of the relationship between in
situ process dynamics and the molecular ecology of the microbial community, thus
improving understanding of the biological controls over soil CH4 consumption,
which remains the most enigmatic dimension of the soil CH4 sink. Methane
oxidation is an ideal model for initiating this type of approach because it is a
highly specialized physiology, and because substrate supply can be controlled
precisely in laboratory incubations. Future investigations on other
biogeochemical processes will benefit from experience gained during this
research.