* 9708487
* (EGB) Understanding and Modeling Hydrogeological,           Microbiological, and Geochemical Processes that Control     Groundwater Redox Zonation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Sheridan Haack, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2002
* USD 466,000.00

9708487 Long One of the most fundamental issues in aquifer biogeochemistry
concerns the mechanisms by which solute transport and geochemical processes
combine with microbiological activity to influence spatial and temporal
variations in redox zonation. We will examine these mechanisms in a shallow
sandy aquifer contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbons, which has exhibited
redox zonation that varies on seasonal time scales. The dynamic nature of redox
zonation at this site allows us to examine the interaction among
hydrogeological, geochemical, and microbiological processes, and test hypotheses
regarding the (1) reactions that govern groundwater evolution from zone to zone
and (2) factors which control the spatial and temporal dimensions of redox
zones. By coupling information gained from the three disciplines, through field
and laboratory research, a three-dimensional, transient reactive flow and
transport model for the evolution of redox zonation will be constructed. The
goals of this interdisciplinary study are to (1) quantitatively assess
hydrogeologic, geochemical and microbiological constraints that influence redox
processes within a given zone; (2) use these constraints to identify sets of
reactions that describe the evolution of groundwater from one zone to another;
and (3) integrate the reaction sets with a dynamic flow and transport model to
simulate past observations regarding the dimensions of various redox zones at
the site, as well as compare the predicted and observed outcome of groundwater
hydrologic events such as prolonged periods of high or low water table. These
goals will be achieved through field sampling (seasonal and event), laboratory
analysis and experimentation, in-situ hydrolgeological, microbiological, and
geochemical analyses, and hydrogeochemical modeling. Unique aspects of the
methods include: (1) combining geophysical and hydrolgeological data to estimate
aquifer properties; (2) using 16S rRNA nucleic acid probe hybridization to
determine microbial abu ndance, fatty acid methyl ester profiles and 16S rDNA
restriction analysis (ARDRA) to determine community structure; (3) estimating
redox state from H2 gas concentrations; (4) assessing minerals-microbial
interactions using in-situ samplers and experiments; and (5) combing geochemical
and microbiological reaction sets in a reactive flow and transport model to
quantitatively account for observed water chemistry at the study site. This
approach will benefit each discipline through improved understanding of the
interaction among physical, chemical and biological processes that lead to redox
zonation in both pristine and contaminated aquifers, and will provide
fundamental information valuable to the design of appropriate sampling,
monitoring and remediation methodologies. This proposal was submitted in
response to the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF
96-152, and is being funded jointly by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and
Environmental Biology.