* 9708559
* Doctoral Consortium for Students in AI; July 28, 1997;      Providence, RI
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Bruce Buchanan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 03/31/1998
* USD 11,920.00

One of the most important aspects in learning how to do research is early and
detailed discussions on various aspects of the research plan with experienced
mentors. Unfortunately, most students get little feedback on their thesis at the
initial stages except from their immediate advisors. Attending conferences can
be a good way to meet other researchers and discuss work. However, the chances
of a student at an early stage of his/her work getting the opportunity to
discuss their preliminary ideas with well established researchers are not very
good. The Doctoral Consortium (DC) at the American Association for Artificial
Intelligence conference was planned as a way to improve this situation. Students
about to begin their thesis work are chosen to present their research plans in
front of a group of carefully selected faculty panelists. Unlike traditional
conference presentations, the bulk of the time in a DC is devoted to discussions
between the students and the faculty panelists. Each student is also assigned a
faculty mentor who works with the student at a more detailed level. Students
learn from both their own presentations as well as watching other students being
advised by the faculty panelists. A survey taken after the first DC held last
year found all participants (both students and faculty) agreeing that the DC was
tremendously useful. We anticipate that all students attending the DC this year
(both as presenters as well as those just attending) will leave with renewed
confidence in their work, suggestions for improving their thesis plans and a
clearer idea of what constitutes good research practice.