* 9708406
* Collaborative Research: (EGB) Multisubstrate Biodegradation Kinetics of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in      NAPL-Contaminated Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Catherine Peters, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2001
* USD 277,335.00

9708406 Peters This project is designed to investigate the chemical, physical,
and microbiological processes governing the behavior of mixtures of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in NAPL-contaminated soils. PAHs are an important
class of organic pollutants that are commonly associated with multicomponent
organic contaminants such as coal tar, creosote, and diesel fuel. These
contaminants commonly exist as non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs). A clear
understanding of underlying mechanisms and a comprehensive compositional
modeling approach is essential to understanding the impacts of these
contaminants on a larger scale and over a long time periods. The specific
objectives of this project are: (I) to gain insights about relative
biodegradabilities and substrate interactions of PAHs in sole and multi-
substrate systems, (ii) to relate biodegradation rates in NAPL contaminated
systems to the thermodynamic phase equilibrium and dissolution kinetic processes
governing bioavailability, and (iii) to construct an integrated mathematical
model of PAH behavior in NAPL-contaminated soils and to validate model
formulation through experimentation using PAH-NAPL-contaminated soils.
Experimental studies are designed to explore the interrelation of PAH
dissolution and biodegradation, and to observe the presence or absence of
substrate interactions under various conditions of initial substrate
concentrations and proportions. One aim is to ascertain the extent to which
kinetic parameters inferred from sole substrate experiments can be used in
conjunction with a mathematical formulation that captures substrate interaction
effects to describe what happens in a system with multiple PAH substrates. A
novel aspect of this work is the use of synthetic NAPLs as models organic
liquids to simulate multicomponent contaminants such as coal tars, which permits
control in experimental design and analytical characterization.