* 9708587
* Robust Covariance Estimators and Heterogeneous Agent Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Wouter Denhaan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1999
* USD 76,529.00

9708587 Haan Many papers in the macroeconomics literature argue that
heterogeneity is important for explaining the time series behavior of
macroeconomic variables. For example, when the lack of frictionless trading in a
complete set of financial assets prevents agents from diversifying idiosyncratic
income risk, this risk typically affects aggregate variables like asset prices.
In this case, the standard assumptions of the representative agent framework are
violated and the amount of heterogeneity in agents' wealth and income levels
affects the behavior of the variables in the model The empirical failures of the
representative agent framework have contributed to the popularity of models with
heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. Models with heterogeneous agents
have now been used for studying a wide range of topics in macroeconomics
including asset pricing, consumption behavior, economic growth and investment
behavior, the monetary transmission mechanism, business cycle studies, labor
economics, and the international business cycle. Quantitative analysis plays a
crucial role in economics. Solving dynamic equilibrium models with heterogenous
agents, however, is a challenging problem because the cross-sectional
distribution of agents' characteristics typically is a high dimensional
endogenous object that is part of the set of state variables. This project
studies dynamic equilibrium models with a large number of agents and aggregate
uncertainty. This involves developing new algorithms to deal with the complexity
of these models as well as analyzing some new important economic questions that
could not have been addressed in the existing models that either assume a small
number of different (types of) agents or no aggregate uncertainty. In addition
the project continues the work on the heteroskasticity and autocorrelation
consistent (HAC) covariance matrix estimator, VARHAC, developed in the
investigator's previous NSF grant.