* 9708228
* Electrophoretic NMR with Toroid Cavity Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,10/31/1999
* Charles Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 10/31/1999
* USD 145,500.00

This research project, which is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, focuses on the
development of a toroid cavity probe for use as an NMR detector for
electrophoresis. Professor Johnson and his student at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill will construct a toroid cavity probe, characterize its
performance as an electrophoresis detector, and write programs necessary for the
handling of data. This instrument will be able to detect all components in a
mixture and the analysis time will be less than 100 msec. These measurements
will provide information about the chemical interactions that occur in ordered
media, such a micelles. This information will be useful in understanding the
behavior of these materials as pseudo-stationary phases in many separation
processes. In this project toroid cavity detectors will constructed and designed
for use in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to permit studies of
electrophoretic processes. In addition to the construction of this new detector
for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, programs will be written to acquire
and handle the data produced in these experiments. Analysis of all components in
a mixture will be possible and the analysis time will be less than 100
milliseconds. This new instrumental capability will have applications ranging
from microscopic imaging to the study of the interactions that occur in high
pressure fluids.