* 9708155
* RUI:  The Contribution of Secondary Seed Dispersal to the   Reproductive Success of "Wind-Dispersed" Pines
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2004
* Stephen Vander Wall, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2004
* USD 316,000.00

Vander Wall 9708155 The objective of this research is to determine the relative
contributions of primary (wind) and secondary (animal scatter hoarding)
dispersal to the reproductive success of four species of pines with winged seeds
that vary in seed mass: lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta; 7 mg/seed), ponderosa
pine (Pinus ponderosa; 55 mg), Jeffrey pine (Pinus jeffreyi; 146 mg), and sugar
pine (Pinus lambertiana; 288 mg). Scatter-hoarding animals provide several
important benefits to the seeds, including dispersal that often carries the seed
away from the source plant, burial of the seeds in soil, and caching the seed in
microhabitats that often favor seedling establishment. The variation in seed
size is expected to influence the aerodynamic behavior of the seed and the
attractiveness of the seed to vertebrate foragers (i.e., both primary and
secondary dispersal). As seed size increases, the relative effectiveness of wind
dispersal should decrease and the relative effectiveness of animal-mediated
dispersal should increase. This research will make fundamental contributions to
our understanding of seed dispersal and reproductive success in plants,
especially with regard to the role of secondary dispersal, which has received
little study. Further, this study will also provide information that will help
foresters more effectively manage these economically valuable trees. The
critical steps of seed dispersal and seedling establishment are poorly
understood for these pines. The current assumption, based on seed morphology and
cone phenology, is that these pines are wind dispersed and that animals act
almost exclusively as seed predators. The results of this research will fill
this gap in our knowledge and provide scientifically sound data on which to base
management decisions.