* 9708165
* SGER:  Using Stable Isotopes as Tracers to Measure Below    Ground Neighborhoods in Plant Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/28/1999
* USD 25,154.00

9708165 Casper The ultimate goals of this project are to measure the lateral
spread of plant roots and to determine how rooting area changes with certain
soil conditions and the presence of neighboring plants. The one year project
funded here will primarily test whether recently devised techniques in plant
science can be applied to this problem. We will test to what extent isotopes of
cesium, lithium, rubidium, and strontium can be used as tracers to determine
whether plants take up nutrients from a particular point in soil space. These
elements serve as nutrient analogs which means that plants should take them up
in place of common nutrients. Because they are rare within most soils, we can
place solutions containing these elements at defined locations in the soil and
by detecting their presence in newly produced plant tissue, be certain that the
plant's root system intersects the pocket of tracer. By knowing how many of the
plants in the population have taken up a particular tracer, we can determine
exactly how many root systems overlap in the area marked by tracer. The use of
all four tracers within a single population will enable us to measure root
extension in four different directions and facilitate estimates of lateral
rooting area. A second technique will be applied to the question of whether
fungal-root associations mycorrhizae) enlarge the soil area over which a plant
takes up nutrients. GORE-TEXR fabric will be used to separate tracer from plant
roots. Roots and nutrients do not pass through the small pores in the fabric but
mycorrhizal hyphae do. By physically isolating roots from tracers in this way,
we can determine whether the mycorrhizae extend the distance over which a plant
takes up nutrients. Another experiment will determine whether the tracer moves
laterally in the soil even in the absence of plant roots. These experiments are
important to understanding how below ground competition for soil resources takes
place among plants. We can measure how the presenc e of below ground competition
affects plant growth, but we have little knowledge of which individuals are
engaged in the competition. We do not know whether interactions primarily occur
between nearest neighbors or whether root systems extend beyond nearest
neighbors to include many other plants. It is impossible to determine this
information from excavating root systems because the fine roots that are most
active in nutrient uptake cannot be recovered from the soil. This information is
essential to determining how the number and proximity of neighboring plants
affect plant growth, whether it be in agricultural or natural systems.