* 9708478
* Sedimentary Records of Pyrogenic PAH Emissions from Fossil  Fuel and Biomass Sources
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Ann McNichol, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David C. Kadko
* 01/31/2001
* USD 448,095.00

9708478 Eglinton This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
Geochemistry &amp; Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation, NSF 96-152. It is being
jointly funded by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Ocean Sciences and
Atmospheric Sciences. The objective of this proposal is to use a newly developed
method for molecular-level radiocarbon analysis to establish a 200 year record
of combustion-derived (pyrogenic) polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) inputs
to aquatic sediments. Radiocarbon represents an ideal parameter to distinguish
fossil fuel (infinite 14C age)from modern biomass (contemporary 14C age)
combustion sources. Exploiting these isotopic characteristics we seek to
determine (a) the extent to which the proportion of fossil fuel derived
pyrogenic PAH have varied since the pre-industrial age; (b) which PAH represent
the most effective tracers of modern and fossil combustion sources; and c the
source(s) of selected PAH of uncertain origin (perylene). Radiometrically-dated
sediments with established PAH profiles from Lake Siskiwit (MI) and the
Pettaquamscutt River (RI) have been selected for this study. By virtue of their
remote/rural location the PAH burden in these sediments is a function of
atmospheric deposition (i.e. exclusively combustion-derived inputs). Down-core
PAH isotopic profiles will be used in two ways: (I)isotopic mass balance
calculations will provide quantitative constraints on the contributions from
different source materials; (ii) molecular 14C data will be used as a new source
discrimination "vector" when plotted against concentration or compound specific
13C composition in property-property plots. The product of this novel study will
be a refined assessment of the impact of anthropogenic activity on the
provenance of this important class of contaminants. The data obtained may also
place constraints upon temporal variations in the source(s) of other combustion
products which are introduced into the environment via atmospheric transp ort,
but are harder to trace (e.g. CO2, "soot" or "elemental" carbon). Finally, this
study will lead to improved source apportionment capabilities and an
unprecedented level of understanding of the distribution and fate of PAH in the
environment. This project impinges on several aspects of environmental
chemistry; it will bring together sediment, aquatic and atmospheric chemists and
will employ novel molecular isotopic tools. As such we believe this study is
central to the goals of the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry
program.***