* 9708610
* An Investigation of Cerros de Trincheras Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 35,920.00

For many years archaeologists have been aware of a category of sites termed
`cerros de trincheras.` Located in southern Arizona and northern Sonora Mexico
they date to sometime after 1,100 AD and are characterized by complexes of walls
and terraces constructed on the slopes and tops of steep volcanic and granitic
hills near major streams. Investigators have proposed that they served
defensive, habitational, agricultural and other functions although definitive
explanations have been difficult because very few sites have been excavated. The
amount of effort invested in their construction strongly suggests a sedentary
society which relied on agriculture to meet subsistence needs. Within the
broader context of archaeology in the region, such occurrences are not
surprising since evidence clearly indicates the presence of settled
agriculturists at that time in neighboring areas. Recently Dr. Hard and
colleagues have discovered three cerros de trincheras sites which, based on
associated stone tools appear to be Archaic in age and thus significantly older
than their well known counterparts. They have been tentatively dated to the time
period between 1,500 BC and 200 AD. Were such the case they would be unique and
strongly challenge conventional theories of how and when sedentism emerged in
the region. Almost all available evidence indicates that Archaic peoples
subsisted by hunting and gathering, lived in small groups and changed residence
frequently. With NSF support Dr. Hard and his colleagues will further evaluate
these Archaic cerros de trincheras sites. They will conduct limited survey, map
surface features and conduct controlled stratigraphic excavations. A primary
goal is to collect in situ organic materials such as wood charcoal for
radiocarbon dating. Understanding what plants were being exploited is critical
to the basic evaluation of the site and its potential for further investigation.
Through floation of soil the investigators will search for charred seeds and
other plant parts. They will also situate their excavations to obtain
information which will shed light on the functions of the terraces and enigmatic
rock rings which are abundant. Aerial photographs in conjunction with geological
fieldwork will permit reconstruction on the environment within which this
culture functioned. The process of sedentism, the domestication of plants and
animals and the development of large scale complex society has occurred
independently in many parts of the world. Given the similarities among regions
scientists believe that this has not happened through historic chance but rather
reflects an orderly set of underlying rules. Much effort has been expended in
the attempt to elucidate them. The Cerros de Trincheras sites are, in this
context, particularly interesting because they are so unusual and unexpected. It
is often situations which break the rules which provide the opportunity to
achieve deeper levels of understanding.