* 9708309
* Space-Time Processing for Digital Comm: Nonparametric       Channel ID &amp; Interference Cancellation &amp; Multichannel       Equalizer Design Based on Linear Matrix Inequalities
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Michael Zoltowski, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2001
* USD 277,000.00

In an urban cellular environment, the data pulses employed in digital
communications typically travel through multiple paths from transmitter to
receiver due to reflections from buildings and other structures. This multipath
propagation causes each pulse to be corrupted by pulses transmitted before and
after it; the deleterious effects of this "intersymbol interference" (ISI)
necessitate signal processing in the form of an "equalizer". As a further
complications, the projected explosion in the number of cellular users will
almost certainly require two users in the same of adjacent cells to occupy the
same frequency band. This leads to "co-channel interference" that manifests
itself as cross-talk amongst users. The use of antenna arrays, which enables
discrimination amongst signals arriving from different directions, offers a
means of suppressing co-channel interference. This research focuses on the
development of spatiotemporal signal processing schemes to effect both
equalization and interference cancellation for mobile narrowband digital
communications in an urban cellular environment. The equalizer design problem is
reformulated as a convex optimization problem based on linear matrix
inequalities and solved numerically. Equalization is effected with sample-spaced
taps at each antenna, encompassing a time duration roughly equal to the
multipath time delay spread. This facilitates better tracking of time-varying
multipath channels as compared to conventional equalization schemes employing
symbol-spaced taps. Interference cancellation is effected by forming beams with
directions of maximum gain steered towards the desired user's multipath, and
nulls steered towards strong co-channel interferers. This is achieved by
processing a short training signal via a novel extended correlator that highly
localizes in time the contribution of the desired user's signal, thereby
allowing one to estimate the spatial correlation matrix of the interferers. The
equalization an d interference cancellation schemes developed in this research
hold the greatest promise in terms of the trade-off amongst convergence rate,
computational complexity, robustness to model mismatch, and symbol error
performance for Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) systems where the multipath
time delay spread is less than the null-to-null mainlobe of the pulse symbol
waveform, as is the case with cellular systems based on the IS-136 TDMA
standard.