* 9708101
* The Heiss Island Imaging Photometer
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Cesar Valladares, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/31/2001
* USD 292,424.00

This proposal requests support to build and install an intensified all-sky
imaging photometer (ASIP) and to investigate a variety of phenomena related to
the dayside cusp in darkness and polar cap sun-aligned arcs. The imager will be
located at Heiss Island, Russia and will operate continuously during the winter
months. The Heiss Island imager will constitute the eastward most anchor of a
chain of all-sky imagers currently extended for Resolute Bay, Canada, through
Greenland and up to Svalbard, Norway. The imager, in addition of being used for
studies of the cusp and the behavior of polar cap arcs, will be able to probe
the dayside aurora with high temporal resolution, diagnose substorm related oval
expansions, detect sun-aligned arcs in the near oval sector, and follow polar
cap patches before being reconfigured into auroral blobs. The Heiss Island
imager, used in conjunction with the DMSP and Polar satellites and with the
EISCAT and Svalbard incoherent scattering radars, will allow US investigators to
conduct research in this region populated by several diagnostic techniques. The
science proposed here specifically deals with 1) understanding the formation and
motion of sun-aligned arcs near the auroral oval and 2) imaging dayside
transient events in the cusp/cleft region with high temporal and spatial
resolution to investigate whether merging proceeds at multiple sites or instead
over an extended merging line. Funds are requested for building and installing
an imager, and analyzing, interpreting, and distributing the data. Additionally,
partial support for post-doctorate participation is requested.