* 9708314
* A Lake-ICE Project: Operations Center and Multi-Scale       Numerical Investigations
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* John Young, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/2001
* USD 396,913.00

9708314 Tripoli Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations is
obtained through exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum with the surface.
Lake-effect weather events, where cold air masses are rapidly modified over the
Great Lakes, are excellent natural laboratories for studying these exchanges.
The Lake-Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a multiple-Principal
Investigator project which seeks to use this natural laboratory to determine how
boundary layer growth processes are controlled by mesoscale boundary layer
convective structures and how the modified boundary layer effects the production
of precipitation and the larger scale meteorological conditions. Under this
award the Principal Investigator proposes to investigate how the convective
planetary boundary layer organizes in response to the evolving environmental
flow structure. The researcher will utilize a suite of advanced numerical models
along with observations to be collected during the Lake-ICE. The ultimate
objective is to bridge the gap in understanding of the large eddies in the dry
convective planetary layer that occurs on the upwind side of the Great Lakes to
that of the linear cloud rolls on the lee side. If successful, this research
will lead to a unified theory of linear cloud roll genesis and the interaction
of the factors responsible for that genesis with the larger-scale environmental
flows. This could lead eventually to better forecasts of timing, location and
magnitude of lake-effect snow events. ***