* 9708023
* Develpment of a Laser-Excited System for 16 O, 17 O, and    18 O Analysis of Molecular Oxygen from Small Samples of     Silicate and Oxide Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Jonathan Berg, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 07/31/1999
* USD 70,634.00

9708023 Perry This grant provides $65,895 as one-half support of the costs of
acquiring necessary components to develop a laser-based oxygen extraction system
for direct mass spectrometric analyses of molecular oxygen liberated from oxide
and silicate minerals. Direct analysis of molecular oxygen has the advantages
of; reducing isotopic fractionation that occurs when oxygen is converted to CO
instead of CO2 as in conventional laser fluorination; will allow analysis of all
three stable isotopes of oxygen including 17O, which cannot be determined by
conventional CO2 mass spectrometric analysis due to isobaric interference; and,
will allow analysis of sub-milligram size samples, thereby increasing the
spatial resolution achievable in oxygen isotope studies of silicate and oxide
minerals. The capabilities of this system should allow study of a number of
fundamental Earth science problems that might otherwise be difficult to address
such as, elucidation of the oxygen isotope history of seawater as recorded in
very small, indentifiably unaltered samples of precipitated marine cherts and
carbonates and microfossil tests, and the determination of relative
contributions of subducted components (i.e. sediment, altered oceanic crust,
fluids, melt) to arc volcanics based on oxygen isotopic analyses of olivine
phenocrysts. ***