* 9708241
* Villages on the Periphery:  Neolithic Adaptations at        Ghwair I, Southern Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Alan Simmons, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2001
* USD 152,777.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Alan Simmons will conduct two
seasons of archaeological research at the site Ghwair I which is located in the
Wadi Feinan region in central Jordan. The site is dated to the pre Pottery
Neolithic B (PPNB) period from ca. 7,350 - 6,000 B.C. The site is small, covers
an estimated 1.5 acres, and thus likely represents a village. It contains at
least four architectural phases in over 3 meters depth of deposit and
preservation is spectacular. Walls containing windows and doorways are preserved
to over 2 meters in height. Faunal remains as well as ceramics and worked stone
tools are also abundant. The general time period and region of the world is
important because it documents an early stage in the Neolithic Revolution, when
village life first emerged and domestic plants and animals first provided the
major source of subsistence. A number of larger `urban` PPNB sites have been
examined but these likely are not typical of this period. The small Ghwair I
excavation will shed light on a little known aspect of this society. Because the
site is located in a marginal environmental area it will also provide a new
perspective on subsistence adaptation. During the two field seasons Dr. Simmons
and his collaborators will excavate large areas to reveal details of village
layout and will analyze the cultural materials as well as faunal and floral
remains. An areal site survey will also be conducted and geomorphological
analysis will trace changes in past environments. Archaeologists have come to
realize that within `simple` societies, sites cannot be studied in isolation.
They form parts of large social systems which are economically and politically
integrated and that individual sites may serve specialized functions. Dr.
Simmons' research is important because it takes this broader perspective and
will fill in a crucial missing portion of the picture. He postulates that Ghwair
I , despite its small size was, in fact, an elite settlement. He also believes
that the site, as well as many other PPNB occupations was abandoned because of
environmental degradation. This research is important because it will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on how complex
societies, including our own, emerged.