* 9708581
* Cylindrical and Spherical Supermolecules from Polymer       Backbones Jacketed with Dendritic Coats
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1997,06/04/1999
* Virgil Percec, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/04/1999
* USD 375,000.00

9708581 Percec This research will design libraries of monodendritic building
blocks with well defined flat tapered and conical shapes which self-assemble
into cylindrical and respectively spherical shapes. These supermolecules will
generate columnar hexagonal and spherical thermotropic and lyotropic liquid
crystalline (LC) phases. These LC phases will warrant a thermodynamic control of
their assembly and will allow the determination of their shape by X-ray
diffraction. Libraries of flat tapered and conical monodendritic building blocks
functionalized with polymerizable groups will be polymerized via living methods
to generate the first examples of giant polymers with cylindrical and spherical
shapes with diameter and length and respectively diameter controlled at the
nanoscale level. The organization of these giant dendritic monomers in a LC
assembly will also be used to aggregate their polymerizable groups in a reactor
of artificially enhanced concentration and restricted geometry during the
polymerization process and therefore, will generate a new approach to the
control of polymerization. This research will provide an entry into the design
of polymeric materials with predictable and dramatically different properties
which are determined by their shape. Cylindrical and spherical giant polymers
obtained from flexible backbones jacketed with dendritic coats will access new
mechanisms to control the conformation and rigidity of their flexible chain
regardless of their tacticity. Mechanisms to change in a reversible and
controlled way the shape of the polymer from rod-like to spherical will be
elaborated. It is expected that these cylindrical 3-D polymers will produce more
rigid structures than the currently known 1-D linear rigid-rods. %%% This
research will transplant concepts from Nature into the field of complex
synthetic polymeric materials. Natural systems provide the most efficient
mechanisms for the storage and transfer of energy and information and for the
production of structural materials. The polymeric systems developed by this
program will provide new technologic concepts which will allow for the first
time the development of new materials such as functional fibers, films,
membranes, viscosity controllers, electronic, photonic and controlled release
systems with externally regulated physical properties via principles elaborated
by Nature during the long process of evolution. ***