* 9708615
* Research into Spurious Stochastics in Panels, Generalized   Forecast Theory and Evaluation of Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Clive Granger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 170,902.00

This is an accomplishment based renewal project. The goal of this project is to
bring some fresh thoughts on the evaluation of empirical models or to economic
theories; although two established building blocks will be used. The first comes
from panel analysis and discusses the possibility of `spurious stochastics`
occurring in a dynamic panel model specification, using data from regions that
differ greatly in size, but where the size effect is not properly modeled. Size
itself may be slowly evolving and so not be captured by the use of fixed
effects. Initial simulations suggest that this is potentially an important
problem. One that follows from it is how to evaluate panel models, and thus how
to compare models. The second block is consideration of a general theory of
forecasting, with general cost t functions and an emphasis on predictive
distribution functions. New tests for forecast errors arise and a better
appreciation of the appropriate modeling strategy to use depending on ones
objective and knowledge. The majority of the currently available methods of
evaluation, such as measures of goodness of fit, correctness of specification
and encompassing, are statistical measures. It will be argued that a better
approach considers the value to the economy of a new model or theory, or at
least the aid it gives to decision makers. This is the approach is already taken
in finance and it could be more widely used in forecasting. The implications of
this viewpoint will be explored and analyzed