* 9708646
* Electrostatics of Macro-Ions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* William Gelbart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/2002
* USD 690,001.00

9708646 Bruinsma This is a grant to conduct theoretical research to develop
further a fundamental understanding of the electrostatic interactions in aqueous
media between lamellar, cylindrical and spherical macro-ions. The research is
funded by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities and the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, Molecular and
Cellular Biology, and Physics. One aim of the research is to study electrostatic
forces between macro-ions of mixed dimensionality, such as interactions between
charged spheres and planes, and charged rods and planes. Under conditions of
mixed dimensionality and opposite charges on the macro-ions, release of
counterions into the solvent by the rod and/or the sphere produces an unusual
entropic mechanism for binding in the plane. Adsorption of charged biopolymers
onto oppositely charged lipid membranes by counterion release attraction will be
studied. A second aim will be to address various deficiencies in Poisson-
Boltzmann (PB) theory, the main analytical tool available to describe the
electrostatic interactions between macro-ions. Whereas PB theory predicts
repulsive interactions between like-charged rods, simulations show that
attractive forces can appear due to counterion correlation effects. A
theoretical, many-body description of macro-ion attraction between rods by
polyvalent counterions and by flexible polyelectrolytes will be undertaken. In
the former case, a linear response approach will be used to treat the
interacting rods as coupled one- dimension plasmas. In the latter case, the
polymer field theory of Edwards will be generalized to include electrostatic
effects for this special rod-chain-rod geometry. Brownian dynamics simulations
of cylindrical macro-ion interaction with both ordinary polyvalent counterions
and with flexible polyelectrolytes will be done by Dr. Gronbech-Jensen of
UCLA/LANL. A final aim of the research will be to examine the effects of intra-
bilayer fluidity on binding of macro-ions to membranes which consist of non-
ionic/ionic lipid mixtures. A new degree of freedom is associated with a
variable, and inhomogeneous, surface charge layer. Charged biopolymers bound to
such membranes are expected to develop a two- dimensional variant of the well-
known Manning condensation of charged rods in bulk solvent. Motivated by
experimental studies of condensates of DNA on cationic membranes, either with
solid support or in stacks, the self-assembly of ionic amphiphiles in membranes
during macro-ion adsorption will be studied. %%% This is a grant to conduct
theoretical research to develop further a fundamental understanding of the
electrostatic interactions in aqueous media between lamellar, cylindrical and
spherical macro-ions. The research is funded by the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the Divisions of Materials
Research, Chemistry, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Physics. The study of
the electrostatic interactions between large, macro-ions of various shapes is a
challenging problem of fundamental importance. It is also a problem of great
practical interest when one realizes that these systems are also comprised of
the biopolymers (DNA) and membranes which make up living systems. ***