* 9709489
* Partial Support of the Core Activities of the Committee on  National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2003
* Andrew White, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2003
* USD 5,167,529.00

This award continues NSF support for the core activities of the Committee on
National Statistics (CNSTAT), a standing committee of the National Academy of
Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC). The Committee was established in
1972 at the recommendation of the President's Commission on Federal Statistics.
It fills a critical gap as a integrative force for a highly decentralized
federal statistical system, in which research interests often have lower
priority than other concerns. The Committee works to improve, over the long
term, the statistical methods and information on which public policy decisions
are based. It strengthens, directly and indirectly, the development of data for
social, behavioral, and economic science research, makes such data more
accessible for research, and furthers the development of methods for
measurement, collection, and analysis for research and other purposes. On its
own initiative, or at the request of NSF or another agency, the Committee
identifies problem areas in which statistical questions are important to public
policy and carries out studies within these areas by itself or by convening
panels of other experts. Most of the Committee's studies fall under three major
themes: improving and furthering the development of data on social and economic
conditions, including health, social welfare, and the environment; improving
statistical methods and their applications; and integrating and coordinating
national statistics. The Committee provides leadership over interdisciplinary
areas by bringing methodologically oriented statisticians and quantitatively
oriented social scientists together with federal agency staff to work on
problems important to public policy.