* 9709860
* Electronic Catalog of Mexican Asteraceae Specimens Deposited at the University of Texas at Austin Herbarium
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Carol Todzia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2000
* USD 100,039.00

9709860 Panero This project will complete data entry for the approximately
100,000 specimens of Mexican Asteraceae that are housed in the Plant Resources
Center at the University of Texas. This database is a collaborative project
among the University of Texas (TEX-LL), the National Herbarium of Mexico (MEXU),
and the Commission for the Understanding and Use of Biodiversity of Mexico
(CONABIO), and will be freely available to all interested parties through the
World Wide Web. CONABIO is funding a portion of the data entry personnel and
computer equipment, as well as providing monies to MEXU to create a similar
database for their specimens. In addition, staff of MEXU, with funds from
CONABIO, will add geographic coordinates to TEX-LL records, and correct any text
and locality data that are in incorrect Spanish. NSF funding (provided by a
partnership among the Research Collections in Systematics &amp; Ecology,
Database Activies, and International Programs) will be used to hire data-entry
and supervisory personnel at the University of Texas. Specimen data will be
entered into the database using the Microsoft Access application BIOTICA
developed by CONABIO. All databased specimens will be barcoded to insure easy
recognition of specimens in the database and expedite specimen handling. This
database will foster research on the Asteraceae and on the Mexican flora by
facilitating data retrieval, floristic checklists and floras, and the
identification of areas high in endemism for their potential conservation.