* 9709881
* Frictional Labor Markets:  Theory and Implications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Shimer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 111,154.00

This project builds a theory of frictional unemployment based on information
imperfections. It is assumed that it is costly for workers to observe the
characteristics of all potential employers. Instead, they observe a random
subset of employers choosing optimally their sample size. The equilibrium of
this model exhibits frictional unemployment; some workers are unemployed, while
some eligible employers have open vacancies. However, the implications of this
model are much closer to the baseline Walrasian model than to existing modals of
frictional unemployment with less solid microfoundations. Besides reaching a
number of new and surprising conclusions, this theory has the added advantage of
tractability. Preliminary research shows the possibility of using this model to
examine the implications of risk-aversion and imperfect labor-income insurance
markets for frictional unemployment. As unemployed risk-averse workers consume
their assets, they become increasingly willing to look for low wage, low
productivity jobs where queues are shorter and employment chances are higher.
Thus, optimal job search behavior implies that the expected wage of a worker who
has been unemployed for only a short period of time, is much higher than the
expected wage of the long-term unemployed who grow extremely risk-averse. This
model can also be used to study how heterogeneous workers search for
heterogeneous jobs. Previous research, which focused on the matching process and
not on the search process, showed that the conclusions of frictionless matching
or assignment models do not carry over to a frictional environment without
additional assumptions. However, by carefully modeling the information
imperfections behind frictional unemployment, this theory establishes that
frictionless results generalize to a frictional setting. At any point in time,
over 5% of the U.S. labor force suffer from frictional unemployment, and for
that reason alone it is important to understand whether the level is optimal.
But understanding frictional unemployment is important for other reasons: does a
market economy give optimal incentives for an unemployed worker to take a job,
or do people search inefficiently, accept inappropriate jobs, or reject
appropriate ones? How does frictional unemployment affect the incentives to
create new jobs, or to invest in human and physical capita1? This project
addresses all these issues and preliminary research leads to substantially
different conclusions than the existing literature suggests