* 9709494
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:  Interdisciplinary Mathematics:  Applied and Numerical Analysis in Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Alexander Barvinok, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 600,000.00

(c) PROJECT SUMMARY The purpose of this project is to enhance interdisciplinary
mathematics research, teaching and the professional development of postdocs at
the University of Michigan. This funding primarily provides half-support for
four postdoctoral researchers associated with the Department of Mathematics'
Interdisciplinary Initiative, with the remaining support coming from half-time
assistant professor appointments (non-tenure-track) teaching one course per
term. The postdoc/assistant professors will be selected for their ability and
interest to conduct research and teach mathematics inspired by and applied to
problems arising in science and engineering (physics, chemistry, biology,
geology; mechanical, electrical, chemical, industrial and operations
engineering, and financial mathematics). The central goal of the project is to
support existing interactions and stimulate new interdisciplinary research and
collaborations between the Department of Mathematics and researchers throughout
the University of Michigan's science and engineering departments and at other
centers of excellence. These goals will be pursued by way of the following
activities supported in part by the grant: . A regularly scheduled
Interdisciplinary Mathematics Seminar given by experts in mathematical issues
and applications relevant to other disciplines. . An annual research conference
organized by subsets of the Pls and postdocs, focusing each year on a different
specific area of interdisciplinary mathematics. . Postdoc/assistant professors
will teach and develop upper-division undergraduate level special topics courses
in areas of interdisciplinary mathematics. The Pls and other senior associated
researchers represent a broad spectrum of experience in applied and
interdisciplinary mathematical research. They will mentor, guide, and
collaborate with the postdoc/assistant professors. Funding for this activity
will be provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.