* 9709873
* Research on Dynamic Models of Earnings and                  Human Capital Accumulation in Partial and General           Equilibrium settings
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* James Heckman, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2002
* USD 454,769.00

A major goal of this. project is the construction of the aggregate supply of
skills to the U.S. economy. This supply curve will be a tool for exploring the
likely impacts of tax reforms, social security reforms, proposals for tuition
subsidies, and other policies designed to promote the formation of skill in the
economy. A broad array of policy proposals will be evaluated. Although the main
focus is on tax policy and human capital accumulation, how taxes affect capital
accumulation and hence wages; how employment subsidies affect skill formation
and employment; and how subsidies to education and training affect physical
capital formation and wage differentials will also be analyzed. Both short run
and long run impacts of public policies will be considered in a dynamic general
equilibrium framework. The following tasks will be undertaken: (A). To formulate
and estimate microeconomic life-cycle models of earnings, labor supply,
schooling and on the job training that can be used as inputs into rigorously
justified policy simulations. A major focus of this portion of the project is to
produce estimates of the human capital production function that is the principal
input into endogenous growth models and models in public finance used to
simulate the impacts of policies. (B) A comprehensive assessment of the current
and past tax and subsidy treatment of human capital will be undertaken. (C)
Aligning general equilibrium forecasts with micro estimates is a distinctive
feature of this project. A general equilibrium framework is essential if the
insights of modern dynamic public finance are to be applied to systematically
investigate the effects of alternative policies. A major goal is to improve the
empirical foundations of a class of general equilibrium simulation models.
Current widely used calibration methods take micro parameters estimated from
models that assume one economic environment and transport them without
modification to very different economic settings. This practice raises the
possibility of inconsistency in the estimates used to simulate a macro model.
The simulation and micro estimation of the model will be integrated to ensure
consistency of micro and macro estimates.