* 9709576
* ESH - Late-Quaternary Temperature History of the Great      Basin Based on Amino Acid Paleothermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Darrell Kaufman, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,629.00

9709576 Kaufman Proxy climate indicators that record purely temperature or
precipitation are rare but are critical for separating the two signals to
compare with the output from climate models and for resolving the relative
contribution of each to the hydrologic budget of Pleistocene lakes. This study
follows previous research that has demonstrated the utility of biomolecules
preserved in fossils as paleothermometers. I propose to use the extent to which
chemical reactions, particularly amino acid racemization, have progressed in
fossil molluscan shells from extensive late Quaternary lake deposits in the
Great Basin, Western United States, as a measure of paleotemperature. The extent
of amino acid racemization in a fossil is proportional to the length of time
elapsed since the organism lived and to the ambient postdepostional temperature.
Coupled with independent age control though AMS 14C, luminescence, and
tephrochronology, the amino acid data can be used to assess the timing and
magnitude of paleotemperature changes. By using shells of different ages, the
temperature of successive time intervals bracketed by the shells can be
calculated. Because protein diagenesis is an integrative measure of the entire
postdepositional temperature history, it reflects long-term temperature changes
that complement the geologically instantaneous paleoenvironmental evidence
contained within the deposits themselves. During the past four years, the Amino
Acid Geochronology Laboratory at Utah State University has gained considerable
experience analyzing fossil snail shells from across the northern Great Basin.
Preliminary results indicate that the effective diagenetic temperature (EDT) in
the Bonneville basin for the period 25-15 ka (calibrated yr) was 1.5(2.0 (C,
which is about 9 (C lower than the present mean annual air temperature (MAAT).
The uncertainty in the temperature estimate could be reduced through additional
laboratory heating experiments and analysis of 14C dated Holocene snails that wi
ll serve to refine the kinetic equation. The technique will also benefit from a
newly developed analytical procedure and instrumentation that resolves multiple
amino acids including some that react at higher rates than the single amino acid
(isoleucine) that was used previously. In addition, because the sample-size
requirements are nearly an order of magnitude less for the new analyzer, and
because reducing uncertainties imposed by analytical and inter-shell
variability. The questions addressed in this study focus on calculating
temperature differences (thermal gradients and temperature changes between time
intervals), which are inherently more precise than absolute-temperature
estimates. The aim is to attain precision better than ( 0.5( C, which is more
than sufficient to assess regional-scale characteristics of past temperatures
and to compare with fundamental features of GCM-and regional-model-simulated
climate, such as: (1) full-glacial, MAAT anomalies that increase about 2-3( C
northward and are lowered by 3-5( C relative to the present; (2) full-glacial,
mean annual water-to-air temperature difference of about 3-4( C; and (3)
postglacial warming that progresses northward during the period 15-12 ka (14C
yr). Preliminary amino acid data on 14.7 ( 0.3 ka (calibrated yr) snails from
the Franklin basin (40( 10( N) and the Chewaucan basin (42( 40( N) suggest that
the average late Quaternary temperature anomalies increase northwestward by 3(
C, whereas the present MAATs at these sites differ by &lt; 1( C. To evaluate
whether the steeper paleotemperature gradient reflects either greater
early/middle Holocene warmth in the north or greater late Pleistocene cooling in
the south will require partitioning the EDT estimates of the late Quaternary
into shorter time intervals using shells of bracketing ages, such as those that
have been previously dated at numerous sites across the Great Basin. In
addition, new tephra (A. Sarna-Wojcicki, USGS, Denver), luminescence (S. Forman,
University of Chica go), and AMS 14C analyses will be conducted as part of this
study. The shorezone deposits rimming the basins provide an ideal datum for
collection because they contain similar-age shells and because they occur at
similar elevations, thereby avoiding differences in thermal histories resulting
from different submergence durations. On the other hand, contemporaneous shells
from nearby localities but from different elevations afford a means of assessing
the difference between past water and air temperatures, a major control on
evaporation rate. Similarly, shells from a restricted area but of a range of
ages can be used to date climate transitions, such as the last glacial-to-
interglacial warming. On the inter-basinal scale, widely distributed tephras
previously reported in Pleistocene lake deposits provide ideal stratigraphic
markers that, in conjunction with amino acid analyses, can be used to calculate
paleotemperature gradients across the area of the eruptive plume.