* 9709361
* Mechanisms of Sensorimotor Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* John Jeka, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/2001
* USD 84,267.00

Human standing posture is inherently unstable; even when one is standing
quietly, small disturbances and corrections of posture occur continually.
Control of human upright stance requires sensory input to perceive the
distinction between movements of one's own body and movement of the environment.
These inputs include (1) visual information from the eyes; (2) vestibular (inner
ear) information about head orientation; and (3) somatosensory (touch)
information about position of body segments and external surfaces, from
receptors in the muscles and skin. Most postural control studies have focused on
isolating a particular sensory input through experimental manipulation or
pathology (e.g., patients without a functioning inner ear), to determine how an
individual sensory input influences postural control. However, a single input
rarely works in isolation and there is a need to understand how multiple inputs
interact. The present study analyzes human postural control while simultaneously
manipulating two sensory inputs, vision and touch. Previous studies have shown
that vision can influence postural sway: A person standing quietly in front of a
moving visual pattern sways at the frequency of the visual display. More
recently, experiments in our lab have shown that the sense of touch can
similarly influence sway. Postural stability was enhanced when people lightly
touched a rigid surface with a single fingertip; and, if the touched surface was
moving, postural sway assumed the frequency of the moving surface. The intent of
the present study is to provide visual and touch information simultaneously, to
determine how these two sensory inputs interact in the control of postural sway.
Individuals will stand in front of a visual display consisting of a random dot
pattern. At the same time they will touch a rigid metal plate. The experiments
will explore how postural sway is influenced when 1) visual cues are moving and
touch cues are static, and vice versa; and 2) visual and touch cues are both
moving. The question is whether postural responses are dominated by vision or
touch, or whether instead a more complex relationship obtains. These studies
should lead to a better theoretical understanding of how the central nervous
system processes complex sensory information, and eventually to better
rehabilitative techniques for patients who have lost sensory function due to
neurological injury (e.g., stroke).