* 9709514
* RUI:  Development and Maturation of Olfactory Centers in theLobster:  Influences of Serotonin and Adult Neurogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 214,027.00

9709514 BELTZ Dr. Beltz will investigate two related issues of neuronal
development and plasticity in the lobster brain. One area of this research
builds on recent studies in a variety of organisms that point to the potential
contibution of proliferating cells that generate new neurons in the adult brain.
The birth of new neurons in the mature olfactory pathway of the lobster has been
demonstrated both in the receptor population and in interneurons that are
involved in olfactory processing and transmission of information to higher
centers. Integration of new cells into existing circuits may provide a means of
modifying olfactory learning or integration in the mature brain. The proposed
studies will examine the possible regulation of neurogenesis by steroid hormones
and other factors, such as damage to the antennules in the olfactory periphery.
The possible contribution of neuronal death ("apoptosis") to the refinement of
the mature olfactory system also will be addressed. The second set of studies
will examine the role of the neurotransmitter serotonin in brain development. In
contrast to the apparent gradual changes in cellular components of the olfactory
pathway, the serotonergic input to the olfactory system appears to be very
stable in lobsters. Identified serotonergic interneurons innervating the
olfactory lobes appear early in embryogenesis and persist throughout larval and
adult life. Serotonin depletion during the embryonic period results in a
dramatic slowing of growth in olfactory target regions. This implies that
serotonin normally promotes the growth of these regions. In future studies the
cellular bases of this growth retardation will be investigated by comparing the
development of specific groups of olfactory interneurons exposed to reduced,
normal and increased levels of serotonin. These studies are relevant to
developmental mechanisms in higher organisms because there are many parallels
between the organization of olfactory pathways and processing even in phylogen
etically distant species. In addition, these studies will explore basic
mechanisms involved in the development and maintenance of neural circuits which
may be applicable in a spectrum of other organisms.