* 9709491
* An Empirical and Theoretical Investigation into Goods       Pricing in Open Economies and the Implications for the      Macroeconomy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Charles Engel, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 197,077.00

9709491 Engel This project addresses one of the central questions in
international finance: how consumer and producer prices respond to nominal
exchange rate changes, and how those responses relate to changes in import
prices. The implications for the behavior for real exchange rates if explored.
The goal of the empirical work is to allow us to build models of goods pricing
into macroeocnomic models of open economies. The link between pricing-to-market
theories and menu-cost pricing will be studied, and the consequences for foreign
exchange rate volatility and possibly international market efficiency will be
examined. The first phase of the project involves reexamining currently popular
methods of testing purchasing power parity of panel data. A new model is
proposed which generalizes existing work. It allows for the speed of adjustment
of prices to relate to several sources of price disequilibria. It also
constructs a model for the covariance of price shocks across locations that
makes estimation of relatively large panels by GLS feasible. The second phase of
the project makes use of a new data set recently obtained from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. It consists of consumer price data disaggregated into 44 sub-
categories which together comprise over 99.5% of the C.P.I. The data is
available for 27 U.S. cities. Comparable data are obtained from Statistics
Canada for Canadian cities. The project uses the data to examine the behavior of
prices between locations. The thrust of many of the empirical studies is to
distinguish between intra-location relative price behavior that is due to market
segmentation owing to distance between locations and relative price behavior
between cross-country location pairs that may also depend on nominal exchange
rate behavior. ??