* 9709431
* HCI:  Moving Public Housing Residents to Middle-Income      Neighborhoods:  Effects on Children and Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2001
* USD 294,781.00

This project examines the impact of neighborhood change (moving from high-
poverty, predominantly minority neighborhoods into more affluent neighborhoods)
on low-income parents and their children. Following a federal court order to
remedy long-standing racial segregation in public housing and in schools, the
city of Yonkers, NY built 200 units of low-rise public housing in mostly white,
middle-income neighborhoods. Subsequently, a group of very low-income, mostly
African-American and Latino families was moved into this housing between 1992
and 1994. This project would comprise a 2-year follow-up study of these
families, who will be re-interviewed to examine short-term adaptation to their
new neighborhoods. This project will permit a closer examination of the human
capital and other social factors thought to mediate the impacts of neighborhood
on the social attainment of families. Several factors make this an exceptionally
rich longitudinal data set for analyzing neighborhood effects: the project
combines the best outcome measures of previous survey studies on housing
mobility with social process and social interaction measures highlighted in a
long tradition of ethnographic research on neighborhoods; a quasi-experimental
design is used to minimize selection bias; a large breadth of measured variables
is employed; a high survey completion rate (90%) was attained at baseline;
multiple levels of data collection (parents, children and youth) are used;
detailed neighborhood ecology data beyond the census data typically used in this
form of research is available; and the inclusion of a significant sub-population
of Latinos and African-Americans is possible. The project is relevant to a
number of the research priorities central to the Human Capital Initiative,
especially those related to workforce, neighborhoods and families.