* 9709447
* GOALI:  ELECTROMIGRATION STUDIES OF ELECTROLESS CU ON       SUB-QUARTER-MICRON TEST STRUCTURES
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Linda Vanasupa, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/1999
* USD 50,267.00

9709447 Vanasupa The microelectronics industry is currently undergoing a
revolution in the technology and material employed to connect individual devices
in an integrated circuit (interconnects). It appears that metallizations based
on copper will likely replace the aluminum metallizations whose use has
dominated the silicon microelectronics industry for decades. Copper offers a
lower resistivity as well as a higher resistance to diffusional transport under
the influence of high current densities (electromigration). At this point, many
of the issues associated with converting to copper metallization have been
addressed. With the trend for eversmaller circuits, however, the
microelectronics industry is likely to find themselves faced with the same
limiting factor currently plaguing the use of aluminum-based metallization:
electromigration. The objective of this research is to identify the parameters
that are important to preventing electromigration of copper-based metallization
in integrated circuits. The objectives will be accomplished by generating a
matrix of test samples composed of multiple levels of copper interconnects using
an electrochemical process to deposit the copper. The copper deposition
parameters will serve as a variable in the experiments since they strongly
influence microstructural features of the copper. Samples will be packaged in
ceramic daul in-line packages to simulate the operating environment of actual
integrated circuits. Electromigration tests will be performed at elevated
temperatures until the samples fail. Technics such as focused ion beam
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, secondary ion mass spectrometry and
grazing incidence x-ray diffraction will be used to characterize and identify
the source of the electromigration failures. ***