* 9709386
* Investigation of In Situ Interfacial Polymer Structure by   Surface Sum-Frequency Generation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Marie Messmer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

This Research Planning Grant is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program. Professor Messmer and her students at Lehigh University will
study the structure of polymeric interfaces with the aim to understand how the
structure of polymeric chains affects the tribological properties of these
surfaces. This work will correlate the orientation of surface chemical bonds and
their conformation with properties such as phase transitions and frictional
characteristics. In situ sum-frequency generation spectrometry will be used to
determine the degree of bond order and structure for these polymeric surfaces
because this second order optical method is sensitive only to interfacial
regions and not to bulk properties that often dominate signals in surface
spectroscopy. The work will begin with model diblock polymers composed of
polyolefins and polyethylene oxide films on fused silica surfaces so that C-H
stretching, and C-C bending and rocking modes can be quantified as a function of
compositional and environmental variables. Results from this work will identify
surface properties that strongly influence the frictional character of these
interfaces. This work aims to develop a foundation for predicting the surface
frictional properties of polymeric materials through the use of a surface
sensitive spectroscopic method, in situ sum-frequency spectrometry. Model
diblock polymers will be studied initially. Through sensitive measurements of
the composition and structure of these polymeric surfaces, small features that
greatly control surface friction will be established. This work has broad
application in many important technological areas such as lubrication, anti-
flocculating agents, and protective coatings.