* 9709575
* Theoretical Aspects of Chemical Dynamics: Ion-Molecule      Collisions, Energy-Time Analysis of Molecular Spectra, and  Assignment of Quantum States
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Gregory Ezra, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 05/31/2000
* USD 197,800.00

Professor Ezra of Cornell University is being supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry program to continue his work on the theoretical
investigation of chemical dynamics. Specifically the project is a computational
study whereby complex high lying vibrational states are investigated by quantum,
classical and semiclassical methods. During this next grant period he will
investigate the dynamics of ion-molecule collisions, with particular emphasis on
the formation and decay of long lived collision complexes. This research will
also focus on the development of semiclassical periodic orbit theory as an aid
in the interpretation of molecular vibrational spectra which are of sufficiently
high energy that they lie beyond the regime of traditional spectroscopic
techniques. These topic address several fundamental problems in chemical and
molecular physics namely the fate of energy distribution of long lived molecular
complexes and statistical versus non-statistical behavior in the unimolecular
decay of transient species. During the following two years Prof. Ezra will be
concerned with the theoretical analysis of the internal motions in molecules, as
they vibrate, rotate, and collide with one another. The study of these patterns
of nuclear motion leads to a deeper understanding of the factors that determine
the propensity of molecules to undergo reaction under given conditions. This
research group will be studying a number of topics relevant to this general
theme. First, they will investigate the nature of the ``sticky'' collisions that
can occur between charged species and uncharged molecules in, for example,
reactions of atmospheric importance. Such sticky collisions are often essential
for subsequent chemical reaction to occur. Another major topic is the
development of methods that enable the nature of nuclear motions within
molecules to be inferred in a fairly direct way from molecular vibrational
spectra. Much of this work exploits semiclassical ideas: that is, theories that
are correct with respect to quantum mechanics, while retaining the intuitive
appeal of classical ball-and-spring pictures of nuclear motion. Periodic
classical motions of nuclei, those that repeat over and over ad infinitum, are
found to play an important role in understanding the connection between spectra
and nuclear dynamics.