* 9709633
* Modeling Regional Paleovegetation of the Holocene in EasternUnited States: Upper Great Lakes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Katherine Klink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2002
* USD 334,451.00

Abstract ATM-9709633 Sugita, Shinya University of Minnesota Title: Modeling
Regional Paleovegetation of the Holocene in Eastern United States; Upper Great
Lakes Climate and vegetation in the Upper Great Lakes region have been
influenced not only by continental-scale movement of air masses but also by
substrate and regional physiographical features such as Lakes Superior, Michigan
and Huron. Retreat of the continental ice sheet and subsequent isostatic rebound
dramatically altered sizes and shapes of the Great Lakes and Lake Agassiz during
the late- glacial and early Holocene, which undoubtedly affected the regional
climate. Shifts in the location of the prairie-forest border are likely to have
had further feedback effects on the regional climate. This award supports an
examination of Holocene climate/vegetation interactions in the Upper Great Lake
region, and the preparation of regional models of climate (RegCM2) and
flora/vegetation models as simulations of the present and of 11 k, 6 k and 3 k
calibrated yrs. A pollen dispersal/deposition model, will link regional
vegetation predicted by the vegetation models to pollen assemblages in lakes,
which can be compared with observed fossil pollen from the regional database.
Through this model/data comparison, the effectiveness of simulations which
couple regional climate and vegetation models will be evaluated. The density of
good-quality, well-dated pollen records in the Upper Great Lakes region is now
extremely high, allowing a more spatially detailed model/data comparison than
would be possible in most other regions of the globe.