* 9709029
* Mechanisms of Primary Creep in Lamellar TiAl
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 07/31/2001
* USD 350,489.00

9709029 Mills The primary creep response of polycrystalline TiAl is examined as
a function of the lamellar spacing and grain size under a GOALI grant at Ohio
State with interaction of Universal Energy Systems and Wright Laboratories.
Single lamellar colony crystals are prepared and creep tested in several
orientations to determine the effects of lamellar orientation on the primary
creep behavior. The effect of carbon additions on the creep response of both
polycrystalline samples and single crystal lamellar colony crystals is
determined. The form of primary creep transient is modeled quantitatively and
compared to the hardening behavior under constant strain rate conditions. Stress
change, strain transient experiments are conducted to provide new insight into
the mechanisms controlling deformation during creep. Activation energies for
transient flow are determined by employing rapid temperature change experiments.
Transmission electron microscopy is used to study the deformation
microstructures in both the major gamma phase and the alpha 2 phase, slip
transmission across lamellar interfaces, and deformation mechanisms within the
interfaces themselves. Observations are conducted as a function of creep strain
in order to develop an understanding of the hardening and recovery processes
during creep. The graduate student will have the opportunity to interact
extensively with the technical staff at both Universal Energy Systems and Wright
Laboratories. This project is jointly funded by the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Materials Research. %%%
Titanium aluminide alloys of the gamma and alpha 2 phase structure are
considered for a variety of high temperature applications where primary creep
could be a critical factor in their use. This program is aimed at understanding
the effect of microstructural scale, lamellar orientation, and composition on
the primary creep transients in fully lamellar TiAl. ***