* 9709587
* Functional Analysis of the Skull in South American Capuchin Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Matthew Ravosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1999
* USD 55,000.00

Using an in vivo analysis of bone strain during vigorous biting and chewing of
tough foods from gages affixed to the interorbit, body, and symphysis of the
mandible in adult black-capped capuchin monkeys, this research will directly
evaluate the functional morphology of the area around the eye orbit and
mandibular symphysis in higher primates as it relates to the masticatory
complex. Capuchins, unlike many other primates, often use the incisors as well
as molars to process tough foods. This study is designed to investigate the
relative effects on symphyseal and browridge form of loading regimes during
forceful biting with the incisors and during chewing in the same animal. Two
hypotheses regarding cranial form and function will be tested: symphyseal fusion
in higher primates is linked to stresses experienced during heavy use of the
incisors, and browridge formation in neandertals and other hominoids is due to
greater incisal loading. If maximal strain levels at the symphysis are
significantly higher during powerful incisor biting and clenching, then it will
be possible to link vertical incisors and incisal loading to the evolution of
symphyseal fusion in higher primates. In assessing the relative influence of
incisor loading on browridge formation, mandibular and interorbital strain
levels will be compared to test for a cranial strain gradient. For a
circumorbital structure to be considered a functional adaptation to dissipate
masicatory stress, no difference should be observed between interorbital and
mandibular strain levels. Alternatively, the presence of a strain gradient would
suggest a secondary effect of a loading regime on browridge formation. In this
case, genetic and epigenetic controls of circumorbital form would be viewed as
relatively independent of factors affecting jaw form. This would also support
the claim that bone along the upper face serves to protect the special sense
organs from traumatic forces.