* 9709986
* Dissertation Research:  Pilots Versus Cosmographers: Theory and Utility in Early Modern Spain
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Michael Shank, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 12/31/1998
* USD 9,200.00

This dissertation project examines a sixteenth century dispute in Spain over
navigation and cartography, which pitted educated cosmographers against
practical pilots in arguments about the relative value of theoretical knowledge
and practical utility. The researcher will use legal records preserved in
Seville, writings on navigation, and maps and navigational instruments to
explain the goals and positions of the main factions in this debate -- the
pilots who navigated the ships, the cosmographers their examiners, and the
instrument makers who mediated between them --as well as those of one man,
Sebastian Cabot, who affiliated himself at various times with all three groups.
The researcher will use the dispute to probe the reasons for the consistent
misunderstandings between pilots and osmographers. The dissertation will look
beyond the pilots' conservativism and ignorance, invoked in most of the
historiography, to explore their reasons for rejecting the new knowledge and
techniques of the cosmographers. The dissertation will also explore the vastly
different conceptions the pilots, cosmographers and instrument-makers had both
of what constituted valid knowledge and of why one would want to acquire it. By
examining the different goals of the pilots and cosmographers, and by focusing
attention on the ways the pilots chose what methods to adopt, the researcher
hopes to understand the problems inherent in trying to make theoretical
knowledge practically useful.