* 9709820
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:  Lie Groups, Algebras and        Their Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2003
* Ivan Penkov, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT : Support provided by this grant will facilitate the continuation and
enhancement of the regional workshop "Lie Groups, Lie Algebras and their
Representations", which has been operating in the Western US for several years,
and help establish it on a regular basis. Lie theory is a central discipline in
modern mathematics, playing key roles in harmonic analysis, number theory,
algebra, differential geometry and several aspects of mathematical physics. The
goals of the workshop are to provide opportunities for graduate students and
junior researchers to avail themselves of the expertise of the many researchers
who are working in this general area in the Western US. The three CO PI's will
continue to organize four weekend workshops per year at various campuses of the
University of California. These workshops will feature both local experts and a
few outside speakers. Funds will be awarded to graduate students and junior
researchers in order to both facilitate attendance at the workshops and to
encourage collaborative research with senior researchers. It has been the CO
PI's collective experience over the past few years that this type of activity,
creating as it does a unique opportunity to learn, is a particularly efficient
and beneficial way for graduate students planning to work in this important
branch of mathematics to acquaint themselves with both current research and the
researchers who are producing it.