* 9709009
* Secure Slide Storage and a Frozen Tissue Component for the  University of California Davis Nematode Collection (UCDNC)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Steven Nadler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1999
* USD 53,000.00

9709009 Nadler The University of Califomia Davis Nematode Collection (UCDNC) is
known world-wide as having one of the largest and most comprehensive collections
of plant parasitic, free-living soil, freshwater, and marine nematodes. The type
slide collection includes more than 11,000 specimens, including 3,454 primary
types representing 930 species and 14 of the 18 recognized orders. The general
slide collection includes more than 53,000 specimens representing 2,221 species
and 16 orders. Thus, the collection conserves original specimens from
descriptions of new species, voucher specimens associated with nematology
research, and specimens from surveys throughout the world. These specimens are
used by scientists studying nematodes for research in comparative morphology,
taxonomy, evolution, ecology, biological control, and agriculture. Efficient
collection resources are essential for nematology research, not only because
nematodes are among the most diverse and abundant multicellular groups of
organisms, but because they have significant impact on human activities (e.g.,
plant parasites and agriculture, vertebrate parasites and animal husbandry,
human health). As a large reference source of identified specimens, the UCDNC is
extremely useful for precise identifications in nematology-related research.
This project will provide a new system for storing slides to decrease the
frequency of specimen damage, facilitate monitoring of slides for deterioration,
and increase access to specimens for research purposes. The storage system to be
employed has proved to be very efficient (in other nematode collections), and is
necessary to ensure the long-term conservation of the specimens.