* 9709364
* Reduction of Polyhalogenated Alkanes in the Environment:    Verification of Model Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Judith Perlinger, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Professor Judith Perlinger, Department of Chemistry, Michigan Technological
University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Program of the
Chemistry Division under a Research Planning Grant to study the reduction of
halogenated alkenes under environmental conditions. The goal of this project is
to establish one-electron reduction as the rate determining step in the
reduction of halogenated alkanes by naphthoquinone, mercaptojuglone and iron
porphyrins. Electron transfer rates of these model systems will be analyzed in
terms of Marcus theory to develop a more global reactivity model applicable to
natural systems. Naturally occuring organic and iron-sulfur containing species
will be identified and their rates of reduction of polyhalogenated alkanes
compared to those of the model systems to assess their usefulness in detoxifying
polyhalogenated alkanes. Given the timely nature of the problem, a Research
Planning Grant at this point in Professor Perlinger's career will facilitate
completion of the preliminary studies needed for a competitive proposal. The
release of halogenated compounds into the environment creates the need to
detoxify these reagents under natural conditions. Reduction to more benign
products occurs under laboratory conditions, but the chemistry under
environmental conditions is not known. Systematic studies of model electron
transfer systems will be performed to identify the rate controlling reaction
step, and the data used to develop a more global reactivity model. Naturally
occurring reductants will be identified, and their usefulness as reductants of
polyhalogenated compounds under environmental conditions assessed by means of
the developed reactivity model.