* 9709607
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG: New Multidisciplinary Directions in Applied Mathematics Reserach &amp; Teaching at MIT (Group    Infrastructure Grant)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Daniel Rothman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/2001
* USD 430,556.00

PROJECT SUMMARY This award will proved seed money to build infrastructure to
promote interdisciplinary collaborations and train students in the applied
mathematical sciences at MIT. The theme of the activity is to set up mechanisms
for substantive, direct collaborations between faculty members from different
departments (Applied Mathematics and Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences)
on research topics of common interest. The plan is to create a research
environment where important interdisciplinary problems can be addressed through
a blend of analysis, numerical simulations and physical experiments. The
infrastructure includes the creation of special student seminars, computer
equipment designed to increase visualization and educational capabilities,
support for postdoctoral fellows and students, and funding to strengthen
connections of the mathematical modelling of complex systems to physical
experiments. The seminar series includes an informal workshop, allowing students
and group members to share ideas on current projects, as well as a series
focusing on developing areas of research. The planned scientific areas extend
current areas of individual faculty research to collaborations between many
faculty members. Specific research topics include the dynamics of interfaces,
sedimentation and pattern formation in geophysical processes, and singularity
formation in general relativity. Collaborations will be facilitated and
sustained by joint postdocs and students supported partially through the
infrastructure grant. The diverse talents brought together in the group create
the potential for a special environment for collaborative research and
interdisciplinary education in mathematics and the physical sciences. Funding
for this activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.