* 9709291
* Paleoclimate Variability Recorded in Varved Sediments of Lake Malawi, Tropical Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2001
* USD 333,833.00

Abstract ATM-9709291 University of Minnesota Johnson, Thomas C. Title:
Paleoclimate Variability Recorded in Varved Sediments of Lake Malawi, Tropical
Africa The award supports the collection of sediment cores from four sites in
northern Lake Malawi, to establish a robust, high-solution record of past
climate change that spans the entire Holocene. The cores will be dated by
Pb-210, AMS C-14, and varve counts. The sediments will be analyzed for weight
per cent biogenic silica and for light and dark layer thickness of the varves.
Biogenic silica abundance is believed to reflect primary productivity, which is
a function of upwelling intensity, related to wind strength and seasonal
cooling. The light layers in the varve couplets are diatom ooze, also reflecting
primary productivity during the dry windy season (June - August). The dark
layers consist of terrigenous silts and clays with admixtures of diatoms. These
reflect the intensity of river runoff during the rainy season in the austral
summer (Dec. - March). The varve thickness records (light layer, combined) will
be subjected to evolutionary spectral analysis, paying particular attention to
ENSO-scale variability through the Holocene. Pilot studies on the sediments will
include redox-sensitive elemental analysis, organic matter isotopic composition,
and diatom assemblage composition. This research will be in collaboration with
the Malawi Global Environment Facility (GEF) program funded by the World Bank,
which will provide ship time, logistical support in the country, and Pb-210
analyses of the sediments. This will be a collaborative effort with scientists
from Malawi, Canada and Norway. This paleoclimatological investigation on Lake
Malawi will be conducted as part of the International Decade for the East
African Lakes (IDEAL). IDEAL is a multi-disciplinary, multinational program of
research and training on the large lakes of East Africa.