* 9709341
* U.S. Government Support for IAI Core Budget
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Bradford Wilcox, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/1999
* USD 1,355,000.00

970341 Rabuffetti The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
was created by an international agreement concluded among representatives of
American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Institute
for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13, 1992 ("the IAI
Agreement"). The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental organization for the
purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research related to global
change. The Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda" identifying particular
areas for research. Full membership in the IAI is limited to States, although
the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State entities to become "Associates of
the Institute." The Institute is governed by an annual Conference of the
Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC). The US Government currently
serves on the EC, and also serves as Chair. The Institute has a permanent
secretariat, the "Directorate." The procedures and practices of the IAI's
governing institutions are elaborated in detailed rules of procedure. The IAI
thus possesses the fundamental institutional characteristics of an international
oreanization: it was created by international agreement, is composed of States
and is governed by governing bodies composed of representatives of States. The
US Government participates actively in the IAI. The United States played a
leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in
the IAI since its creation. Senior US Government officials have served on the
Executive Council and held other responsible positions related to IAI
activities. Furthermore, the IAI has been listed by the State Department and by
the Office of Personnel Management as an international organization within the
meaning of the Federal Employees international Organization Service Act, covered
by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581. Core Budget support, for which this proposal
is submitted, allows the operation of the Directorate of th e IAI. Currently,
the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in S o Jose dos Campos, S o Paulo state,
on the campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute (INPE), where
the IAI Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical
personality, with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the
Government of Brazil.The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the other
Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa
Rica, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Amounts are arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of
the Parties to the IAI Agreement. %%% The Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) was created by an international agreement concluded among
representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-
American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13,
1992 ("the IAI Agreement"). The IAI agreement created an intergovernmental
organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
related to global change. The Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda"
identifying particular areas for research. Full membership in the IAI is limited
to States, although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State entities to
become "Associates of the Institute." The Institute is governed by an annual
Conference of the Parties, and by a subsidiary Executive Council (EC). The US
Government currently serves on the EC, and also serves as Chair. The Institute
has a permanent secretariat, the "Directorate." The procedures and practices of
the IAI's governing institutions are elaborated in detailed rules of procedure.
The IAI thus possesses the fundamental institutional characteristics of an
international organization: it was created by international agreement, is
composed of States and is governed by governing bodies composed of
representatives of States. The US Government participa tes actively in the IAI.
The United States played a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been
an active participant in the IAI since its creation. Senior US Government
officials have served on the Executive Council and held other responsible
positions related to IAI activities. Furthermore, the IAI has been listed by the
State Department and by the Office of Personnel Management as an international
organization within the meaning of the Federal Employees International
Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581. Core
Budget support, for which this proposal is submitted, allows the operation of
the Directorate of the IAI. Currently, the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil
in S=E3o Jos=E9 dos Campos, S o Paulo state, on the campus of the Brazilian
National Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI Directorate functions as
an internationally recognized juridical personality, with the corresponding
privileges and immunities granted by the Government of Brazil. The IAI receives
Core Budget contributions from the other Parties to the Agreement Establishing
the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Amounts are arrived at by consensus at
an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the IAI Agreement. The IAI
is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues
among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency designated by the White House to
carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***