* 9709456
* The Question of Common-Access Lands and Sustainable Rural   Development in South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,05/31/2001
* John Pickles, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 05/31/2001
* USD 159,525.00

SBR-9709456 Haripriya Rangan University of Kentucky The research supported by
this award addresses the issue of environmental sustainability of common-
property land uses in post-apartheid South Africa. Specifically, the
investigator will study the ways in which the structures of the informal markets
for resource-based commodities and of rural households influence which members
(especially by gender) of which households make use of which common-property
sites as sources of these commodities. The commodities are not cultivated farm
products, but rather, materials for crafts and medicines to be sold eventually
in informal urban markets. The investigator will determine which commodities to
make the subject of study from preliminary comparison of commodities' market
characteristics. The research will proceed by tracing the social and economic
linkages in the chain of production and marketing from urban, informal markets
to rural households and land. Through interviews with participants at each point
in the chain, the investigator will construct these linkages and their
relationship to the gender- and household-specific production of commodities.
The findings of the research will be important because of the large role that
the marketing of non-cultivated commodities plays in the livelihoods of rural
South African households, the importance of these land uses to the ultimate
environmental sustainability of common lands, and the role that common lands
play in agrarian and resettlement policies in post-apartheid South Africa.