* 9709418
* Mechanism of Ferric Enterobactin Transport Through FEPA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Phillip Klebba, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/2000
* USD 307,842.00

9709418 Klebba This project addresses the transport mechanism of an Escherichia
coli outer membrane (OM) protein. FepA transports the bacterial iron chelator
(siderophore), ferric enterobactin (FeEnt), across the OM into the periplasm.
This transport reaction is energy-dependent and TonB-dependent, involving two
experimentally defined biochemical stages: binding and internalization. The
molecular mechanisms comprising FeEnt binding to FepA will be elucidated; the
siderophore binding site will be investigated by identifying residues that
confer affinity and chemical specificity to the binding event. Using an
abbreviated form of site-specific mutagenesis, termed double mutagenesis, two
elements of the receptor-ligand interaction, ionic and hydrophobic bonds, will
be explored. Using chemical analogs of FeEnt, chemical substitutions on the
siderophore that impair or abrogate its binding to FepA will be identified. The
PI will analyze conformational changes that occur in FepA during transport in
vivo with electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, and study the proposed
interaction between FepA and TonB with ESR by site-directed spin labeling
(SDSL). Random and site-directed mutagenesis will be employed to identify
regions in FepA that are important to ligand uptake after binding, and SDSL used
to study the effects of mutations in these sites. Finally, the investigators
will use a novel system of in vivo ESR to study biochemistry in the bacterial
periplasm. These investigations will determine how an iron-containing molecule
adsorbs to a receptor protein in the outer membrane of a bacterial cell. It will
define the parts of the metal complex and the parts of the membrane protein that
interact together during the passage of the iron through the cell membrane.
Since all Gram-negative bacteria obtain iron using similar systems, the results
of these studies will establish fundamental principles of binding and transport
that are applicable to many different uptake systems in many diffe rent
organisms. Electron spin resonance analysis of a spin labeled membrane protein
(FepA) will augment general knowledge of membrane protein structure, and provide
information about how such receptors function to allow entry of metal complexes.
In many ways this process is akin to the opening and closing of a door on the
outside of a cell, that allows the entry of certain molecules but not others;
the proposed research will define the mechanisms underlying the operation of the
membrane "doors."