* 9709250
* Studies of the Impact of Low Inflation and Minimum Wages    on Employment and Welfare
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* George Akerlof, Brookings Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2001
* USD 287,088.00

This research consists of four project. The first will analyze the impact of low
inflation and minimum wage legislation on employment and welfare. The first
question that will be addressed is the benefits from lower tax distortions of
lower inflation. Martin Feldstein has estimated the welfare benefits of reducing
inflation from two percent to zero as 1.01 percent of GNP. These calculations
will be redone taking account of four factors omitted in the Feldstein model.
Those four factors are: behavioral responses of savings out of interest income
to changes in after tax rates of return on savings, tax shelters, the
distribution of benefits by income, and the fall in the rate of return on
physical capital with increases in the capital stock. These factors properly
considered should result in significant changes in the evaluation of the welfare
benefits of lower tax distortions from zero inflation, quite possibly leading to
a loss in welfare from pursuit of such a goal. The second project will be the
theoretical and empirical consideration of models in which the way inflation
enters price and wage decisions changes qualitatively as inflation nears zero.
Advocates of price stability have claimed that one of the reasons for pursuit of
that goal is that inflation could then be ignored in many economic decisions. If
some significant fraction of decision makers ignore inflation in wage and price
decisions at very low inflation, there will be a significant trade-off between
inflation and unemployment if inflation is low enough. Such behavior will be
near rational since the losses to price and wage setters will vary with the
square of inflation. The model will yield an optimal rate of inflation which is
moderate, but greater than zero. The third project will consider the effects of
minimum wage legislation on employment. The PI's will use the same approach as
in their earlier work on evaluating the employment impact of nominal wage
rigidity at very low inflation to calculate the impact of changes in the real
minimum wage on employment. They will explore the differences between the two
types of effects. They will also estimate the size of the pass through of
changes in minimum wages onto prices. The fourth project will continue the
earlier work on nominal wage rigidity. The PI's will test their earlier model
using international data. They also will use contract data to see how people
now, in times of higher than zero inflation, think that they might behave if
inflation should actually fall to zero, by examining indexation provisions in
contracts where inflation becomes negative. The PI's will develop a general
model of indexation, incorporating both rational and irrational elements,
borrowing on the work of Shiller in terms of what people say about indexation
and, in particular, will see whether contracts provide for give-backs in the
event of deflation, or whether they specifically prohibit them.