* 9709340
* Collaborative Research:  Learning and Efficient Matching
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Juuso Valimaki, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,411.00

Project Abstract This is a collaborative project with Dirk Bergemann (9709887).
This is a project to conduct three projects concerned with the realization and
division of social surplus in dynamic matching environments under uncertainty.
Project I presents a dynamic and two-sided matching model when there is imper
fect information about the value of the match on both sides of the match. The
value of each match between two individuals given by a random variable. More
information about the true value of each feasible match can be acquired by
repeated sampling. The project analyzes intertemporal pricing and match forma
tion when there is competition in prices for the match partners. In an
application to the labor market, sufficient conditions for efficient assignment
of workers to tasks are identified. Project II is concerned with dynamic bidding
behavior under the assumption that the true value of the object is unknown to
all parties at the outset, while the bidder that is awarded the object in each
period receives additional (private) information about its true worth. Project
III continues research on a model of experience good diffusion in a market
consisting of buyers with heterogeneous preferences. We study the decisions to
adopt a new product by buyers that differ according to their disposable income
and other characteristics. Different entry and innovation strategies are
analyzed for environments where the new product presents (i) a potential
improvement over the established product or (ii) is potentially a substitute of
no higher value than the established product.