* 9709527
* RPG:  Detection of Other Minds in Infancy:  A               Domain-Specific Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Susan Johnson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

This planning grant will support preliminary studies concerning infants' beliefs
about what kinds of things in the world have mental states such as intentions
and perceptions. Previous research has focused largely on determining when
infants first conceive of people as entities with minds, on the assumption that
infants attribute mentality only to humans. This project proceeds from the view
that infants may attribute mental states to a broader range of entities. From
this perspective, a central question is, On what grounds do infants make mental
state attributions? My previous research has shown that 12-month-old infants
will follow the `gaze` of an animated object that bears no physical resemblance
to a person, as long as it has other properties characteristic of creatures with
minds, such as goal-directed behavior or facial features. Gaze-following refers
to the familiar behavior in which one person, the `follower,` turns to see what
another person is looking at, and is thought to reflect the follower's belief
that the gazer has mental states such as attention, perception, and goal-
directedness. The proposed research explores the nature and development of the
knowledge that underlies gaze-following behavior in infancy. This goal will be
pursued by exploring 1) the characteristics that elicit gaze-following in
infancy, 2) developmental changes in these characteristics between the ages of 9
and 18 months, and 3) the relationship between object characteristics that
elicit gaze-following behaviors and those that elicit attributions of
intentionality as revealed by other behaviors such as the imitation of perceived
goals. The findings of this work will further our understanding of how infants
come to reason about a social and mental world that includes not only people but
also other kinds of objects.