* 9709543
* Collections Improvement for Paleobiology at the University  of Colorado Museum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Paul Murphey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2000
* USD 130,000.00

9709543 Robinson The Paleobiology Section of the University of Colorado Museum
(UCM) is focused on the Paleogene fossil record of the Rocky Mountain region,
and includes significant collections of vertebrate fossils from most of the
Larsmide basins of the Rocky Mountains. The Wasatch, Willwood, Huerfano,
Bridger, and White River Formations are especially well represented. In this
project, the UCM will curate and house backlog collections and rehouse portions
of curated collections so they will be more available for research and
education. In order to effect the goals of the project, 1) 44 archival cabinets
and 438 drawers of three different sizes will be acquired; 2) 1,355 archival
boxes to hold existing osteology collection specimens will be purchased; 3)
backlog collections will be curated; 4) cumulative curatorial problems within
the existing collections will be corrected; and 5) a collections manager will be
employed to work with curators, and supervise GRAs, work-study students, and
volunteers in order to complete the proposed project in a professional and
timely manner. In partnership with the NSF, the University of Colorado is
providing partial support for the collections manager position during the
project, and will make permanent and fully support the position after the
completion of the project.