* 9709140
* Fourth Africa-United States International Conference on     Manufacturing Technology; August 11-15, 1997 in             Pittsburgh, PA
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Bartholomew Nnaji, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 06/30/1998
* USD 37,750.00

9709140 Nnaji The Fourth Africa-USA International Conference on Manufacturing
Technology is to continue the three previous ones in providing a forum for the
exchange of information and ideas on contemporary manufacturing technologies and
their applications. The participants will come mainly from Africa and USA. Many
topics on manufacturing technologies will be discussed. Experts from Europe and
the Far East are also to be invited to share their experiences on manufacturing
research, education, technology transfer, and international collaboration. The
conference also provides an opportunity for development of contacts and
understanding of research interests between African and American researchers,
which is valuable to developing long-term, mutually beneficial collaborative
projects. This is the first Africa-USA International Conference on Manufacturing
Technology held in the United States, since the previous three were all held in
Africa. The formal part of the conference is scheduled for August 11-12, 1997 at
the University of Pittsburgh, followed by two-day university and industry tours
in the Pittsburgh area. This conference enables researchers in manufacturing
technology from Africa and USA to exchange ideas and research results and to
make connections for possible future research collaborations. It has receive
support from several African countries and companies in the Pittsburgh area.