* 9709813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The    Logic of Economic Liberalization:  Regional Differences in  the Reform Policies toward Non-State-Owned Industry in China
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Ronald Rogowski, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/1998
* USD 8,843.00

This dissertation research support allows the student to explain the regional
differences in economic liberalization policies in china between 1978 and 1994.
Data collected concern the regional differences in the governmental policies
toward non-sate owned industry and the political-economic characteristics of the
provinces between 1978 and 1994. The research applies the major political-
economic theories to the variation in the national and provincial license
registration, loaning, and taxation policies toward non-state-owned industry in
thirty Chinese provinces. Through the test of the validity of four explanations
- - growth, revenue, political support, and interest group explanations the
research explains why some provinces were more favorable toward non-state owned
industry than the others. In the test, the quantitative measurements for the
national and provincial reform policies will be regressed on the political
economic variables drawn from the hypotheses. Several strong indicator variables
are used to quantify the data on the national and provincial policies of
economic liberalization. The political-economic characteristics of the
provinces, such as the size of the state-owned industry, are quantitative. The
research thus involves the collection of data on the national and provincial
policies and on the political-economic characteristics of the provinces. The
student uses data collected at the major Chines collections in the US and China.
A data set on the national and provincial reform policies and on the political-
economic characteristics of Chinese provinces will be produced and made
available to other scholars interested in the topic.