* 9709204
* Optimal R&D Procurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Suzanne Scotchmer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1999
* USD 61,346.00

Project Abstract The usual justification for patents is that R&D decisions
should be delegated to agents who are informed, namely, to firms that know the
costs and benefits of their research programs better than the government does.
Though compelling, this is hardly a conclusive defense of patents. Patents are a
crude form of decentralization with many defects. They lead to monopoly pricing,
encourage inefficient patent races (and perhaps efficient ones), permit
duplication of research efforts, and do not encourage firms to share their
private information on whether a particular research line is promising. Further,
patents do not give firms an incentive to delegate research to the most
efficient firms. Alternative funding mechanisms that researchers have discussed
include grants funded out of general revenue, prizes for specific
accomplishments, and direct reimbursement of costs ex post. Like patents, all
these solutions have defects, mostly arising from asymmetries of information and
from the divergence between private and social incentives. Most investigations
of R&D incentives take the basic features of patent law as given. In particular
they take as given that patents will be the primary incentive mechanism. The
research described here starts from the other end of the problem. It takes
seriously that firms have better information on the costs and benefits of R&D
than the government has, but does not concede that patents are the obvious
incentive instrument. Following techniques in the now voluminous literature on
mechanism design, the investigator develops a mechanism which (i) supports R&D
if and only if it is efficient conditional on all the private information
possessed by the firms, (ii) avoids patents, (iii) delegates research to the
least-cost firm(s), and (iv) extracts all the surplus from the firms except that
which is necessary to induce them to reveal their costs. The last point means
that although some profit is lost because firms must be induced to reveal their
costs, no additional profit is lost because firms must also reveal their private
information on the value of the R&D project. However the investigator also
conjectures that there is a more limited role for patents in ensuring that the
efficient mechanism has a unique equilibrium. Patents that serve this role can
be arbitrarily short.