* 9709533
* GOALI:  Evaluation of System Integration Solutions for      Computer-Aided Assembly Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Nong Ye, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 15,782.00

This grant provides funding for the evaluation of system integration solutions
to computer-aided assembly planning. Three solutions of system integration are
considered. First, an assembly design viewer and a process specification system
are included in system integration. Second, an assembly modeling system is added
and integrated with an assembly design viewer and a process specification
system. Third, functions of assembly design viewing, process specification and
production simulation are integrated in a virtual reality system. Production
engineers from the manufacturing industry will participate in an experiment. The
three solutions together with three packages of application software will be
presented to production engineers. For each solution, subjects will be asked to
use the corresponding package of application software to perform assembly
planning. Subject performance will be measured. Subjects will also be given a
questionnaire to obtain their subjective evaluation of the three solutions. Both
objective data from the experiment and subjective data from the questionnaire
will be analyzed. Based on the results, a system integration solution for
computer-aided assembly planning will be recommended. The proposed work will be
performed in collaboration with researchers at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST). The results of this research will reveal the
advantages and disadvantages of various system integration solutions for
computer-aided assembly planning. The recommended solution of system integration
will lead to the future research and development of knowledge, technology and
commercial software products towards an effective system integration for
computer-aided assembly planning. The proposed work will directly contribute to
the NIST System Integration for Manufacturing Applications Program. The exchange
of knowledge, experience and technology with NIST researchers will spin off new
collaborative relationships and projects.