* 9709488
* Model Based Design of Central Nervous System Neural         Prosthetic Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Warren Grill, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 08/31/2001
* USD 271,512.00

9709488 Grill Neural prostheses are a developing technology that use small
electrical currents to activate the nervous system and restore lost function to
individuals with neurological impairment. Electrical activation of intact nerve
cells, in the form of a neural prosthesis, is presently the only method
available to restore function to individuals with spinal cord injury. The long-
term goal of the principal investigator's research program is to develop
advanced neural prostheses based on electrical stimulation of the spinal cord.
The novel approach being pursued is to activate electrically the intact neural
control circuits of the spinal cord to generate distributed commands to groups
of last-order neurons. There is abundant evidence in animals, and increasing
evidence in humans, that the neuronal control circuitry of the isolated spinal
cord is capable of generating complex movements with coordinated muscle activity
including reaching, locomotion, scratching, and micturition. Exploiting these
intact neuronal control circuits would significantly improve the function of and
simplify the implementation of neural prostheses. One fundamental requirement to
implement a neural prosthesis using microstimulation of the spinal cord is the
ability to generate selective and controlled electrical activation of specific
groups of neurons. The outcome of the proposed research will be new techniques
to effect selective excitation of targeted neurons. Two fundamental questions
will be answered using a combination of experimental measurements, computer-
based modeling, and engineering optimization. First, what neural elements are
activated by stimulation of the spinal cord with penetrating microelectrodes?
Second, how can targeted populations of neurons be selectively stimulated? The
techniques and knowledge which result from this research will find application
in fundamental studies in neurophysiology and in design of advanced neural
prostheses utilizing microstimulat ion for restoration of function in
individuals with neurological impairment. ***