* 9709485
* Models of Time Inconsistency and Self Control
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Matthew Rabin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 08/31/2000
* USD 253,841.00

Abstract Though economists assume that intertemporal preferences are time-
consistent, evidence suggests that a person's relative preference for well-being
at an earlier moment over a later moment increases as the earlier moment gets
closer. That is, many people have a self-control problem, and moment-by-moment
we pursue immediate gratification more than we ourselves wish we would. This
proposa1 attempts to develop formal economic models of such psychologically
realistic time-inconsistent preferences, building from and expanding on earlier
models. In the simplest model, a person must engage in an activity exactly once
during some number of periods, choosing at each moment whether to do it now or
do it later. Results in this model depend on two distinctions. First, do choices
involve salient costs - where the costs of an action are immediate but any
rewards are delayed - or do they involve salient rewards - where the rewards of
an action are immediate but any costs are delayed? Second, are people
sophisticated - they foresee future self-control problems - or are they naive -
they do not anticipate these self-control problems? Some simple results are
derived. Naive people procrastinate activities with salient costs and
preproperate - do too soon - activities with salient rewards. If costs are
salient, sophistication mitigates procrastination, and can even lead people to
do the activity sooner than if they had no self-control problem. If rewards are
salient, sophistication exacerbates preproperation. These behavioral results
have corresponding welfare implications: With salient costs, mild self-control
problems can severely damage a person only if she is naive, while with salient
rewards mild self-control problems can severely damage a person only if she is
sophisticated. The investigator and his co-author apply the insights of the one-
activity model to different economic appli cations. In one project, they analyze
optimal incentives for naive procrastinators. The findings indicate two major
lessons. First, incentives designed to induce efficient behavior will in general
be `steeper` than if agents were not procrastinators - agents will be punished
for delay in completing a task more harshly than corresponds to the true cost of
delay. Second, when there is uncertainty about the exact propensity of agents to
procrastinate, then even in environments where the true cost of delay is
`stationary`, `deadline` incentive schemes may be used to max imize efficiency:
The agent will at first be punished mildly or not at all for delay, but then
after some date be punished severely for delay. Such incentives encourage those
with little propensity to procrastinate to wait until it is efficient to do the
task (i.e., not do the task right away if it turns out to be too costly), while
assuring that those with a severe propensity to procrastinate do not delay too
long. The investigator's major project is the study of the role of self-control
problems in the consumption of addictive goods. Some recent theoretical and
empirical research by economists has been innovative in understanding the crux
of addictive goods: While consuming goods (e.g., smoking cigarettes) may be
harmful to a person's wellbeing, higher past consumption of those goods
increases a person's marginal utility of consuming the good, so that the person
may maintain or increase her consumption of the good over time while doing more
and more harm to herself. These models, however, use a rational-choice
framework, where people are assumed to have both time-consistent preferences and
correct expectations about their future behavior. This project concerns the
implications of a self-control problem and varied assumptions about
sophistication for people with the same underlying preferences for addictive
goods as in these rational-choice models. Results pertain to the role that
sophistication plays in the propensity to get addicted to goods. If an addiction
is irreversible - every time a person takes a `hit` of an addictive good, she
knows it will forever increase her craving for that good - a person who is
sophisticated about her self-control problem will be more likely than a person
who is naive to become addicted. Na?vet? makes you more willing to resist
temptation now, because you (naively) believe that the consequences of indulging
now will be that you will 1ive the rest of your life with a craving you won't
fulfill. If you are sophisticated, and hence realize it is likely you will get
addicted, you will be more likely to cave in to a craving - because you realize
the only cost is that you will get addicted a bit sooner. The logic is very
different for the (more realistic) case where refraining from an addictive
activity will help a person become unhooked. The investigator conjectures that
people who are naive about their self-control problem will consume a lot of an
addictive product - and become and stay addicted - under the naive belief that
they will quit tomorrow. The investigator also plans to pursue many other
projects that incorporate greater psychological realism into eco nomics.