* 9709796
* Modeling, Interface Design, and Verification of Hybrid and  Discrete Event Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Ratnesh Kumar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2001
* USD 168,191.00

ECS-9709796 Kumar This project is motivated from a comprehensive and formal
study of operationally embedded avionics software systems that are used in
automated control of aircraft systems. Such automated control systems are
hybrid-possessing both continuous and discrete states. A Moore machine type
formal representation of the operational procedures of the avionics software
will be developed and it will be used to check consistency and completeness of
the software. Requisite extensions will be also made to include hybrid
characteristics of the system. Verification of properties of hybrid systems is
accomplished by hybrid automaton representation of the system and the
specification. We propose to develop a modular and hierarchical hybrid automata
modeling framework of complex hybrid systems. Next a theory of interaction of
such hybrid systems will be developed by extending the theory of prioritized
synchronization of discrete event systems. This theory will then be used to
design the required interface logic between multiple interacting hybrid systems.
Finally, tools and algorithms for the verification and synthesis of hybrid
systems will be developed in the proposed framework, specifically we propose to
develop a method of successive hierarchical verification and synthesis.