* 9709096
* Economic Organization in a Halaf Village:  Excavations at   Kazane, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,01/25/1999
* Susan Pollock, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/25/1999
* USD 93,852.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Reinhard Bernbeck and Susan
Pollock will conduct three seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of
Kazane located in Southeastern Turkey. Occupied over a 4,000 year span, the
earliest levels of the site date to the Halaf period, ca. 6th millennium B.C.
and these lowest horizons will provide the focus for Dr. Bernbeck's and
Pollock's research. Their goal is to delineate household groupings to determine
the extent to which status differences among them are evident and to accomplish
this they will conduct three seasons of field excavation. They will expose a
relatively large horizontal area of Halaf occupation and map distributions of
artifacts, features and architecture. This will provide evidence on the
distribution of economic activities and thereby identify households. To examine
changes over time in the distribution of activities they will open deeper
stratigraphic soundings. Systematic recovery of artifacts, faunal and floral
remains will be ensured through a rigorous program of screening sediments and
floating them to obtain light seeds and other organic remains. The measurement
of volumes of all excavated deposits will permit calculation of densities and
this will allow comparison of activities in different contexts. Preliminary work
by the investigators in 1996 has indicated that significant variation across
units does exist. The Halaf period is important because it was during this time
that the first indications of Near Eastern civilization become apparent. The
period is best known for its elaborately painted and technically sophisticated
pottery which suggest craft specialization. However interpretations of level of
social organization vary widely. Traditional interpretations characterize the
Halaf period as a fully sedentary, village based society which relied on the
cultivation of crops and the raising of animals. The presence of some large
sites has been interpreted as an indication of an emerging social and political
hierarchy. However other evidence has pointed in the opposite direction
suggesting that many sites were occupied for brief periods of time and that an
egalitarian form of organization prevailed. By examining synchronic variation
between households it is possible to address this question directly. This
research is important because it will provide important information on the
development of civilization in the Near East. It will yield data of interest to
many archaeologists.