* 9709032
* Status/Dominance and Motivational Effects on Nonverbal      Sensitivity and Smiling
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Judith Hall, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 236,181.00

Gender differences in nonverbal communication, including sensitivity to
nonverbal cues and expressive behaviors such as smiling, are well documented but
poorly understood. One proposed explanation for why men are less nonverbally
sensitive and smile less (among other nonverbal differences) is that men have
more status and dominance than do women. This proposed explanation rests on the
assumption that people with greater status and dominance behave in the `male`
stereotypic manner, such as being less sensitive to others and smiling less.
However, little research exists to support these assumptions. The present
research will address the relations between the status/dominance concept and
nonverbal behavior, with special emphasis on nonverbal sensitivity and smiling.
Of central importance to understanding status/dominance effects on behavior is
the way in which people define their respective roles. That is, role motives may
guide behavior more than roles per se. Several experiments will be conducted in
which status/dominance will be experimentally controlled in a laboratory
setting, along with manipulations of role motives. An example is whether the
subordinate is motivated to be pleasing or to be perceived as competent. The
behavior of both superiors and subordinates will be studied to better understand
how nonverbal behavior and nonverbal cue processing are influenced by roles and
role motives. This research addresses a number of complex issues relating to
gender and sex differences. The research has strong potential for offering new
insight into very basic and important societal and interpersonal problems.