* 9709774
* Effects of Prosody and Lexical Familiarity on Perceptual and Accoustic Measures of Young Children
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* LouAnn Gerken, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 07/31/2001
* USD 322,287.00

The most frequent source of data used to understand the nature of both normal
and disordered language development is children s productions. The properties of
child utterances that deviate from adult forms are of particular interest, since
they appear to reflect parts of the adult system that the child has not yet
mastered. One of the most common types of deviation from adult forms seen in
normally developing children between the ages of 24 and 30 months, as well as in
older children with language disorders, is omissions, including omissions of
mono-syllabic grammatical morphemes (e.g., the ) and unstressed mono-morphemic
syllables (e.g., the first syllable of giraffe ). Data from numerous researchers
suggest that such omitted syllables are not simply missing from children s
representations of language. The proposed research continues in this framework,
but begins to move beyond the question of whether normally developing children
have some representation of syllables they omit to a question of why they omit
these syllables. In keeping with this expanded focus, the proposal begins to
draw more heavily on studies of adult language production as a framework for
understanding child production. The proposed experiments are divided into three
sets. Exps. 1-4 are based on observations of the role of prosody (i.e., rhythm
and intonation) in children s omissions, along with an observed bias for
children to produce final syllables. The goal of these experiments is to compare
two prosodic accounts of children s omissions, one proposed previously and a new
account derived from current linguistic theories of prosody as well as studies
of adult language production. If the new account is supported, it would provide
a unified account of English-speaking children s weak syllable omissions and a
framework for viewing the relation of immature and mature language systems.
Exps. 5-8 are based on the observation that children are more likely to omit
weak sylla bles from sentences containing an unfamiliar word. These experiments
promise to shed light on how utterance complexity affects child productions and
how prosody fits within the larger language production system. Two of the
experiments in this section also use work on adult language production to make
predictions about child production. Exps. 9-10 are based on a pilot study that
suggests children maintain a slot for weak syllables that they appear to omit.
These experiments have the potential to confirm the notion that children have
some representation of elements that they do not produce in an adult-like way.
They also have the potential to relate child omissions to studies of adult
production. Taken together, the experiments will reveal considerable information
about normally developing children s growing knowledge of language and how this
knowledge is implemented by their changing language production system.