* 9709618
* Theories of the Welfare State and the Formative Years of    U.S. Social Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Edwin Amenta, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2000
* USD 162,931.00

This is a study of the development of social policy in the United States. It
will focus on the formative years of modern, national social policy, in the
1930s and 1940s, when the Social Security Act and related legislation and
programs were enacted, and it will analyze the determinants of social policy
during this period. The analyses will be based on three theoretical models that
are prominent in the cross-national literature on social policy: social and
economic, state-centered or institutional, and political theories. A synthesis
of some political and institutional theories, the institutional politics theory,
holds that institutional circumstances set boundaries to politics which
constrains the effectiveness of political actors. To appraise these theoretical
models, a number of comparative and quantitative strategies will be employed.
Several episodes of social policy-making at the national level will be compared
across the two decades. Other comparisons will examine the varying fates of
social programs, votes at the national level for social spending, and state-
level social policy outcomes. Among the analyses will be pooled cross-sections
and time-series from 1936 through 1950. In addition, qualitative comparative
analyses will be employed to test the combinational or interactional claims of
the institutional politics theory. Finally, four carefully chosen cases will be
examined across the entire period. This study will not only increase our
substantive understanding of the social policies and programs that have endured
as the legacy of this period, but it will test general theories of how social
policy is developed that will also apply to current debates. This knowledge will
improve the scientific basis for making the correct social policy decisions in
future.