* 9709253
* Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric        Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Charles Seyler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

ECS-9709253 Thorp One of the results of deregulation and the creation of large
independent system operators (ISO) is that the physical size of the system to be
operated will be greatly increased. Systems will be larger both in terms of
square miles and in electrical dimension. It is our premise that there are
effects in such large systems that are not easily understood using existing
models and that valuable understanding can be obtained by taking a macroscopic
view of the system. As the number of buses reach tens of thousands and system
dimensions are measured in thousands of miles, it is useful to imagine a
distributed system with a contimuun of transmission, generation, and load. The
phenomenon of electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors caused by
faults and equipment outages is one of the most vexing problems facing the
interconnected network operators . If the protection and control systems do not
function as they are designed to do in the face of a disturbance, the
disturbance can propagate over the network, and expose individual generators, or
groups of generators to the danger of going 'out-of-step' with the rest of the
network. If a sufficient number of generators lose synchronism in this fashion,
a system black-out results, and very expensive, disruptive, and time-consuming
restoration procedures have to be followed. These phenomena -familiarly knows as
'transient stability' studies-are the subject of the most important
investigations in power system planning. The normal techniques for studying
electromechanical transient phenomena are time-consuming and lead to voluminous
outputs, and very often it is difficult to grasp the sense of the ensuing
phenomena on a global scale. The proposal is to study the problem of
electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors from an entirely different
point of view . The power system with its transmission lines, generators, and
loads is considered to be a continuum . When the power system spans entire
continents, thi s is certainly a reasonable extrapolation. In doing so, we give
up the detail associated with the motion of each machine rotor. In return , we
gain and insight into the mechanisms by which the disturbances initiated by
faults and other random events propagate in the continuum. When the problem is
cast in this fashion, we find that very powerful techniques developed in others
fields (wave propagation phenomena in plasma) can be brought to provide
important insights and useful results. Power system engineers have long
recognized that electromechanical disturbances propagate over the power network
with finite speed, and exhibit dispersion phenomena. It is only in recent years
that simultaneous measurement of rotor angles (through synchronized phasor
measurements) has been made possible with the help of the GPS satellite system.
Using these measurements over long distances, we expect to observe the traveling
wave phenomena in actual power systems. The preliminary investigations confirm
the presence of electromechanical traveling waves on the network treated as
continuum. The research proposal identifies several important areas in which
this work needs to be extended in order to produce results which could be used
in designing next generation monitoring, protection and control systems on power
networks.