* 9709617
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ethnic Bases of         Bargaining Power in Post-Soviet Russia
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* John Sprague, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/1998
* USD 4,912.00

This doctoral dissertation research grant assess the question of whether or not
the ethnic composition of a given federal region affects its ability to
successfully bargain with federal leaders. More specifically, does the ability
of regional leaders in the Russian Federation to mobilize citizens along ethnic
lines enhance their relative bargaining power vis a vis Moscow, and does this
increase in bargaining power affect their ability to successfully bargain with
the central government? Intergovernmental bargaining is an important part of all
federal systems. This is especially the case in ethnic federations where regions
have divergent interests on may dimensions. Intergovernmental bargaining affects
the prospects for macro-economic stability as well as the formal political
autonomy of the federal regions. Consequently, scholarly understanding of the
bases of regional bargaining power, especially the ethnic bases, has profound
implications for understanding and assessing the prospects for regional peace
and stability in the Russian Federation, as well as in multi-ethnic federal
states more generally. While research has been done which addresses the ability
of regional elites to mobilize citizens along ethnic lines and how
intergovernmental bargaining affects everything from the redistribution of
economic resources to the political status of regional governments, there has
been almost no work which has attempted to examine how the ability to mobilize
citizens increases or decreases the ability of regional leaders to successfully
bargain with the central governments. By making clear this link, this research
improves our understanding of how the strategies employed and outcomes
anticipated by regional leaders in ethnic federations differ from the strategies
and outcomes we would expect to see in federations which are not based upon
ethnic divisions. Since many of the theoretical frameworks employed by both
policy analysts and scholars to grapple with the problems faced by multi-ethnic
federations are based upon theories of non-ethnic federations, an understanding
of how these frameworks must be modified to fit multi-ethnic federations is of
tremendous importance. This dissertation research addresses this question
through a combination of cross-regional statistical analysis and case study
research. Using statistical methods especially well-suited to deal with problems
encountered in the Russian case (small number of cases, non-random sampling,
missing data), it is shown that variations in bargaining power has an important
effect on the distribution of net transfer payments to that region. Having
demonstrated the general importance of ethnic mobilization, interview and
archival data drawn from case studies in Tatarstan and Nizhinii Novgorod is used
to flesh out and elaborate the ways in which regional elites are able to
mobilize citizens and how this bolsters the bargaining power of these elites vis
a vis the central government.