* 9709334
* Laboratory Qualification and Field Behavior Studies of      Piezometers for Measuring Earthquake-Induced Pore Pressures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/2001
* USD 138,197.00

Abstract: CMS-9709334, Pedro deAlba &amp; Jean Benoit, University of New
Hampshire When a saturated sand deposit is shaken by an earthquake, there can be
a significant build-up of pore-water pressure, with consequent loss of rigidity
and strength of the soil, often ending in actual liquefaction of the deposit,
and major damage to structures. While pore-pressure buildup has been simulated
in laboratory experiments, there is only one case currently available in which
the development of these pore pressures to the point of liquefaction was
measured in a field deposit under earthquake-induced strong-ground shaking.
Unfortunately, the pore pressure records obtained in this case have certain
unusual features, which has led some researchers to question their validity.
Consequently, it is of primary importance to geotechnical earthquake engineers
to obtain more records, in order to provide a final verification of mathematical
models developed on the basis of laboratory and centrifuge testing. This
research project involves an extensive laboratory and field study of piezometer
designs in current use. In the laboratory, piezometer installation will be
simulated in a test chamber, and piezometer response to dynamic pore pressure
increases will be measured both in water alone and in saturated soil. Acceptable
procedures for design, saturation and installation of piezometers will thus be
identified. In the second phase, a field installation for periodically checking
piezometer response will be developed. These second-phase tests will provide
insight into the problem of response changes, if any, due to long-term
biological or chemical interaction with the surrounding soil. The outcome of
this project will be a set of guidelines for the design, manufacture,
installation and long-term monitoring of piezometer arrays designed to obtain
much-needed field data on pore pressure development during earthquakes. This
project is being coordinated with a complementa ry research program headed by
Dr. Behnam Hushmand of Hushmand Associates, California.