* 9709152
* The Influence of First Language Processing Mechanisms and   Working Memory Constraints on Second Language Parsing in    Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Alan Juffs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2000
* USD 91,447.00

The Influence of First Language Processing Mechanisms and Working Memory
Constraints on Second Language Parsing in Adults. The reasons for the low
success rate among adults who try to learn a second language (L2) are still
poorly understood. This lack of understanding stems in part from our lack of
knowledge about the relationship between the learner's first language (L1), what
the learner hears and understands from input in the L2, and the development of
second language competence. An urgent need exists for research on how second
language learners actually process the L2 as they read and listen. Therefore,
the major goal of the proposed research will be: (1) to develop techniques for
investigating sentence processing in speakers of English as a Second Language
(ESL); (2) to establish to what extent parsing in the second language is
influenced by the first language (L1) in low to high intermediate learners of
English as a Second or Foreign language in the domain of the lexicon and syntax;
and (3) to assess the extent to which individual differences in working memory
capacity affect second language parsing. This research will have implications in
at least three sub-fields. First, it will contribute to the understanding of the
influence of L1 in on-line second language sentence processing in the
intermediate stages of acquisition; it will be relevant to current debates on
the role of the L1 in L2 acquisition, and will contribute to an understanding of
individual variation in L2 acquisition. Second, if it can be shown that L2
parsing is influenced by L1 syntax and working memory the results will provide
an additional source of data for central questions in human sentence processing
in general. Third, the results will have implications for instructional
techniques in foreign and second language classrooms. The results will be
particularly relevant to those researchers and teachers who advocate a focus on
listening comprehension tasks that force learners to process difficult
structures.