* 9709731
* Coordination
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Raymond Battalio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 365,066.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT A central question in economics is how markets coordinate the
behavior of decision makers in a many person decentralized economy. The formal
study of equilibria in abstract games has not provided a convincing explanation
of the origin of mutually consistent behavior, because it does not provide a
useful coordination theory. It assumes what coordination theory seeks to
explain. Consequently, coordination theory is an essential complement to
equilibrium theory. This project provides an empirical foundation upon which to
construct a useful coordination theory, that is, one that makes effective
prescriptions, true descriptions, and accurate predictions. Rather than using
introspection, the experimental research attempts to determine how people
actually use the strategic details of their environment. This project
encompasses three projects: the first project tests models of routine learning,
especially exponential fictitious play, using extant data sets; the second
project attempts to discover emergent conventions based on deductive selection
principles in scrambled payoff perturbed (but strategically similar) bargaining
situations, and the third project continues our research on market statistic
games. The project also includes a component that will improve the conduct and
delivery of our research results. During the period covered by the proposal we
will be putting primary data sets from prior NSF support up on the world wide
web and moving to a new laboratory. Both activities are intended to improve the
infrastructure of economic science.