* 9709519
* Intergroup Contact:  A Meta-Analytic Empirical & Theoretical Clarification
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Stephen Wright, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2000
* USD 94,419.00

Gordon Allport's contact hypothesis holds a central place in social
psychological work on interpersonal relations. The contact hypothesis holds that
contact between members of different groups will reduce prejudice between
members of those groups if four specific conditions are met. The contact
hypothesis has inspired extensive research and received considerable support.
Although it has been a very active area of research, the literature is
disorganized and suffers from several theoretical problems. The current project
proposes to use meta-analysis to help organize, refine, and extend the contact
literature. Meta-analysis provides a set of statistical tools that have proven
extremely useful in organizing and making sense out of a large collection of
individual experiments and studies. The practical goal of the project is to
organize the research literature. The theoretical goal is to clarify the
importance of necessary conditions and to gain insight into the underlying
processes that are responsible for contact effects. Intergroup contact offers
strong potential for reducing the hostility and prejudice that social groups
often display toward one another. The current project will lend some order to a
research literature that seeks to develop ways of improving interpersonal
relationships.