* 9709797
* Target-Based Determinants of Social Categorization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Steven Stroessner, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1999
* USD 20,000.00

This project develops a psychological model that helps to explain how people
spontaneously categorize other people. In contrast to current assumptions, the
model suggests that social targets are not always categorized as members of race
or sex groups. Rather, categorizations depend on whether targets match a
perceived `cultural norm` and on whether the perceiver has the motivation and
capacity to engage in thorough processing of available category information. If
no unusual information is available or if motivation and capacity to process the
available information is low, judgments are likely to be based on perceivers'
beliefs about people in general. If unusual information is available and
motivation and capacity are high, however, judgments will be influenced by the
ways in which the target is unusual or distinctive. Several different aspects of
this model will be tested. A procedure based on measuring the speed with which
different judgments are made will be used to assess whether there exists a
perceived norm or default in terms of race and sex within our culture. The
effects of the perceivers' own race and sex also will be examined. Manipulations
of available cognitive capacity will be used to determine the types of judgments
that can be made easily and those that require effortful processing. It is
expected that individuals will easily recognize targets' features, regardless of
how much cognitive capacity is available. However, categorization judgments
based on that feature information may require greater deliberative processing
and therefore should be affected by the availability of cognitive resources.
Support for the model would demonstrate that race and sex categorizations are
most likely to occur when the encountered individual is a member of a non-
normative group and when the perceiver has the capacity available to make
category judgments. It is expected that these studies will extend our
understanding of the basic cognitive processes that underlie social perception
and will provide a framework for predicting the types of beliefs that may
influence interpersonal and intergroup interactions.