* 9709012
* Spatial, Temporal, and Phylogenetic Structure of            Bacterioplankton Communities in Crater Lake, Oregon
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Michener
* 06/30/2000
* USD 308,588.00

9709012 Giovannoni The focus of this study is the ecology of bacterioplankton in
Crater Lake, Oregon. The motivation for the study originates from the
observation of pronounced vertical structure in the distributions of uncultured
bacterioplankton "species" in open oceans. This study will test the hypothesis
that populations of uncultured bacterioplankton in freshwater ecosystems may be
similarly structured along the vertical axis, and that such structure may play
an important role in processes such as the remineralization of organic matter
and nutrient export from the epilimnion. The proposed work will be integrated
with the ongoing Crater Lake Long Term Monitoring program. Crater Lake is the
centerpiece of Crater Lake National Park. This oligotrophic caldera lake is one
of the clearest freshwater environments ever recorded, with secchi depths
ranging from approximately 25 to 36 m over typical annual cycles. The extreme
clarity of the lake's surface water is attributable to low nutrient input from
its small, highly eroded catchment, and to its extraordinary depth, which allows
for long-term export of nutrients to abyssal regions during periods of seasonal
stratification. During the progress of seasonal stratification, the chlorophyll
maximum migrates to the upper hypolimnion. In many respects, Crater Lake is
atypical of freshwater environments but closely resembles the intensively
studies, oligotrophic open ocean systems typified by the Sargasso Sea. A major
component of the investigative approach will be the application of ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) methods to identify abundant bacterioplankton species and to measure
spatial and temporal variation in their activities and distributions. PCR
amplification and cloning of rRNA genes in lake water, automated gene
sequencing, the design and testing of rRNA probes, and hybridizations to high
density pin bolts of 16S rRNA gene clones and environmental RNA samples will be
used to identify key microbial species, assess their phylogenetic relationships
, and determine their distributions. These approaches will be augmented with
radiotracer studies of bacterial production, dissolved organic carbon
measurements, direct cell counts, and experiments to identify bacteria that
exhibit specialized preferences for dissolved organic carbon from different
depths, to provide an integrated perspective on Crater Lake bacterioplankton
ecology.