* 9709635
* Data Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,10/27/1998
* Tomas Philipson, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/27/1998
* USD 118,214.00

9709635 Philipson Much of positive economic analysis relies on data that are
obtained through surveys which record the behavior or experiences of included
sample members or through social experiments in which treatments are assigned by
investigators. However, although the production of data, and the functioning of
the market for observations in which it takes place is a concern universal to
all fields of positive economics, greater emphasis and sophistication in
systematic analysis has been paid by economists to the consumption of data,
rather than its production. This project will seek to remedy this unbalanced
focus by studying incentives used in data production to facilitate
identification and estimation of population parameters of economic interest. In
particular, this project will utilize a labor economic approach to data
production. In the labor market for observations, the supply of observations by
sample members determines both the quantity and quality of data analyzed. The
project will develop wage discrimination schemes that may be used on the sample
for identification of population parameters to be estimated. Such schemes will
allow for correcting estimates for production biases due to poor quantity or
quality of data. The project relies on the idea that if wage discrimination is
random within a survey, then it alters the supply behavior of sample members
across the same types of populations. This in turn allows for separating out
poor supply behavior from the population parameters of ultimate interest. The
project seeks funds for both theoretical work and empirical analysis of a data
set produced by the principal investigator. These data include the
implementation of the random wage discrimination discussed in the theoretical
analysis as an experimental module on a national survey of US physicians
produced by The National Opinions Research center (NORC) at the University of
Chicago.