* 9709159
* Test of a Conflicting-Tendency Model of Fitness-Linked      Behavioral Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/1999
* USD 139,550.00

9709159 Riechert It is well known that behavior is influenced not only by the
design of an animal's nervous system, but also by chemicals produced by its
endocrine system (i.e., hormones). These two influences interact in determining
individual behavior and both systems are genetically determined. This study
tests the validity of the Conflicting Tendency Model, proposed to explain the
potential interaction between factors that operate antagonistically in
determining the behavior of individuals on a continuum from 'fearful' to
'aggressive.' The PI has identified a possible genetic basis for territorial
behavior in a well-studied animal model system (the desert funnel-web spider
Agelenopsis aperta), in which the action of each of two antagonistic factors -
one controlling tendency to flee or 'fear', and the other determining tendency
to attack or 'aggression' - can be separated through selected breeding
experiments. By comparison of the behavior of spiders from populations that
differ in tendency to escalate fights, respond to predators and attack prey, and
selectively bred genetic lineages, the PI will examine genetically-based
aggressive tendency. In addition to testing the hypothesis that hormones may act
in opposition to one another in determining motivational states, the work is
important for the insight it provides into the genetic bases of such complex
behavioral traits as fighting behavior, boldness towards predators, and attack
responses towards prey.