* 9709101
* Mechanical Control of Polymer Morphology and Properties:    Theory and Simulation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2003
* USD 418,000.00

9709101 Balazs This is a theoretical research grant to study the effects of
applied forces on polymer films and blends in order to fabricate tailored
interfaces and high-strength materials. To do this, theoretical models and
computer simulations will be developed to incorporate external forces; determine
how these forces affect morphology; and, to correlate morphology to macroscopic
properties. In the study of polymer films, the focus will be on polymer chains
tethered to solid surfaces. The interactions between such polymer-coated
surfaces are responsible for stabilizing colloidal solutions and reducing
friction between interfaces. To model this problem of mechanically compressing,
stretching or deforming confined polymer layers, two-dimensional self-consistent
field calculations and scaling theory will be used. The results will provide
guidelines for fabricating optical devices, such as bistable switches,
flocculating agents, which are important in the production of wood and paper
products, and layered composites with tailored properties. In the study of
polymer blends, the focus will be on the mixing of "off-the-shelf" polymers.
This process holds considerable promise as a means of creating new materials at
relatively low cost. The actual fabrication of polymer blends, however, poses
significant challenges. Most polymers are immiscible and phase separate into
macroscopic domains. Shear and flow can produce finer dispersements which
improve mechanical properties. %%% This research grant will use theoretical
models and computer simulations to study the impact of various forces on the
properties of polymers. In particular, the research will study polymer films,
such as are used for coatings, and polymer blends (mixed polymers). These
studies are at the forefront of research in polymer science and engineering,
Besides being of great fundamental interest, and a significant theoretical
challenge, the research has the potential to directly affect th e design and
production of new materials. ***