* 9709314
* ESH - Climate Variability and Ecologic Change in Mesoamerica During the Late Holocene:  Implications for Maya Cultural  Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Mark Brenner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2000
* USD 320,619.00

9709314 Hodell The Department of Peten in northern Guatemala represents the
central area where ancient Maya civilization arose more than 3000 years ago,
flourished during the so-called Classic Period, and mysteriously collapsed
around 800 - 900 AD. The cause of the Collapse has been debated by
archaeologists for over a century. Climate change has been suggested as a
contributing factor, but this hypothesis has not been tested rigorously. Our
previous work, funded by NOAA-Paleoclimatology, sought to understand the role
that climate change may have played in the collapse of Maya civilization. We
discovered compelling paleoclimatic evidence from two lakes in central and
northern Yucatan for a protracted drought between ~800 and 1000 AD that
coincided with the Classic Maya Collapse (Hodell et al., 1995; Curtis et al.,
1996). Correlation of arid events in paleoclimate records between Yucatan lakes
and the Peruvian Quelccaya ice core suggests that aridity was widespread in
Central and South America over the last 1500 years, and may have been related to
large-scale departures in atmospheric and oceanic fields. Here we propose to
test if the droughts documented in Yucatan affected the southern Maya lowlands
of Peten, Guatemala, where Maya population densities were highest and the
Collapse was most profound. We propose to collect geochemical, palynological,
and sedimentologic data from sediment cores taken in the Peten Lake District to
reconstruct climatic and ecologic changes in sufficient detail to reveal decadal
to centennial fluctuations over the past 5,000 years. Specifically, we will
measure oxygen isotopic ratios in microfossil shells (ostracods and gastropods)
from cores taken in close-basin lakes and reconstruct changes in the ratio of
evaporation to precipitation (E/P) over the catchment. We will also document
stratigraphic changes in pollen spectra from the same cores to reconstruct
regional vegetation changes that may have been influenced by climatic factors
and/or human impact. The proposed study will elucidate the spatial and temporal
pattern of changes in E/P and vegetation in the Maya lowlands during the late
Holocene. Paleoenvironmental records from Peten will contribute to our
understanding of: 1.) the full range of natural hydrometeorologic variability
during the Holocene in the lowland Neotropics; 2.) teleconnective linkages with
climatic records (marine, lacustrine, and ice core records) from other regions;
and 3.) the response of Classic Maya social and economic systems to climate and
ecologic change.