* 9709601
* The Value of Information in Strategic Environments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,08/27/1998
* Stephen Morris, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/27/1998
* USD 102,555.00

Project Abstract Information is a key input into production in today's economy.
Some believe that the world's economy is undergoing an information revolution
that will have as large an impact as the industrial revolution of two hundred
years ago. A basic research area for economists in the information age is to
understand why and how information is valuable. There is a well developed theory
(dating back to the 1950's) of the value of information in single person
decision problems under uncertainty. It was shown that information is valuable
in every decision problem exactly if it is more informative in a natural
statistical sense. In single person decision problems, more information is
always better. But the economy is strategic. We cannot analyze each decision
maker in isolation. Rather, we need to understand how each participant in the
economy will behave, taking into account how he or she thinks others will
behave. The value of information in strategic settings is a much more
complicated problem. More information can sometimes make everyone worse off. For
example, insurance markets make profits for insurance companies and make
consumers better off by reducing risk. If the consumers had access to more
information, the insurance markets would shut down and everyone would be worse
off. The purpose of this project is to develop a theory of the value of
information in strategic settings. Four sets of questions will be addressed. The
first three are more technical but provide the framework to think about these
issues. First, what is a necessary and sufficient condition for one information
system to be more valuable than another in all strategic settings? The condition
will be extremely strong, but provides an important benchmark. Second, what is a
necessary and sufficient condition for two information systems to be almost as
valuable as each other in all strategic settings. Third, for exactly which
classes of strategic situations do more informative information systems make
every agent better off? And for which classes of strategic situations do more
informative information systems make every agent worse off? The fourth component
is more applied. An important type of strategic problem is a coordination game:
a group of firms would like to coordinate their actions, but they may disagree
on which action they should coordinate. An example would be software companies
choosing standardized protocols. This project develops a theory of the value of
information for coordination games. Existing work shows the importance of common
knowledge in achieving co-ordination. It is important not only what each firm
knows, but also what they know about what other firms know, and so on. Thus the
ability of an information system to generate approximate common knowledge will
be a key determinant of the value of information. This is an important
observation because highly distributed information systems, such as the
internet, are especially poor at generating approximate common knowledge.