* 9709530
* Information Casacades in Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Lisa Anderson, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1999
* USD 17,996.00

Lisa Anderson This is a Research Opportunities for Women/Research Planning
Grant. Information cascades are interesting phenomena that have received
considerable attention from economic theorists. Cascades may form when
individuals have private information and make public decisions in sequence. If
early decisions match, it may be optimal for others to follow, regardless of
their private information. Anecdotal examples of cascades include fads, trends
in financial markets, and the influence of polls on voting behavior. It is
difficult to rule out other explanations for conformity in most naturally
occurring situations. Data from individual decision making experiments
(Anderson, 1994 and Anderson and Holt, 1996) show that cascades form in a
controlled laboratory environment where other motives to follow are minimized.
This research research introduces the possibility of information cascades into a
richer market setting. Previous experimental studies focus on situations where
information dissemination reveals the true value of the asset, and hence,
benefits traders. In the proposed experiments, traders have private signals that
provide incomplete information about the value of an asset. Trades are made in
sequence and are publicly announced (e.g., prices come across a ticker tape). In
some cases, these public trades reveal private information. If early traders are
misinformed, a reverse cascade may form, where other traders follow with
incorrect decisions even though their private information would lead them to do
otherwise. A pilot session of a parameterized version of this model reveals that
cascades and reverse cascades form in many cases where they are possible. The
following preliminary research will be conducted during the period covered by
this Research Planning Grant: developing a theoretical model, determining
interesting experimental treatments, conducting pilot experiments, and preparing
a formal grant proposal based on the findings of the pilot experiments.