* 9709490
* American State Constitutions:  A historical Series
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* John Wallis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2002
* USD 174,153.00

Since 1776, American states have continually amended and revised their
constitutions. States have experimented with a wide variety of suffrage,
representation, legislative structures, judicial structures, corporate law, and
public finance. The constitutions themselves are a record of fundamental
institutional change in American history. It is a record that not only reflects
changes in the way Americans think about their governments, but a record of the
changing institutional constraints on the American economy. Despite its inherent
interest, there is currently no readily accessible consistent historical series
on the provisions of state constitutions. This research will fill that gap by
constructing a consistent, time series of state constitutional provisions from
1776 to the present. Printed source materials are available from compilations of
state constitutions. The product of this research will be a detailed description
of constitutional provisions, and a computer accessible data base of
constitutional restrictions made publicly available through a Web site at the
University of Maryland, linked to public data bases at the National Bureau of
Economic Research and the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research. In addition, constitutional limitations on government debt will be
investigated in detail. The simplest question is whether these debt restrictions
actually work.. The fundamental focus of this research is to solve the problem
of endogeneity between the level and structure of debt and the creation of
constitutional restrictions on debt issue. The issue of endogeneity is central
not only to understanding how constitutional restrictions, like a balanced
budget amendment, may work. It is central to understanding the interaction of
economic behavior and institutional change over time.