* 9709918
* Marine Terrestrial Variability of the Labrador Sea Region   Over Decadal to Millennial Time Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jonathan Overpeck, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2001
* USD 541,999.00

Abstract ATM-9708418 Overpeck, Jonathan T. and Miller, Gifford H University of
Colorado, Boulder Marine-Terrestrial Variability of the Labrador Sea Region over
Decadal to Millennial Time Scales Large scale variations in climate and
vegetation are known to have taken place in the eastern Canadian/Greenland
Arctic on time scales from years to millennia, and are likely to have had
important links with the broader atmospheric and oceanic circulation. Well-dated
records of this change are just becoming available using preliminary networks of
both annually-laminated (varved) and AMS radiocarbon-dated lake sediment
records. This award supports a project to collect and analyze lake sediment
records around the Labrador Sea, and thus provide a comprehensive reconstruction
of the decadal to millennial-scale environmental variability of this region.
This will generate a much improved understanding of how the Labrador Sea
modulates ocean thermohaline circulation, as well as North Atlantic and Arctic
climate, across time scales relevant to assessing future climatic change in
these regions. This work will also provide the modern calibration data needed to
quantify many existing proxy environmental records across the whole of the
eastern Canadian Arctic/Greenland region, and thus provide improved quantitative
space/time reconstructions needed to evaluate the ability of predictive models
to simulate future Arctic and global environmental change.