* 9709320
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:  Mathematical Problems in        Geophysics and Seismology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* George Papanicolaou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2003
* USD 1,000,000.00

The aim of Papanicolaou and an interdisciplinary group of scientists is to
establish a Summer School on Mathematical Problems in Geophysics and Seismology
at Stanford, and to support a year-round research program on various
mathematical problems from geophysics. Specific areas of interest are the
following: waves in random media, radiative transport theory and its
applications in seismology, seismic and other methods for imaging, high contrast
tomography, transport properties of disordered media, fluid-solid interaction,
convection-diffusion, etc. The Group Infrastructure Grant will provide support
for the Summer School and for the year-round research of graduate students and
postdoctoral visitors who will work on projects that emerge from it.
Mathematical geophysics is very rich in basic mathematical problems that are
challenging but not well-known to mathematicians. Most these are of great
interest in geophysics research, which will certainly benefit from the infusion
of new mathematical ideas and techniques. A one-month Summer School will be
established that will help promote high level mathematics research, attract
promising young scientists and mathematicians into the area by providing
training at an introductory level, and produce results that are interesting and
important in geophysics and seismology. Stanford and the San Francisco Bay area
provide an excellent environment for this project because of the unusual
concentration of senior researchers that will be actively involved with it.
Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the NSF
Geosciences Directorate, Hydrological Sciences and Geophysics Programs.