* 9709989
* Dissertation Research:  An Inter-Capital Settlement         Perspective on Political Control and Organization in the    Northern Maya Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Olivier De Montmollin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1999
* USD 11,804.00

Under the direction of Dr. Olivier de Montmollin, Mr. J. Gregory Smith will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
excavation and survey at the Mayan site of Ichmul which is located in the
northern Peten region of Mexico. While large enough to include a closed plaza
surrounded by vaulted architecture and a substantial pyramid nearly 18 meters in
height, based on size, Ichmul is a `minor` center. It lies between two larger
political capitals, Chichen Itza and Ek Balam and is particularly interesting
because, in its architecture, ceramic assemblages and stone iconography it shows
relations to both. The goal of the research is to examine the degree of
independence which Ichmul exercised and the nature of its interactions with its
neighbors. Mr. Smith delineates three possible relationships: autonomy, indirect
control and direct control; the survey and excavation to be conducted will,
hopefully, permit identification of the correct model. The project includes five
goals: mapping of the domestic settlement adjacent to the civic architecture;
test excavations in a wide-range of settlement contexts; examination of
previously located sites in the transect area between Chichen Itza and Ek Balam
to map and surface collect ceramics and other cultural materials; test
excavations at a sample of these transect sites; mapping and test-pitting a
sample of non-site cleared fields in the transect to better understand these
rural hinterlands. Archaeologists recognize that individual Mayan sites were
integrated into larger political networks and that by discovering the extent of
each and tracing how they changed over time it is possible to understand the
principles which underlie such political organization. While much work has
focused on major centers, relatively little is known about rural hinterlands and
how centers exerted - or did not exert - control over these regions. Mr. Smith's
research will directly address this important question. It will also assist in
training a promising young scientist.