* 9709422
* Minority Police, Affirmative Action, and Crime
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* John Donohue, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 51,090.00

Project Abstract This project examines affirmative action, the racial and gender
composition of police forces, and the resulting impact on arrest patterns and
crime rates. We focus on three specific questions: 1) How has minority
representation with police departments changed over time and to what extent are
affirmative action programs responsible? To address this question data on police
department minority hiring and retention gathered over a twenty year period by
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), but not previously used in
empirical research, are combined with a database on city-level affirmative
action litigation and policies. Findings suggest that, on average, the racial
composition of police forces today in large U.S. cities is twice as
representative as was the case in the 1970s. Even as early as 1975, however, the
flow of new hires by police departments nearly matched the racial composition in
large cities. The fraction of female police officers has risen, but remains well
below that of the population as a whole. The affirmative action litigation data
set helps to distinguish the influences of nationwide legislation from
litigation aimed at particular police departments. 2) Does the racial or gender
composition of a police force have any impact on the department's ability to
fight crime? For instance, do improvements in police-community relations
engendered by an increased minority police presence lead to lower crime rates,
or a higher fraction of reported crimes cleared by arrest? Using panel data for
roughly 100 large U.S. cities, preliminary estimates suggest a strong negative
correlation between crime rates and the number of black and female police
officers in a city. The relationship between white or male officers is much
weaker. 3) Are patterns of arrest affected by the racial composition of the
police force, and if so, does this provide evidence of discrimination? Past
studies have found evidence of more unfounded arrests of blacks than whites, but
have been unable to link this phenomenon to the race of the police officer.
Analysis of this question at the individual level, however, is complicated by
the non-random assignment of police officers to patrols. The use of aggregated
city-level data potentially ameliorates this sample selection problem. This
question is assessed empirically using the city-level data. ñ«^¬¼¬+^úá¼ñ^|&lt;