* 9709502
* ESH - Late Quaternary Climate Change and Biotic Responses inthe Bonneville Basin and Vicinity, Northeastern Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* David Rhode, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 104,107.00

9709502 Rhode The Bonneville Basin of western Utah and eastern Nevada has one of
the best known late Pleistocene paleoenvironmental records in the world, but our
understanding of the history of terrestrial biota in the region lags behind our
understanding of lake levels or regional paleoclimates. Recently a large number
of ancient packrat middens have been collected from the mountains surrounding
the Great Salt Lake Desert, providing a rich source of fossil plant and animal
remains dating through the last 50,000 years. Under this proposal, a series of
analyses of these midden samples will be undertaken. Samples from these middens
will be radiocarbon dated to derive a long term chronology of midden strata.
Plant macrofossils, pollen, insect remains, and vertebrate faunal elements will
be identified, to reconstruct biotic distributions through time. Stomatal
density and concentrations of stable isotopes of hydrogen and carbon will be
examined to determine changes in water use efficiency of certain plant taxa
(limber pine) in response to changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry during
the glacial-interglacial cycle. Postulated changes in body size of the bushy-
tailed woodrat in response to climate change during this same time period will
be evaluated using fecal pellets as a proxy measure. When these data sets are
integrated together, this midden record will be used to identify and date major
shifts in vegetation associations, the distribution of insect and vertebrate
taxa, and changes in physiology and morphology of plant and animal taxa in
response to dramatic changes in climate and atmospheric CO2 concentration,
within a single regional ecosystem during the last 50,000 years. These data will
provide the basis for paleoclimatic estimates in the region to complement and
cross-check other paleoclimatic proxy data and climate model results from the
Bonneville Basin, contributing to one of the most detailed and well dated long-
term terrestrial records of climate change and responses b y geological and
biological systems available.