* 9709620
* Similarity Eyewitness Identification and Models of          Recognition Memory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Steven Clark, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2001
* USD 247,758.00

Abstract Clark 9709620 This research extends theoretical development in human
memory to the area of eyewitness identification. A generalized global matching
model is used to examine similarity effects in lineup and showup procedures used
to identify suspects in criminal investigations. Twelve experiments using
standard laboratory procedures and staged-crime methods are used. Extant
research shows that recognition is more accurate when people choose between
similar alternatives than when they choose between unrelated alternatives. The
first studies of this project extend that finding to facial stimuli and with
response alternatives that include "both" or "neither" rather than a forced-
choice. Showup performance and lineup performance will be compared in another
study. Strategies for selecting distractors for lineups that test the
proposition that suspect-matching strategies may backfire by increasing the
likelihood of false identification of innocent suspects and a proposal that
distractors should be selected based on their fit to a description of the
perpetrator rather than their similarity to a suspect are tested. Additional
features such as the similarity of a distractor and the circumstances in which
high-similarity distractors are falsely recognized or rejected are examined. The
results of his work will be useful to criminal justice system and will extend
our knowledge of how witnesses make identifications from lineups and showups. In
addition, they will place identification research within a broader theoretical
framework. %%% This research extends theoretical development in human memory to
the area of eyewitness identification. A generalized global matching model is
used to examine similarity effects in lineup and showup procedures used to
identify suspects in criminal investigations. Twelve experiments using standard
laboratory procedures and staged-crime methods are used. Extant research shows
that recognition is more accurate when people choose between similar alte
rnatives than when they choose between unrelated alternatives. The first studies
of this project extend that finding to facial stimuli and with response
alternatives that include "both" or "neither" rather than a forced-choice.
Showup performance and lineup performance will be compared in another study.
Strategies for selecting distractors for lineups that test the proposition that
suspect-matching strategies may backfire by increasing the likelihood of false
identification of innocent suspects and a proposal that distractors should be
selected based on their fit to a description of the perpetrator rather than
their similarity to a suspect are tested. Additional features such as the
similarity of a distractor and the circumstances in which high-similarity
distractors are falsely recognized or rejected are examined. The results of his
work will be useful to criminal justice system and will extend our knowledge of
how witnesses make identifications from lineups and showups. In addition, they
will place identification research within a broader theoretical framework.. ***