* 9709854
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Barbara Block, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 50,000.00

Block This grant is focused on the use of a new generation of remote technology
devices, called pop-up archival satellite tags (PSAT). This study combines
physiology, oceanography and engineering to develop technology that will permit
studying the migratory movements of open ocean fish. The PSAT tags are
essentially computers that record navigational information, body temperature,
depth and ambient temperature data. The tag technology will be used in
combination with established molecular genetics techniques to establish the
relationships between distinct genetic haplotypes evident in certain populations
oi pelagic fish and their dispersal patterns in the open ocean. Despite the
economic and ecological unportance of highly migratory pelagic fish such as
bmfishes (e.g. marlins, swordfish, sailfish) and tunas, little is know about
their movement patterns and population structure. The PSAT tags will provide
information on how the movements of pelagic fish are influenced by oceanographic
factors such as temperature. Although considerable effort has been expended
using fisheries statistics, tag and release studies, and acoustic telemetry, the
time scale and resolution of these techniques are insufficient to characterize
migrations and address questions about life histories and gene flow. This lack
of information becomes more critical as fisheries continue to pressure
resources. The NSF award will support the development of prototype and first
c,,eneration tags, and the deployment of tags on captive and wild tunas. Tracks
of approximately 20-30 Atlantic bluefm tuna will be obtained for periods of one-
two years. The PSAT tags will immediately illustrate the potential existence and
relative importance of migratory corridors and temporal and spatial movement
patterns in relation to oceanographic conditions. Until now this has been
challenging data to obtain. The information gained will improve our
understanding of the biology of these species and increas e our knowledge of
stock structure. The successful implementation of the pop up archival tag
technology will provide marine researchers with a novel tool for studying
inaccessible marine vertebrates.