* 9709656
* Low Temperature (1-300 K) Chemistry and Collision Dynamics  Relevant to Planetary Atmospheres, Comets and the ISM
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Mark Smith, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 06/30/2000
* USD 304,940.00

Mark A. Smith of the University of Arizona is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to continue his studies on the mechanism and dynamics
of gas phase chemical reactions at temperatures between 1 and 300K. The primary
goal is to further the understanding of very low energy collision phenomena and
to obtain absolute reaction rates and product branching ratios needed for the
modeling of planetary atmospheric, cometary, circumstellar and interstellar
chemical environments. He will investigate radical-molecule and molecule-
molecule collision processes near 1K using a free jet-based flow reactor, and
measure rates, branching ratios and product identities over a wide range of
temperatures and pressures using laser-induced fluorescence-based and mass
spectrometer-based Laval flow reactors. The wide temperature range of these
studies encompasses those prevalent in interstellar clouds, and many of the
reactions to be investigated are particularly important in that environment. For
example, there is an enhancement of deuterium atoms in molecules in these
regions, which may be due to grain mechanisms, fractionation in ion-molecule
reaction pathways or neutral fractionation. Reactions must be studied to
determine which alternative is viable. Our general knowledge of intermolecular
interactions at low energies is poor because experimental methods have not
previously existed to permit studies at temperatures below about 250K. These
studies will break new ground in physical chemistry at low temperatures.