* 9709003
* The Behavior and Distribution of Particle-Reactive          Radionuclide Tracers in Particulates, Colloids, and Solution in the Canada Basin of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/1997,07/20/1999
* Mark Baskaran, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Linda E. Duguay
* 07/20/1999
* USD 186,004.00

This proposal is to investigate the behavior of a range of elements that
provide isotopic tracers for particle removal processes in the Canada Basin of
the Arctic Ocean. These will include U- and Th-series nuclides, Nd and Pu. The
role of partitioning between particulates, colloids, and solution will be
emphasized. This region is unique in having exceptionally low particle fluxes
compared with other oceans for at least two reasons: (i) It is a fundamental
characteristic of the Arctic Ocean that needs to be better understood along with
the implications it has for the assimilation of particle-reactive contaminants,
and (ii) a careful characterization of the processes in this extreme case will
provide an important reference point for other studies. This proposal
incorporates current ideas about the role of colloid-size particles in the
removal of trace metals by scavenging and this is an important focus of the
proposed work. The hypothesis to be tested is as follows: "Due to low particle
concentration in the Canada Basin, the colloids play a major role in the cycling
of particle-reactive radionuclides." Earlier studies on the dissolved organic
carbon and suspended particle concentration (SPM) indicate that the
concentration of colloidal material in Canada Basin is likely similar to other
major ocean basins while the SPM concentration is about an order of magnitude
lower than that of other ocean basins. In order to test the hypothesis, the
study will focus along the following lines of investigation: 1. The distribution
of the long-lived TH isotopes and short-lived isotopes between particles,
colloids, and dissolved species will be measured in the Canada Basin water
column in both continental shelf, slope and deep basin. The removal rate by
particulate scavenging of Pb and Po will be calculated from their measurement in
the water column for comparison with the removal of Th. 2. The distribution of
Nd isotopes between particles, colloids and the dissolved species will be m
easured. 3. The distribution of dissolved and particulate PU isotopes in the
water column will be measured at various sites and their rates of transport and
removal will be investigated by comparison with other particle-reactive
nuclides. A key aspect of the study is the combining of data for the short-lived
isotopes of TH with the long lived Th isotopes and stable Nd isotopes.