* 9709682
* Science and Technology for the Environment; Environmental   Literacy and Decision Making
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Sharon Jones, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/29/2000
* USD 65,039.00

The general objective of this curriculum development project is to prepare a
handbook of exercises and teaching tools that can be used to teach environmental
issues to a wide range of undergraduate engineering and science students. The
curriculum will include a) modules that can be incorporated into individual
disciplinary courses, and b) a complete curriculum for a self-contained course.
The material will be prepared jointly by Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
(Rose-Hulman) and Carnegie Mellon University. Preparation of the materials
includes initial preparation, implementation, evaluation, and revision. The
specific components of the project are as follows: Develop teaching tools and
exercises using a problem-based approach to teaching environmental awareness
among undergraduate students. The material will be developed so it can be used
in either courses devoted to environmental issues, or as independent modules in
existing disciplinary courses e.g. thermodynamics, materials and energy
balances, and so on. The material will be developed jointly with Carnegie Mellon
University to enhance the variety of exercises developed, and the number of
courses in which they may be used. Evaluate these teaching tools as part of
courses currently taught at Carnegie Mellon University and Rose-Hulman. At Rose-
Hulman, the materials will be used in a required class for junior civil
engineering students. Using the materials at the two institutions will allow us
to reach different groups of students. An important component of this project is
to use the evaluations from these diverse disciplines (including engineering,
social science, humanities, and natural science majors) to ensure that the
material benefits a wide range of students. The evaluations will focus on a) did
the students gain knowledge of environmental issues during the course, and b)
did the course content affect students' careers in the short term. Prepare a
handbook of the teaching tools and exercises that can be widely disseminated. Th
e handbook will include the materials described above after revising them based
on the evaluations.