* 9709272
* Photochemical Studies of Multicomponent Molecular Devices inSolution and in Organized Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Thomas Moore, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2000
* USD 471,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor J. Devens Gust, Jr. and Professor Thomas A. Moore, of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Arizona State University, are
carrying out photochemical studies of multicomponent molecular devices in
solution and in organized assemblies. Natural photosynthetic reaction centers
are photovoltaic devices of molecular dimensions, and the principles dictating
the operation of reaction centers suggest design elements for synthetic
optoelectronic switches. New types of pigments and electron donor and acceptor
moieties, including functionalized buckminsterfullerenes, aromatic imides and
amines, and porphyrin derivatives, are being used to construct molecular-scale
photovoltaics, switches, and logic gates. Biomimetic antenna systems that gather
light and transport excitation energy to these molecular photovoltaics and
switches will also be studied. Incorporation of switches into larger-scale
devices will be examined both by interfacing molecular species with
microelectronic circuits and by incorporation of molecular photovoltaics into
liposomes. Professor J. Devens Gust, Jr. and Professor Thomas A. Moore, of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Arizona State University, are
supported by the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for their
studies of molecules and molecular assemblies designed to harvest the energy of
light. Modeling their studies after the structural motif designed by nature to
carry out the process of photosynthesis, Professors Gust and Moore prepare and
study molecules which absorb and use the energy of light. By appropriate design
of molecular systems, these studies address the fundamental phenomena behind
such interactions of molecules with light while paving the way for the
preparation of molecular-scale electronic and computational devices which offer
the possibility of optical processing and extraordinarily high density storage
of information.