* 9709678
* Haptic Perceptual Instruments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Michael Turvey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/2001
* USD 311,000.00

Haptic perception refers to the perception one has of one's body, and of
attachments to it, by means of sensors in the body. The term incorporates what
is commonly meant by `touch,` and more besides. For example, without benefit of
vision one is aware of the positions of one's limbs, and one can also ascertain
properties of objects (e.g., weight, length)by wielding and hefting them. These
aspects of haptic perception, referred to as dynamic touch, have their basis in
receptors that sense the states of muscles and tendons. Unlike vision and
audition, whose importance to everyday activity are obvious, the haptic
perceptual system is strikingly subtle in its contribution to our everyday
achievements of perceiving and acting. The fact that the loss of the sense of
touch (without concomitant paralysis) is extremely rare and profoundly
devastating begins to illustrate the fundamental importance of this sense in
common activities such as lifting a cup, using a pen, pointing to a word, or
just standing upright. Our research is directed at dynamic touch and an
understanding of the role it plays in everyday controlled manipulations. We ask,
What can it do?; and, How does it do it? Research to date has implicated the
rotational dynamics of limb movements as the major constraint on both of these
questions, and this is pursued in the proposed research. Formally, the
achievements of dynamic touch are related to the inertia tensor (which
quantifies an object's resistance to being rotated) and the attitude spinor
(which quantifies an object's orientation relative to some reference frame such
as the hand). In some of the basic methodologies, participants wield an unseen
object (whose structure has been specially contrived to produce the
experimentally relevant inertia tensor or attitude spinor) to perceive its
length, width, shape, weight, or orientation to the hand. In other basic
methodologies, the participants attempt to orient a nonvisible upper limb or
limb segment (with attached splints that systematically control the limb's
inertia tensor and attitude spinor) to an environmental target or to another
nonvisible limb. A major thesis is that, in perception by dynamic touch, the
hand-related haptic subsystem behaves as a smart instrument: It capitalizes on
physical, law-based, invariants. Experiments are designed to examine the
consequences of different attentional demands (and the extent to which different
properties are perceptually independent), different force structures (such as
those experienced underwater and in rotating space stations), and in different
neural conditions (such as the spurious receptor states produced when the
tendons are vibrated electromagnetically). Understanding the principles
governing dynamic touch should enrich the physical constraints on computational
and neural modeling of perceptual systems and provide a source of new hypotheses
about somatosensory disorders and about designs for prosthetic and robot limbs.
Such understanding might also be expected to motivate more intensive study of
the physical principles formative of biological perception-action systems and of
the cognitive and neural constraints that exploit them. s partly supported by
the NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program.