* 9709318
* Photoinduced Electron Transfer Mechanisms in Covalently     Labeled DNA Oligomers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Thomas Netzel, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2001
* USD 331,450.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Thomas L. Netzel, of
the Department of Chemistry at Georgia State University, and Professor Bruce E.
Eaton, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington State University, explore
photoinduced electron transfer mechanisms in covalently labeled DNA oligomers.
Through the synthesis and study of short, covalently modified DNA
oligonucleotides, Professors Netzel and Eaton explore the rates of electron
transfer among various DNA bases and representative organic electron donor and
acceptor molecules, probing such issues as the rate at which an initially formed
hole or excess electron within DNA will travel to its final trapping site and
the nature of such trapping sites. These studies provide the information needed
to design and interpret electron transfer in covalently modified DNA duplexes,
wherein the skewed pi-stacking of bases suggests the possibility of enhanced
electronic coupling between donors and acceptors embedded within or attached to
such a pi stack. The uses of charge-separating supramolecules spans fields as
diverse as artificial photosynthesis, photocopying, and optical information
storage and processing, leading to great interest in developing spatially well-
defined molecular assemblies designed to effect efficient charge separation
through the harnessing of the energy of light. Professor Thomas L. Netzel, of
the Department of Chemistry at Georgia State University, and Professor Bruce E.
Eaton, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington State University, with the
support of the Organic Dynamics Program, prepare and study short pieces of DNA
bearing chemically attached molecules designed to probe the fundamental aspects
of the charge separation process. These studies provide an initial framework for
the systematic design of DNA molecules which geometrically position molecules at
desired positions relative to one another for controlled light-induced charge
separation.