* 9709117
* Evaluation of the Role of Climate-Vegetation Interaction    During Earth History
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Eric Barron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 147,575.00

Abstract ATM-9709117 Barron, Eric Pennsylvania State University Title:
Evaluation of the Role of Climate-Vegetation Interaction During Earth History
Vegetation distribution an d character are largely viewed as a function of
climate in most paleoclimate studies. For this reason, vegetation has been
specified as "globally uniform" in the majority of paleoclimate model
experiments. However, previous studies indicate that inclusion of a dynamic
surface vegetation is a critical factor in climate model experiments. This award
supports a project to utilize the wealth of exiting information and models on
biosphere-atmosphere interaction, modified explicitly to maximize their
application to earth system history, in order to improve climate model
simulations of past climates and to assess climate sensitivity. The major
components of the study: (1) evaluation of the climatic significance of
vegetation character and distribution, (2) evaluation and then selection of a
vegetation model, appropriate for paleoclimate study, for coupling to a General
Circulation Model (GCM), (3) development of a dynamic interaction scheme for the
climate-vegetation model, (4) evaluation of the coupled model for modern
climates, and (5) assessment of model results for a variety of past climates.
This project focusses on the assessment of three different types of vegetation
models, and will apply them to the Last Glacial Maximum, the Miocene, the Eocene
and the mid-Cretaceous. This project will enhance our ability to apply climate
models to the study the earth history, explicitly examine the importance of the
terrestrial system as a factor influencing climate, and contribute to our
knowledge of both past and future climate change.