* 9709111
* Counteracting Potential Contamination of Young Children's   Eyewitness Reports
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1997,02/29/2000
* D. Stephen Lindsay, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 83,971.00

Abstract Poole 9709111 There is a pressing need to develop interviewing
procedures that enhance children's ability to discriminate, in their eyewitness
reports, between events they remember experiencing versus events they remember
hearing other people describe. This research builds on earlier work by these
investigators that demonstrated that misinformation from parents often
infiltrates the autobiographical reports of 3- to 8-year-old children, that
errors appear even during the free-narrative portion of interviews, that asking
explicit source-monitoring questions improves older children's ability to
distinguish between events that actually occurred versus misinformation. The
current project develops and tests interviewing techniques designed to help
young witnesses escape the contaminating influence of prior exposure to
misleading suggestions. In the first phase 1160 children play individually with
an unfamiliar man (Mr. Science) and subsequently participate in an interview
about the Mr. Science experience. Three months later, parents read a story to
their children and the children are interviewed in three conditions: source-
monitoring training (SMT) before or after the interview or no training control.
Data analyses assess the efficacy of SMT for reducing false reports in free-
narrative response without reducing accurate reports, the effects of SMT on
accuracy of answers to leading questions, developmental trends in performance
during SMT and the interview, and relations between individual difference
variables and accuracy of testimony. This research answers basic questions about
children's suggestibility and source-monitoring ability and practical issues of
significance for forensic interviewing. %%% There is a pressing need to develop
interviewing procedures that enhance children's ability to discriminate, in
their eyewitness reports, between events they remember experiencing versus
events they remember hearing other people describe. This research builds on
earlier work by these investigators that demonstrated that misinformation from
parents often infiltrates the autobiographical reports of 3- to 8-year-old
children, that errors appear even during the free-narrative portion of
interviews, that asking explicit source-monitoring questions improves older
children's ability to distinguish between events that actually occurred versus
misinformation. The current project develops and tests interviewing techniques
designed to help young witnesses escape the contaminating influence of prior
exposure to misleading suggestions. In the first phase 1160 children play
individually with an unfamiliar man (Mr. Science) and subsequently participate
in an interview about the Mr. Science experience. Three months later, parents
read a story to their children and the children are interviewed in three
conditions: source-monitoring training (SMT) before or after the interview or no
training control. Data analyses assess the efficacy of SMT for reducing false
reports in free-narrative response without reducing accurate reports, the
effects of SMT on accuracy of answers to leading questions, developmental trends
in performance during SMT and the interview, and relations between individual
difference variables and accuracy of testimony. This research answers basic
questions about children's suggestibility and source-monitoring ability and
practical issues of significance for forensic interviewing. ***