* 9709941
* Mobility, Inequality, and Growth in a Changing Technological Environment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Oded Galor, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2000
* USD 145,895.00

This project will analyze the relationship between technological progress,
earnings inequality, the transmission of inequality across generations, and
economic growth. The research will assert that the interplay between
technological progress and several components that determine individual earnings
- specific and general human capital and individual ability - governs the
evolutionary pattern of wage inequality, intergenerational earnings mobility,
the pace of technological progress, and economic growth The research will
demonstrate that in periods of major technological inventions individual ability
is the dominating factor and earnings inequality rises. The decline in the
relative importance of acquired initial conditions (i.e., the driving force
behind the persistence of inequality) enhances mobility and generates a larger
concentration of individuals with high levels of ability and human capital in
technologically advanced sectors, stimulating further technological progress and
future economic growth. Once existing technologies become more accessible, the
specific human capital is the dominating factor, mobility is diminished and
inequality declines but becomes more persistent. The reduction in the
concentration of human capital in technologically advanced sectors diminishes
the likelihood of major technological breakthroughs and slows down future
economic growth. User friendliness, therefore, becomes unfriendly to future
economic growth. The research will explore an unexamined relationship between
technological progress and earnings inequality. It will suggest that the life
cycle of technology governs the evolution of earnings inequality. Initially,
inventions increase the return to skills, but as technology becomes more
accessible the return to skills declines. In addition, the research will
contribute to the literature on income distribution and growth, and
technological progress and economic growth. It will explore a novel
technological link in the relationship between inequality and economic growth,
demonstrating the role of inequality in the determination of output growth via
its effect on mobility, the allocation of talents across occupations, and the
frequency of technological breakthroughs. Furthermore, the research will examine
the role of technological progress in allocating high-ability individuals into
technologically advanced sectors in which growth-enhancing technologies are
developed.