* 9709327
* Collaborative Research: Issues and Economics in Multiparty  Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ramon Alvarez, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2000
* USD 84,967.00

This collaborative investigation researches the extent of issue-based and
economic-based voting in advanced industrial democracies using new innovative
discrete choice models. The research has both substantive and methodological
components. The investigators employ an integrated model of vote choice which
allows them to study the degree of issue- and economic-oriented voting in a set
of eight nations. The model also allows investigation of the movement of
political parties in issue space, the removal of parties from electoral
competition, and changes in the economic context of the election.
Methodologically the investigators employ an important discrete choice model new
to political research. The researchers argue that past work on voter choice in
multiparty democracies has been done using statistical models which impose very
restrictive assumptions on how voters make their decisions amongst parties in
multiparty systems. Of particular concern is the independence of irrelevant
alternatives assumption. Their model, for this project, does not impose this
assumption on voters, and it also provides a very flexible way to model
multiparty elections empirically. This project will substantially enhance our
understanding of the topic and will inform the methodological and theoretical
debate about it.