* 9709612
* The Impact of Legal and Regulatory Policy on Patient and    Provider Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Daniel Kessler, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2001
* USD 346,415.00

Kessler 9709612 This research will investigate empirically the impact of legal
an regulatory policy and physician decision making and the consequences of law-
induced changes in health care decision for health care costs and patient health
care outcomes. To date, none of the methods used the in the published literature
have been based on datasets that would allow direct measurement of all of the
key variables hypothesized to have causal relations among the law, physician and
patient treatment decisions, health care costs, and health outcomes. Three
studies will remedy this problem. The first project estimates the impact of
medical malpractice liability law reforms on defensive medicine. It explores the
why and how doctors practice defensive medicine. The second estimates the impact
of living wills on medical treatment, costs, and outcomes at the end of life.
The third estimates the impact of hospital competition on the cost and quality
of medical care. Three types of data will be used. Medicare Part A and Part B
claims forms and matching Social Security death date records have been linked in
analytic files. Information regarding covered services, discharge information,
and demographic informant are included. In addition, an ongoing project on
Treatment Intensity and Outcomes of major illness data set guides the living
will subproject. The longitudinal files span 1984-1993 and are updated
regularly. The analyses will use data from 100 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
who have ever had a particular illness will use 20% random sample of other
beneficiaries as a comparison group. Medstat data will provide information on
claims records for over 4 million nonelderly employees, dependents, and retirees
with firm medical plans. National hospital information datasets will be used as
well. %%% This research will investigate empirically the impact of legal an
regulatory policy and physician decision making and the consequences of law-
induced changes in health care decision for health care costs and patient health
care outcomes. To date, none of the methods used the in the published literature
have been based on datasets that would allow direct measurement of all of the
key variables hypothesized to have causal relations among the law, physician and
patient treatment decisions, health care costs, and health outcomes. Three
studies will remedy this problem. The first project estimates the impact of
medical malpractice liability law reforms on defensive medicine. It explores the
why and how doctors practice defensive medicine. The second estimates the impact
of living wills on medical treatment, costs, and outcomes at the end of life.
The third estimates the impact of hospital competition on the cost and quality
of medical care. Three types of data will be used. Medicare Part A and Part B
claims forms and matching Social Security death date records have been linked in
analytic files. Information regarding covered services, discharge information,
and demographic informant are included. In addition, an ongoing project on
Treatment Intensity and Outcomes of major illness data set guides the living
will subproject. The longitudinal files span 1984-1993 and are updated
regularly. The analyses will use data from 100 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
who have ever had a particular illness will use 20% random sample of other
beneficiaries as a comparison group. Medstat data will provide information on
claims records for over 4 million nonelderly employees, dependents, and retirees
with firm medical plans. National hospital information datasets will be used as
well. ***