* 9709892
* Improvements for the Invertebrate Zoology Collection of the Museum of Comparative Zoology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Herbert Levi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/1999
* USD 307,230.00

9709892 McHugh The Department of Invertebrate Zoology at the Museum of
Comparative Zoology (MCZ) of Harvard University houses some of the most
extensive and historically important metazoan and protozoan collections
available to researchers today. Among the approximately 307,100 lots (nearly one
million specimens) in the collections are almost 10,000 type specimens. The
spider collection is the second largest in the world; the crustacean collection
is one of the largest in the U.S.; the cnidarian holdings are among the ten
finest in the world; and the hexactinellid sponges probably represent the
largest collection in the world. The steady use of the collections by the
international scientific community and the large number of publications citing
the collections attest to the valuable nature of these holdings. Currently, a
severe shortage of space impedes routine curation of the invertebrate
collections at the MCZ; only 2.7% of current shelving space is empty and
available for collection reorganization and expansion. This project to install a
compactorized storage system will make routine collection-related activities
more efficient, allow for the integration of the sponge collection and recent
acquisitions, and provide space for future acquisitions. These changes will
directly improve service to the scientific community and will make future large-
scale curatorial projects more feasible.