* 9709786
* Late Quaternary Paleoclimate History from Saline Lakes      of the Arid Andes, 23-26 Degrees South-Paleohydrology       and Geochemical Proxies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 149,306.00

Abstract ATM-9709786 Lowenstein, Tim K. State University of New York at
Binghamton ATM-9709771 Jordan, Teresa E. Cornell University Title: Late
Quaternary Paleoclimate History from Saline Lakes of the Arid Andes, 23-26o
South - Paleohydrology and Geochemical Proxies This award will support the
investigation of climate proxies from evaporite-bearing sediment cores in closed
drainage basins of the arid subtropical high Andes. A 100-m-long core from the
Atacama salt pan (salar) (2300 m elevation on western flank of the Andes) is
available for detailed study, and cores from Rincon and Hombre Muerto salars in
the neighboring Puna plateau (elevations above 3800 m) will also be evaluated.
Precipitation in the region is largely related to the behavior of the Amazonian
monsoonal system and frontal systems sourced in the westerlies. Temporal
variability in climate throughout tropical and subtropical South America,
including precipitation variations in the Puna/Atacama desert region, is related
to ENSO patterns. Paleoclimate fluctuations in the Atacama/Puna region would
reflect changes in positions and strengths of all controlling factors, but
dominated by the intensity and duration of past ENSO activity. The paleoclimate
record will be retrieved from closed basin sediments, which preserve a sensitive
record of climate change and variations in ratio of basin inflow to evaporation.