* 9709212
* Parental Investment and Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 224,750.00

9709212 Packer This project will analyze the extent to which male and female
lions invest in the survival of offspring. Under most conditions, male lions
compete for food with the rest of their pride, but resident males provide
important defense against extra- group males. Pridemates forage apart and males
spend considerable effort trying to relocate the females and young. Females
should be most likely to reveal their whereabouts to resident males when their
cubs are in greatest need of protection from infanticidal strangers but least
helpful when feeding competition would be most intense. Females are also
expected to weigh the relative reproductive value of successive broods according
to the vulnerability of their younger cubs, being more likely to resume
exclusive investment in their older brood when the younger brood is virtually
doomed. Because male parental investment is so important to cub survival, this
research is directed at examining factors related to male-female cooperation and
mating behaviors, and includes a series of mate-choice and intruder- simulation
experiments. Females are predicted to prefer to mate with males with larger or
darker manes, whereas males should preferentially attack strangers with shorter
or lighter manes. The study will investigate whether the mane is a condition-
dependent trait, and will examine a variety of nutritional and hormonal factors
that are likely to contribute to variability in mane size and color. Studies
will be conducted in the field at the NSF Long-Term Ecological Research site in
the Gombe National Park, Tanzania. Results of this research will allow a better
understanding of the evolutionary factors underlying the complex social behavior
of lions.