* 9709742
* ESH - Evidence from the Nebraska Sand Hills for Persistent  Late Holocene Droughts on the Great Plains
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* David Loope, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 145,501.00

9709742 Loope The Nebraska Sand Hills, constituting the largest sand sea in the
western hemisphere, are presently stabilized by prairie vegetation. There are
several lines of evidence that the dune field has been active many times during
the Holocene, but it has been difficult to differentiate climatic from non-
climatic "triggers", and a high-resolution record of dune activity has not been
previously located. In the central Sand Hills, peat-accumulating wetlands fed
almost exclusively by ground-water are present between elongate dunes that reach
over 100 m in height. The basal peat, which typically lies at a depth of 5 to 6
m and contains abundant spruce pollen, is about 12,000 years old. Peat
apparently began to accumulate after major eolian activity caused dunes to block
pre-existing fluvial systems. Structureless sand beds about 10 to 60 cm thick
are interbedded with the peat. Because the region is blanketed in dune sand,
rivers do not flood. For this and several other reasons a fluvial origin for the
sand beds can be ruled out. Our observations strongly favor an eolian origin for
the sand beds. One of our lines of evidence involves the connection of the sand
beds to convex-up sand ridges that are present near the center of some of the
interdune valleys. The ridges lie parallel to the axes of the valleys and some
are not yet completely buried by peat. We interpret the sand beds as eolian sand
sheets and the sand ridges as sand drifts produced along the upwind margins of
shrunken wetlands by the baffling action of dense vegetation. Saltating sand
cannot penetrate dense vegetation, therefore delivery of eolian sand across the
surfaces of interdune peatlands would require a major ecological change,
presumably the result of a significant decline in the regional water table.
Preliminary work indicates that the thin sand beds in the upper 2 m of the peat
are laterally extensive and less than 2000 years old. These shallow sands are
present in at least 27 interdune valleys. The a bsence of Dust Bowl sand sheets
on the surface of these wetlands indicates that droughts of greater persistence
and severity than any in recorded history would be required to drop water table
levels for emplacement of the late Holocene sand sheets. Paleoclimatological
studies of Minnesota lakes have recently revealed strong evidence for a series
of droughts ending just prior to 1200 AD. These drought intervals have been
hypothesized to correlate with western US droughts that were revealed by studies
of tree rings and lake fluctuations. Synchronous drought across such an area
would require a persistent upper-level blocking ridge of tremendous size.
Because of the central location of the Sand Hills and the abundance of datable
material, the peatlands described here provide an excellent opportunity to test
this idea. We are eager to compare the paleoclimatic record of the peatlands
with the record based on buried paleosols exposed in blowouts high in the
adjacent dunes. With the limited data we have from the buried upland soils, we
are unsure whether they record regional climatic fluctuations or more local
environmental changes.