* 9709604
* Compactorization and Reorganization of the Bryophyte and    Lichen Portions of the Farlow Herbarium, Harvard University
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Benito Tan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2001
* USD 274,431.00

9709604 Pfister This project will upgrade the bryophyte and lichen collections
and their curatorial management at the Farlow Herbarium (FH) of Harvard
University Herbaria. The FH holdings of non-vascular autotrophs and fungi amount
to about 1,325,800 specimens of worldwide representation. Of these, 440,800 are
bryophytes and about 178,000 are lichens. There are high proportions of
exsiccatae, and historically significant and type collections. Currently, the 76
steel cabinets for bryophyte specimens and 60 cabinets of the lichen specimens
are nearly filled to capacity and there is no space in the Farlow building for
the addition of new cabinets. During this project, a system of compactor
shelving units will be installed in the basement of the Farlow building where
the bryophyte collections are currently housed. These moveable units will
increase the storage capacity by 62% and will allow for the expansion and
shifting of the overcrowded bryophyte and lichen herbaria. As an improvement in
curatorial operations, the two large and frequently consulted moss collections,
i.e., the Bartram moss herbarium (about 64,000 specimens) and the general moss
herbarium (about 179,200 specimens) will be integrated and reorganized. This
project is a part of continuing efforts to upgrade the collections of non-
vascular autotrophs and fungi at the Harvard University Herbaria. Harvard
University is committed to collection improvement and, as cost-sharing with NSF,
will finance the expenses incurred in major structural work associated with
compactorization.