* 9709754
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:  Computational Science in        Biomedical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Donald Gaver, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2002
* USD 528,779.00

The Computational Science in Biomedical Systems (CSBS) Group at Tulane
University consists of faculty in both the Department of Mathematics and the
Department of Biomedical Engineering. These faculty are leading researchers in
scientific computing, numerical analysis, mathematical biology, fluid mechanics
and electrophysiology. Although these two departments are in different colleges
within the University, the scientific and educational goals of the co-
investigators are consistent and complementary. For example, the techniques of
applied mathematics and numerical analysis ought to be studied in the context of
relevant physical systems. In addition, the technical advances in scientific
computing, as well as traditional applied mathematics, must be tools of a
successful biomedical engineer. This Group Infrastucture Grant will help to blur
the lines between these disciplines, and provide a critical mass of
investigators, so that the research and educational activity of the Group may
flourish. Tulane University, although a Carnegie 1 Research University, is small
enough so that the atmosphere is one of a small liberal arts college.
Undergraduates frequently engage in research projects, with both faculty and
graduate students as mentors. The GIG funds will enable undergraduates to
participate in exciting interdisciplinary research through summer internships,
courses, and seminars. The funds will also provide training for three graduate
students and two postdoctoral fellows. The research activities will focus upon,
but not be limited to, pulmonary fluid mechanics, cardiac-electrophysiology, and
medical applications of biofilm processes. The educational activities include a
weekly journal club, a seminar series, as well as the coordination of curricula
in both departments. Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division
of Mathematical Science, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the
Division Of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems.