* 9709637
* Inverse Problems for Hyperbolic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Lizabeth Rachele, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal concerns two inverse problems for hyperbolic equations. The first
problem involves the wave operator P for the Laplace-Beltrami operator for a
smooth, Riemannian metric on a bounded n-dimensional domain. The inverse problem
is to describe material properties (represented by the coefficients of P) of an
object (represented by the n-dimensional domain) given only measurements made at
the surface of the object (modeled by a boundary operator, the Dirichlet-to-
Neumann map). We consider the continuous dependence of the metric on the
Dirichlet-to-Neumann map for P. For this inverse problem (and inverse problems
in oil prospection and seismology, for example) it is known, though, that the
material properties of the object are not uniquely determined by surface
measurements, in general. In particular, a metric is not uniquely determined by
the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map for P since the pullback of a metric by a
diffeomorphism that fixes the boundary has the same associated Dirichlet-to-
Neumann map as the original metric. Sylvester and Uhlmann have shown that unique
determination does hold at the boundary, though,and in the case that surface
measurements are available for all time, it follows from Belishev and Kurylev
that uniqueness holds in the interior, up to the pull-back by a diffeomorphism
that fixes the boundary. To study the dependence, then, of material properties
of the object on surface measurements, for this inverse problem for which
uniqueness does not hold, we propose showing that the metric depends
continuously on the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map, up to the pull-back by a
diffeomorphism that fixes the boundary. Having shown that continuous dependence
holds, one can expect that material properties of the interior of the object
(represented by the coefficients of the differential equation) can, in
principle, be reconstructed arbitrarily accurately from measurements made only
at the surface (that is, from the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map). In t he second
problem we consider an inverse problem for the system of operators P for
elastodynamics with residual stress. The linearly elastic, nonhomogeneous,
isotropic object being studied is represented by a bounded, 3-dimensional region
with smooth boundary. The behavior of the object is described in terms of
solutions of the system of equations for elastodynamics. Coefficients of these
equations represent material properties of the object, and surface measurements
are modeled by the associated Dirichlet-to-Neumann map. It is assumed there are
no body forces acting on the object after time zero but that events in the past
have built up a residual stress in the object, which is modeled by a smooth,
symmetric, second-rank tensor that is divergence-free and has zero traction on
the boundary. The central question we pose here is to what extent the Dirichlet-
to-Neumann map associated with P uniquely determines the density, coefficients
of elasticity, and residual stress at the boundary.