* 9709030
* Gravity Wave Propagation, Momentum Fluxes and Instabilities Using the Jicamarca and JULIA Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 12/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract for Kudeki and Riggin proposals ATM 9709251 &amp; ATM 9709030 The
investigators will conduct a series of experiments using two radars located at
Jicamarca near Lima, Peru, to study the gravity wave dynamics in the tropical
middle atmosphere over a three-year time span. The objective is to study the
processes that produce the saturated wave spectrum in the stratosphere and
mesosphere from long periods to the shortest buoyancy waves. One of the radars
is a mesosphere-stratosphere-troposphere radar and the other is called JULIA a
subsystem of the large 50 MHz Jicamarca incoherent scatter radar. JULIA will be
operated continuously for an entire month to measure stratospheric winds. The
larger Jicamarca system will operate for a five-day campaign within the month to
measure winds over a wider range of heights. Preliminary evidence from recent
experimental campaigns at Jicamarca suggest the presence of isolated wave
packets. The new experiments will allow the investigators to assess the
contribution of these isolated wave packs to the overall wave spectrum. Other
recent experiments suggest that inertia-gravity waves with periods of 1-3 days
may transport much of the momentum that drives the quasi-biennial oscillation in
the tropical stratosphere. The 24-hour coverage of the JULIA radar will allow
more comprehensive analysis of the low-frequency waves and a more accurate
determination of their intrinsic wave parameters to provide guidance for large-
scale models of the middle atmosphere. This is a joint effort involving the
University of Illinois and Northwest Research Associates. The University of
Illinois investigators will be responsible for experiment planning and data
acquisition and analysis, while Northwest Research Associates will be
responsible for modeling the implications on middle atmospheric dynamics.