* 9709938
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mexican-American Survivors  of Rape and Domestic Violence: Narrating Violence to        Socio-Legal Authorities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Susan Berk-Seligson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 11,310.00

Berk-Seligson 9709938 This dissertation research will investigate empirically
the narratives female survivors of sexual assault and of domestic violence as
told to institutional authorities, in order to discover how such narratives
change over the multiple tellings required by reporting a crime. More
specifically, this project will examine reports made by Mexican-American women
to police, victim-witness advocates, attorneys, and counselors. The research
builds upon pioneering work on gender -related vi0lence and how it is talked
about in institutional settings and advances the literature by analyzing the
impact of culture on speaking about these topics. It examines the differences in
ethnolinguistic backgrounds of interlocutors and how these background
characteristics may aggravate the difficulties of reporting incidents of sexual
assault and domestic violence. The research will analyze narratives structurally
to locate changes that occur with repeated tellings. In addition , linguistic
forms and the use of euphemistic speech will be indexed so potential
misunderstandings in communication can be identified. The research will have an
applied as well as a theoretical impact. %%% This dissertation research will
investigate empirically the narratives female survivors of sexual assault and of
domestic violence as told to institutional authorities, in order to discover how
such narratives change over the multiple tellings required by reporting a crime.
More specifically, this project will examine reports made by Mexican-American
women to police, victim-witness advocates, attorneys, and counselors. The
research builds upon pioneering work on gender -related vi0lence and how it is
talked about in institutional settings and advances the literature by analyzing
the impact of culture on speaking about these topics. It examines the
differences in ethnolinguistic backgrounds of interlocutors and how these
background characteristics may aggravate the difficulties of reporting incidents
of s exual assault and domestic violence. The research will analyze narratives
structurally to locate changes that occur with repeated tellings. In addition ,
linguistic forms and the use of euphemistic speech will be indexed so potential
misunderstandings in communication can be identified. The research will have an
applied as well as a theoretical impact. ***