* 9709064
* Collaborative Research:  Human-Environment Interactions in  the Lower Jequetepeque Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Alan Kolata, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 41,318.00

In this collaborative research project Drs. Alan Kolata and Thomas Dillehay will
lead a scientific team to study the prehistory and paleoecology of the lower
Jequetepeque Valley in northern Peru. Working in an arid coastal region which
saw the rise of pre-Hispanic civilization, the group wishes to analyze long-term
social processes of urbanization and economic diversification and to specify the
pathways and mechanisms through which these transformative human processes
interacted within a dynamic physical environment. To accomplish these goals the
team will reconstruct how regional environmental conditions in the Jequetepeque
Valley varied over time, how urbanized human populations responded to this
environmental variation, and how, in turn, underlying ecological processes and
regional environments were altered by large-scale human actions mediated through
the urban system. In this first phase of the research a first principal
objective will be a full-coverage archaeological survey of the lower valley
followed by limited test excavations in domestic contexts of residential sites
and in selected agricultural features. The group will analyze aerial photographs
of the lower valley to identify natural microenvironmental zones, architectural
complexes, irrigation networks, reservoirs, roads and other salient features. A
fundamental objective of this aspect of the work will be to establish a site
typology based on size, function and proximity to natural resources and it will
serve to establish the basic characteristics of the settlement pattern. The
simultaneous paleoenvironmental aspect of the project will focus on two goals:
1. a geomorphological and landscape analysis of the valley and 2. a
paleolimnological analysis of lakes within the watershed and adjacent highlands.
These data will permit reconstruction of spatial and temporal changes in the
environments exploited by human populations over the past 1500 years. Early
urban societies in Peru were locally based and did not transport foods and other
agricultural projects over long distances. Thus they had no strong mechanisms
for buffering local environmental effects and the ties between environmental
change and social response were extremely tight. This northern region of Peru
saw the rise of urban society and its subsequent decline. This phenomenon can
only be understood in an environmental context and this project, through its
focus on both human and natural variables should significantly increase
understanding of the processes which underlie the rise, and in some cases
subsequent declines, of civilization.