* 9709962
* Collaborative Research:  The Evolution of Conventions       in Intergenerational Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 114,944.00

Project Summary This is a collaborative project with Barry Sopher, 9709079. This
project consists of an experimental investigation of how social conventions and
the information contained in them are created and passed on between generations
of social agents. A large literature in game theory examines infinitely repeated
games played by a set of fixed and unchanging players. In the real world, while
games may go on indefinitely, the agents who play them have finite lives. When
these agents die or retire, their roles in these infinitely-lived games are
taken by other agents who, perhaps in consultation with their predecessors,
continue to play the game after them. We examine the transition from one
generation to another, where conventions and norms are either passed along, or
are disrupted and new ones established. We do so using an alternative
evolutionary model, the Lamarckian model, in contrast to the more common
Darwinian model, to explain the process of social evolution. In this Lamarckian
process conventions of behavior acquired by one generation can be consciously
passed on to the next, so that the relatively mechanical random matching and
replicator dynamics characteristic of Darwinian models are no longer needed
here. We expect that the work proposed here to add to the growing body of
literature on social institutions, as well as provide a realistic framework
within which to study the problem of evolution in repeated games. All the
experiments performed have the same general structure. Subjects are recruited
from undergraduate populations and ordered into generations in which each
generation plays a pre-specified game repeatedly, with the same opponent, for a
pre-specified length of time. During their participation in the game, at various
times, they are asked to predict the actions taken by their opponent in order to
obtain insight into how beliefs about one's opponent change over time, and to
look for convergence in beliefs across generations as proof of the emergence of
conventions. After their participation in the game subjects are replaced by a
next generation, who are able to view some history of what has transpired before
them. This history might either be that of their immediate predecessors in the
experiment or the entire history of all subjects before them. Subjects in each
generation are able to give advice to their successors either in the form of
suggesting a formal strategy or simply writing down a suggestion as to what to
do and explaining why such advice is being given. The payoffs to any subject are
equal to the payoffs earned by that generation during their lifetime plus a
discounted payoff which depends on the payoffs achieved by their successors.
Behavior in four different games using this non-overlapping-generations design
are investigated. The four games investigated include a coordination game (the
Battle of the Sexes), a game where equity considerations are important (the
Ultimatum bargaining game), a game of trust, and an individual learning task.