* 9709123
* Numerical Investigations of the Incompressible Euler        Equations, the Vlasov-Poisson/Fokker-Planck Equations, and  the Boltzmann Equation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Lori Ann Carmack, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract: I propose to numerically address the question of finite time
singularity development in the three-dimensional incompressible Euler equations
with smooth initial data. These equations model the flow of incompressible ideal
fluids. In particular, I will consider the axisymmetric with swirl case which
allows for higher resolution than possible in fully three-dimensional
experiments. Several different finite difference techniques will be implemented.
I will investigate the performance of the different numerical schemes in order
to assess the quality of each method. Also, I will study the effects different
numerical boundary conditions have on vorticity amplification as well as the
fully three-dimensional problem using particle methods. In conjunction with
these experiments, I will perform numerical simulations of the Vlasov-Poisson
equations in one dimension. These equations model a collisionless plasma of
electrons in a uniform background of ions, and serve as a simpler analogue of
the two-dimensional incompressible Euler equations. I will numerically study the
behavior of weak solutions to the Vlasov-Poisson and Fokker-Planck-Poisson
equations arising from non-smooth electron sheet initial data. An electron sheet
describes a concentrated beam of electrons. The equations will be regularized by
either smoothing the initial condition or by including collisions modeled by the
Fokker-Planck-Poisson equations. I propose to use both a a finite difference
method developed by Jack Schaeffer as well as particle methods to examine the
solution of the Vlasov-Poisson equations obtained in the limit of vanishing
regularization. And finally, this proposed research will prepare me to afterward
conduct research related to the Boltzmann and Fokker-Planck equations with non-
qmooth initial data which has potential medical appliations. These equations are
used in the computation of dosage calculations in radiation therapy.