* 9709832
* Intergenerational Relations in Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jay Belsky, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 173,001.00

This project is designed to advance understanding of the development of parent-
child relationships across the lifespan. The project takes advantage of a
unique, ongoing longitudinal study of approximately 1,000 young adults at age 26
(and their parents) in New Zealand who have been studied since age three. These
young adults will be questioned during a 20-minute interview about their
relationships with their parents (at the current time). The data will be used to
learn about the emotional closeness of these relationships. The help received
from and provided to parents will be related to data collected (prospectively)
during early childhood (ages 3 and 5), middle childhood (ages 7 and 9) and
adolescence (ages 13 and 15) on parent-child relations and family climate.
Parallel data on intergenerational relations during adulthood will be gathered
by mail from the parents of the young adults to learn more about affectional,
functional, and associational solidarity between parent and adult child. These
data will be used in structural equation modeling designed to assess direct and
mediated effects of childhood experience on the quality of intergenerational
relations in adulthood. It should be possible to determine whether, and the
extent to which, the quality of family relationships during children's
childhoods affects the quality of relationships between middle-aged and aging
parents and their young adult children. In general, it is expected that more
positive relations during childhood will be related to more positive
relationships during adulthood, although it is anticipated that the strength of
such cross-time associations will vary as a function of both parent and child
gender. Because there exists no such prospective studies of this topic in the
United States (or elsewhere) originating in early childhood, this study of New
Zealanders will break new ground in the study of the life course. Moreover,
given long-term goals of repeating measurements of intergenerational relations
in years to come, this study initiates what is hoped to be a long-term
prospective study of this topic.