* 9709330
* Novel Organic Cages as Moduli for Extended                  Three-dimensional Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Elena Galoppini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

Professor Elena Galoppini, Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University at Newark
is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Program of the Chemistry Division
under a Research Planning Grant to establish a synthetic methodology leading to
novel organic cage molecules. Derivatives prepared from commercially available
adamantanes and tetraphenylmethanes are coupled to achieve robust, rigid cages
with internal cavities ranging from 18 to 28 angstroms in diameter. Professor
Galoppini presents a clever approach to the synthesis of organic cage structures
that possess the rigidity needed to serve as moduli for the synthesis of
extended, porous, supramolecular organic networks. A Research Planning Grant at
this stage in Professor Galoppini's career offers a means to exploit the
chemistry, and develop the methodology needed for an NSF research proposal in a
very competitive area. Porous organic materials of tailorable architecture are
an attractive complement to currently available porous, inorganic materials. The
synthesis of such materials, however, rests on building blocks of sufficient
rigidity to support an extended three dimensional array of the individual units.
A synthetic methodology using commercially available reagents will be developed
to afford a series of rigid organic cages that will serve as building blocks.
Three dimensional materials will be assembled with tailorable porosities to
allow the diffusion and encapsulation of different reagents.