* 9709438
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  High Resolution, Interdisciplinary Paleoclimatic Studies of Late Quaternary Lacustrine Systems in Mongolia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,10/31/2000
* John Peck, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 240,750.00

9709438 Peck This Proposal requests a three year award to do high-resolution,
interdisciplinary studies of Late Quaternary paleoclimate change as recorded in
lacustrine sediment from Lakes Telmen and Dood Mongolia. During the first two
years, a lake coring and catchment sediment and soil sampling program will take
place during the summer, when access to these lakes is possible. The proposed
paleoclimate study is system-wide in scope, interdisciplinary in approach and
located in a region of the Earth that is little studied but important to global
climate (Webb et al., 1993). This project closely follows the guidelines of the
USGCRP and PAGES programs and will contribute to greater coverage of the PEP-II
Asian transect of PAGES/IGBP (Eddy, 1992). This study will also aid the ongoing
Baikal Drilling Project efforts to recover paleoclimate change from Baikal
sediments (Williams et al., 1997) by providing higher resolution records from
the same region. Because small Mongolian lakes have accumulation rates
approximately 5 times that of Lake Baikal (Sevastyanov et al., 1989; Colman et
al., 1996), it will be possible to obtain a climate record with centennial to
decadal resolution from the proposed Mongolian lake sites Through coordinated
analysis of multiple climate proxies, including rock-magnetics, palynology,
geochemistry, diatoms, biogenic silica and detailed lithostratigraphy, this
study will provide insight into orbital and internal forcing mechanisms of the
Asian Monsoon, abrupt climate change (e.g., Younger Dryas, Little Ice Age), and
ecosystem change in Mongolia and provide a means of testing climate models
(e.g., COHMAP). Quantification of humid and arid intervals in the sediment
record will further understanding of the evolution/intensification of the Asian
monsoon since the last glacial maximum and of variations in the transport of
Atlantic air masses (Gasse et al., 1991; Kutzbach et al., 1993; Gasse and Van
Campo, 1994; Weijian et al., 1996; Karabanov et al., submitted). Regi onal
studies of Late Quaternary climate change are often truncated at the Mongolian
border (Velichko, 1984; Winkler and Wang, 1993; Peterson et al., 1993) because
political borders provide convenient boundaries for regional syntheses and
paleoclimate data from Mongolia is limited (see Fig. 1 in COHMAP members, 1988;
Harrison et al., 1996). However, the climate in the Mongolian region represents
an important transition from the subarctic in the north (Russia) to desert in
the south (Gobi of Mongolia/China). The results of the proposed study will help
link the better studied region to the south (Winkler and Wang, 1993) to the
existing network of lake paleoclimate records in Russia (Velichko, 1984;
Harrison et al., 1996) and the new paleoclimate studies from Lake Baikal
(Williams et al., 1997) along the PEP-II transect. A secondary but important
objective of the proposed work is to provide geomagnetic records of direction
and relative intensity (Thompson 1984; King et al., 1983; Tauxe, 1993). These
geomagnetic records will fill an important gap in the global distribution of
such records, contribute to a better understanding of the nature of the
geodynamo, and in conjunction with the Lake Baikal geomagnetic record (Peck et
al., 1996), begin to form a regional master geomagnetic curve that can be used
for correlation and dating in future studies of lake and loess sediments in
central Asia