* 9709091
* Bayesian Analysis of Generalized Linear Mixed Models Using  Non-informative Priors
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/1998,10/16/1998
* Ranjini Natarajan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 10/16/1998
* USD 17,789.00

We study a Bayesian analysis of generalized linear mixed models using non-
informative priors. Mixed models (also known as hierarchical or random-
coefficient models) extend the usual generalized linear regression by
incorporation of a rich and flexible pattern of correlations among outcomes. The
classic non-informative prior for the Gaussian family (Box and Tiao, pg 58,
1992) is currently used as conventional objective priors for these models. In
previously published work, the Principal Investigator has shown that this family
of priors does not lead to proper posterior distributions for mixed models for
binomial responses, thus making them undesirable; further, their use in some
situations can lead to seriously misleading results in practice. This research
extends the Principal Investigators' previous work by exploring alternative
approaches for a non-informative Bayesian analysis of hierarchical models. Four
objective specifications will be investigated: Jeffreys's prior, the uniform
shrinkage prior, flat priors and the reference conjugate prior, and theoretical
and practical recommendations made for their use. The methods developed in this
proposal will be used to analyze real data from a double-blind clinical trial to
study the efficacy of Rifabutin in the treatment of Crohn's disease. More
generally, there will be a horizontal shift of these methods to various
disciplines where correlated data routinely arise. Planning activities include:
deriving the reference priors and investigating propriety of the resulting
posterior distributions; examining methods for sampling from the posterior
distributions.