* 9709301
* A Re-examination of the Link Between Domestic and           International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Paul Huth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/2000
* USD 86,000.00

This project develops and empirically tests a theoretical model of the
conditions under which domestic political unrest causes political leaders to
adopt confrontational foreign policies towards other states. Hypotheses are
derived from game-theoretic models which identify the set of domestic and
international conditions which lead to a systematic relationship between
internal and external conflict. The theoretical premise of this project is that
there is a tight connection between state leader's domestic and foreign policy
choices. Compelling explanations of foreign policy choices require that the
domestic policy choices of foreign policy leaders be modeled explicitly and
carefully. A critical weakness of prior work is that international relations
research often does not analyze in sufficient detail the domestic political
environment, and therefore does not pay attention to the domestic policy
response leaders choose to deal with the political opposition they face. By
ignoring this domestic policy choice, it is very difficult to explain what
impact domestic unrest has on international conflict. It is hypothesized that
the decision of state leaders to either repress or accommodate the demands of
political opposition has significant implications for whether state leaders
pursue and aggressive foreign policy. When state leaders repress domestic
opposition, the incentives to initiate militarized confrontations are much
stronger compared to situations in which leaders accommodate the demands of
political opposition. Empirical tests are conducted on a random sample of states
for the years 1946-1992. Using statistical and supporting case study analysis
will produce strong empirical findings that only when domestic repression of
unrest is coupled with a favorable international political-military position for
states, will there be a positive relationship between domestic unrest and
international conflict. This project will develop a dataset on domestic unrest
and international conflict which will be utilized by numerous other scholars
interested in the topic.