* 9709803
* Collaborative Research: REU: An Integrated Field-laboratory Experience for Undergraduates: Constraints on the Tectonic  Evolution of Ultramafic Massifs in the Southern Blue Ridge
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Virginia Peterson, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1999
* USD 67,321.00

9709803 Peterson This REU project will provide undergraduate students with an
integrated field and laboratory research experience. Students will tackle
questions about the origins and evolution of mafic and ultramafic rock units of
the Buck Creek and Lake Chatuge complexes, in the high-grade metamorphic belt of
the Southern Appalachians of western North Carolina and northern Georgia. The
origins of Appalachian mafic and ultramafic rocks and their tectonic
implications are actively debated. Using detailed field observations, structural
analysis and compositional information, the students will provide some new
constraints on the origin of these rocks and their tectonic evolution. The first
half of the project will involve four weeks of field mapping, sampling and
structural analysis using facilities at Western Carolina University. In the
second half of the project, students will use the analytical facilities of the
University of South Florida to chemically analyze rock samples collected in the
field. The faculty will participate fully in research activities as guides,
providing students with a detailed overview of the relevant geologic issues, and
helping them identify and formulate the research questions; and as instructors,
providing them with direction and training in field techniques, laboratory
protocols, and the use of analytical instrumentation.