* 9710418
* GOALI:  SiGe/Si Modulation-Doped Field-Effect               Transistors for Low Power, High Speed Circuit Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Ilesanmi Adesida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2000
* USD 240,308.00

9710418 Adesida Over the last decade, significant advances have been made in the
epitaxial growth of SiGe/ Si heterostructure material system using molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE) and ultra-high vacuum chemical vapor deposition (UHV-CVD).
The significant improvements in SiGe/Si material properties have brought to fore
a silicon-compatible technology that has the potential to compete favorably with
III-V compound semiconductor devices in application-specific designs which
require low power consumption and high speed which are needed for cellular
telephones and other portable and wireless electronics. The bandgap engineering
made possible on silicon by this material system has provided the impetus to
study devices such as heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) and modulation-
doped field effect transistors (MODFETs) that have heretofore been in the domain
of InP and GaAs. Indeed SiGe/Si HBTs have demonstrated excellent high frequency
performance with unity current gain cut-off frequencies exceeding 100 GHz.
Although, theoretical predictions have shown that SiGe/Si MODFETs and related
devices (e.g. MOSFETs) should have comparable or better performance than those
obtained for HBTs, experimental work in this area is essentially inchoate. SiGe-
based FETs need intensive development in order to evaluate their practical
usefulness for advanced microwave and digital circuits. The PI's proposed
research is therefore motivated by the continued improvement in the growth of
SiGe/Si materials and the need to develop manufacturable processes to turn these
materials into high performance conventional p-type and n-type MODFETs. These
devices will also make possible the realization of complementary MODFETs. In the
proposed research, The University of Illinois (UIUC) and IBM will collaborate to
significantly advance the growth and fabrication technologies for SiGe/Si
MODFETs needed for low power, high speed microwave and digital circuit
applications. The goals of the proposed research are 1) to provide n ew insights
into the growth of SiGe/Si with very low density of dislocations; 2) to develop
new methodologies for the formation of Schottky and ohmic contacts on SiGe/Si
heterostructures; 3) to develop low damage dry etching methodologies for the
selective etching of SiGe on Si and vice versa; 4) to study the physics and
performance of short gate-length ( < 100 nm) p-type, n-type, and complementary
MODFETs; and 5) to demonstrate simple microwave and digital circuits using
SiGe/Si MODFETs. ***