* 9710238
* Three-Dimensional Slab Effects in Partially-Restrained      Composite Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Donald White, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 06/30/2000
* USD 256,610.00

9710238 Leon This project intends to develop experimental data and analytical
tools to better characterize the three-dimensional effects and steel-concrete
interaction in typical composite floor systems. Such as steel moment frames with
composite floors for which very little is known about the ultimate strength
capacity, ductility and toughness of these systems. From a fundamental
standpoint research is needed to answer the following questions: o Behavior of
exterior connections under cyclic load reversals. o Behavior of connections
framing into the weak axis of columns when subjected to cyclic loads. o
Interaction between lateral and gravity actions insofar as system strength and
stiffness are concerned. o Effect of the floor slab on the torsional restraint
at the end of composite beams. o Influence of the degree of shear connection on
the strength and stiffness of the system under lateral loads. o Influence of the
slab reinforcement detailing on the force transfer. o Behavior of shear studs
under reversed cyclic loading. Experiments coupled with advanced analysis
techniques will be used to address several of the topics described above. The
experiments will include some unique bi-directional loading tests on a new type
of partially-restrained composite (PR-CC) connections utilizing T-stubs and
stiffened seats. Among the key items to be studies are the connections to the
weak axis of the columns, connections at the edge of the floor slabs, and
behavior of shear studs under reversed cyclic loads. The analytical component
will develop new elements capable of efficiently modeling composite action under
cyclic load reversals. Experimental data and simplified models based on the
component method will be developed for T-stubs. These connection models, along
with the elements developed to take into account composite action, will be used
in parametric studies to define code-type design rules for structures with a wid
e variety of PR-CC connections. ***