* 9710619
* SBIR PHASE II: KidCode: Software for Young Children's       Exploration of Symbolic Representation
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Michelle Baker, Intellinet Inc  New York
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/1999
* USD 309,991.00

Mathematics without the message devolves into mere manipulation of symbols. It
is important to help children develop an understanding of symbolic
representation through experience with a wide variety of codes and coded
representations, yet there is no software explicitly designed to encourage
children in an exploration of symbolic representation. This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project from Intellinet will implement prototype
software, Kidcode, and develop teacher resource materials for a computer program
that allows children in the age range 5-10 years to explore symbolic
representations. In the course of the Phase I research a sequence of two-person
games to be set within the context of an electronic mail system was developed.
These games satisfy the following objectives with respect to children's interest
and their ability to understand and play independently: Each game is genuinely
enjoyed by at least some cohort of the target age range, and all children
evaluated exhibited delight in at least one game as expressed by their level of
interest and/or requests for repeated play. Moreover, there is evidence that,
taken together, the games improve the children's facility with symbolic
processing. The Phase II plans include completion of the implementation of a
software prototype for the four KidCode games designed in Phase I; development
of teacher resource materials to supplement the software; development of
animated demonstrations and an on-line help facility; and evaluation and
refinement of the software, help facility, and teacher resource materials. The
KidCode games and e-mail software have commercial applications in the markets
for both home and school educational software. KidCode is designed make use of
local area computer networks and the Internet. At present, with the exception of
Web pages on the Internet, little or no educational software exists that takes
advantage of a networked computing environment. Moreover, the games address a
real need in elementary mathematics curricula and appeal to teachers of
elementary-aged children and other adults as well. Possibilities outside of the
classroom include development of a board game style version of the KidCode games
and, because the games are interactive, visually and aurally attractive,
humorous, and colorful, the development of an intriguing television game show
for kids.