* 9710604
* Doctoral Dissertation: Performing Able-Bodiedness: Amputees  and Prosthetics in the USA
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Nancy Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 08/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation project explores how amputees use prosthetic technology to
perform able-bodiedness, and how they collaborate with bioengineers and
prosthetists to develop this technology. American culture values the physical
appearance of able-bodiedness and the capacity to perform activities such as
standing and walking. Amputees' uses of prosthetic technology to perform such
activities are revealing of American conceptions of bodies and bodily movement.
An examination of the social collaborations involved in reconstructing amputees'
bodies offers an opportunity to study concepts of able-bodiedness and physical
disability, and the relationship between bodies and technology in American
culture. This project will enable the investigator to do a cross-cultural
comparison by supporting travel to India and Cambodia to study the Jaipur ankle-
foot prosthesis. The Jaipur foot is a form of Third World appropriate prosthetic
technology, and offers an opportunity to develop a cross-cultural perspective on
materials, methods of technology manufacture, and the cultural context of
consumer use of prosthetic technology. This project will be conducted in two
field sites: Sawai Man Singh Hospital in Jaipur, India, and a prosthetics
workshop near Phnom Penh, Cambodia. f8 Û-ª þ ; + + Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0 Ý + Õ $ H l
+ ¢ ╗ D h + ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
SBR-9617049 -jperhon S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ # Û
++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ is -jperhonis @ +³<─‗{▀ @ @ +³<─‗{▀ @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 f8 Û-ª þ ; +
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++Õªe =- e % j j j
j j j j ` ` ` ` ` ` n ` m 1 ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ j l l l + d µ d O n T   3 m j ╝ ╝ ╝
╝ ╝ m ╝ j j ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ j ╝ j ╝ j + j j j j ╝ j ╝ s ╝