* 9710667
* SBIR Phase II:  A Unique, High Accuracy Means of Locating   Cellular Telephones Using the Existing Cellular             Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Steen Parl, Signatron Technology Corp
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/2000
* USD 292,894.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project from Signatron is
focused on a novel radiolocation technology lowering the costs to the public of
determining the location of cellular telephones which place emergency calls. The
new technology involves a proprietary technique for collection of the calling
phone signal parameters at two or more base stations which are then transmitted
to a central computer for position computation. In Phase I, mathematical
analysis and computer simulations were used to prove the technical feasibility
of the technique. Not only was the technique shown to be feasible, but it was
shown to be much more accurate and an order of magnitude less costly than the
existing state of the art. In Phase II, a prototype system, comprising base
stations linked to a central position location computer, will be integrated into
a commercial cellular telephone system to further refine and evaluate the
technology in field operation. Besides the important application to emergency
cellular phone location (E911), this new technology will have a number of
applications in other location based services for which current geolocation
technologies are either ineffective or too expensive. Such services include
location based billing for wireless telephones, locating fraudulent phone
callers, vehicle fleet management, tracking of parolees, child location,
location of wandering Alzheimer's disease patients, location of stolen vehicles,
location of stolen equipment such as lap-top computers, and location of lost
pets.