* 9710505
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: A Molecular- Biogeographic  Analysis of Relationship Patterns Among Disjunct Arcto-     Tertiary Woody Plant Taxa with Emphasis on West Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Clifford Parks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 49,788.00

9710505 Parks Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project
between Dr. Clifford Parks, Professor of Biology at the University of North
Carolina, chapel Hill, and Dr. Munir Ozturk, Director, Center for Environmental
Studies, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. The research is to carry out a
molecular-phylogenetic analysis of 5 genera with extant species in the major
Tertiary refugia in western Asia (Turkey) to determine the pattern of
relationships among them and extrapolate their biographic history. This will be
accomplished by: employing a phylogenetic analysis to measure the amount of
evolutionary divergence among species within the 5 genera; determining the
pattern of biogeographic relationships among species within each genus and
determining the degree to which the five genera have a common biogeographic
history; comparing biogeographic patterns determined from the molecular analysis
to all available information from the fossil record; and hypothesize a possible
evolutionary history of the major refugia, particularly the affinities of the
refugial vegetation in western Asia. Scope: The research project is intended to
shed light on the details of the relationship between the flora in the humid
regions in the North Temperate zones of Eurasia and North America (the Arco-
Tertiary vegetation). The field research in Turkey will involve two graduate
students from UNC, Alice M. Stanford and Fatih Coskun. The Turkish scientist,
Dr. Ozturk, is planning to spend part of the first year at UNC to become
competent in modern methods of molecular systematics, so that he can continue
with this work after the duration of this award. This proposal meets INT
objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both
sides, and in enhancing the international experience of women scientists and
junior scientists. This award includes funds from the Division of International
Programs and the Division of Environmental Biology. ***