* 9710646
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-destructive Evaluation For Seismic      Damage Assessments Using Real-Time X-Ray or Gamma-Ray       Imaging System
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Wei-lou Cao, INOVIX Imaging Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/1999
* USD 299,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
portable, effective, low cost and easy to use hard X-ray or gamma-ray inspection
system for structural damage assessment. Quick and effective laboratory and
field nondestructive evaluation of structural damage is important for earthquake
studies. In Phase I, a conceptual design using the CSL high sensitivity, direct
photon-electron conversion X-ray image system demonstrated a novel real-time
nondestructive structural damage measurement technique for concrete with a
spatial resolution of 14 lp/mm. This new technique will be developed to a hard
x-ray or a gamma-ray image detecting and processing system to directly visualize
and quantify the structural damage, including damage location, damage pattern
and sizes. A real-time damaging process can be monitored, recorded and
transferred by this fast hard X-ray or gamma-ray detector and the associated
image transfer network system. Together with the National Center for Earthquake
Engineering Research at SLNY Buffalo, CSL will conduct a series of experiments
to quantify the major design parameters of the prototype system and to prove the
feasibility of this novel technique This system will benefit the inspection and
real-time monitoring of civil engineering structures including bridges, utility
structures, aging schools, as well as residential buildings.