* 9710012
* Effects of Category-Based Expectancy Violation on           Evaluations and Motivated Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* B. Ann Bettencourt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1998
* USD 20,000.00

Currently, there is widespread debate about whether persons with equal
qualifications have equal educational and job opportunities. This research is
part of a larger program of studies designed to understand how information about
a job candidate's credentials in combination with information about their race
or gender affect perceptions of the job candidate's qualifications. If
credentials are relatively equivalent, then the chances of obtaining
opportunities should be the same for persons of different racial and gender
backgrounds. According to this perspective, qualifications alone determine the
likelihood of opportunities. However, some evidence suggests that decision
makers may use race and gender information to guide their decisions regarding a
job candidate's qualifications. From this view, it is important to consider how
prior expectations about particular types of persons as well as particular types
of opportunities (e.g., jobs) may affect judgments about qualifications. For
example, prior expectations may include stereotypes about who is best suited for
a particular type of job or who is best suited for entry into medical school.
These prior expectations may in turn influence decisions about job candidates'
qualifications. This research is designed to systematically examine how prior
expectancies in combination with person information (e.g., credentials, race,
gender) influence decision makers' affective reactions toward, evaluations and
judgments of, and reasoning processes about persons. By examining these
variables, the current research will provide insight into the factors that
affect decision makers' perceptions about who is best qualified for access to
valuable opportunities.