* 9710383
* Vibrationally and Rotationally State-Resolved Differential  Cross Sections for Reactive Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mark Keil, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 07/31/2001
* USD 393,115.00

Mark Keil and Gregory A. Parker of the University of Oklahoma are supported by
the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue their investigations on
state-to-state reaction dynamics for various simple reactions: (i) fluorine
atoms plus hydrogen dimer to form hydrogen fluoride; (ii) fluorine atoms and
hydrogen chloride to form hydrogen fluoride and chlorine atoms; (iii) chlorine
atoms and hydrogen bromide to form hydrogen chloride and bromine atoms. The
reaction of interest takes place at the intersection of two crossed molecular
beams. A high-resolution chemical laser in conjunction with a bolometer detector
is then used to resolve the scattered product vib-rotational state and angular
distribution. The PIs will explore the effects of varying initial rotational and
kinetic energies, and isotopic substitutions, upon the vibrationally and
rotationally state-resolved differential cross sections. Direct comparisons will
be made with ab initio theoretical dynamical calculations using quantum
scattering codes developed by the co-PI. The principal goal of these studies is
to deepen our understanding of chemical reaction dynamics at the detailed state-
to-state level. Tremendous theoretical progress is currently being made using
approximation techniques for simplifying increasingly complex chemical
reactivity problems. The validity of approximations used in such quantum
calculations is often based upon experience with tri-atomic A+BC systems of the
sort studied here: detailed investigations of A+BC systems have provided the
foundation upon which larger systems can be understood. The field of detailed
chemical reaction dynamics is helping elucidate chemical reactivity very
broadly, with obvious relevance to all branches of chemistry.