* 9710582
* SBIR PHASE II: Controlled Atmosphere Disinfestation of Raw  Agricultural Products
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/2000
* Larry Swette, GINER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 09/30/2000
* USD 299,970.00

This Small Business Research Phase II project is directed to development of a
method for disinfestation of raw agricultural products. Insect infestation is a
universal problem in produce storage, processing and shipping that must be
effectively addressed to minimize health concerns and to maintain an appetizing
appearance, shelf life and marketability. Cargoes that cross state and national
boundaries are also generally subject to stringent regulations for the same
reasons as well as to prevent the importation of harmful agricultural pests.
Containerized cargo transport in which containers carry a dedicated
refrigeration unit ("reefers") employs controlled-atmospheres (CA) for
preservation of' perishable products. Giner, Inc. has developed a system for
active continuous removal of oxygen leaking into "sealed" reefers to controlled
low oxygen levels, and extend CA technology from food preservation to
disinfestation applications. The oxygen level must be lowered sufficiently for
disinfestation but not below the tolerance level of the respiring produce. The
Giner, Inc. Electrochemical Oxygen Removal (EOR) system is uniquely suited for
adaptation as an Electrochemical Oxygen Control (EOC) system. In Phase I a
prototype FOC system suitable for disinfestation was designed, built and tested,
and a feasibility demonstration with fresh produce was Successfully concluded.
Phase II of the program will optimize the electrochemical reactor and refine the
control system of the prototype EOC. The unit will be field tested more
extensively with a variety of produce for effectiveness in disinfestation.
Anticipated benefits of this development include greater availability of' fresh,
healthy, agricultural products without the loss of quality associated with
disinfestation by heating or freezing or the chemical residues from pesticides.
There should also be substantial cost savings associated with the prevention of
losses for producers, shippers and consumers. This technology may also open to
sh ip transport more distant markets that are now only accessible by expensive
air transport. The technology developed is anticipated to find application for
disinfestation in many other environments where insect infestation is a problem.