* 9710413
* Linking Fundamental Investigations and Engineering Results  for Extinguishment of Fires on Solid Material
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/2000
* USD 170,000.00

Abstract - Vlachos CTS - 9710413 This is an investigation of flame extinction of
fires on solid materials occurring because the energy feedback to the surface
decreases either by direct cooling of the surface or by inerting of the oxidant
stream by a thermal or chemical agent. The study uses modern continuation
methods for numerical calculation of stationary-state solutions in chemical
reaction systems. Numerical results are interpreted with a novel sensitivity
analysis, simple physical models for flame extinction, and standard asymptotic
analysis. Gaseous combustion dynamics is separated from the surface energy
balance by simulating the pyrolyzing material with a porous gaseous burner at a
constant temperature in which a fule such as methane or ethylene burns with the
oxidant flow. One isssue examined is when critical conditions for extinction,
such as dimensionless fuel supply, are independent of the Damkohler number. The
flame heat feedback to the surface is calculated as a function of mass supply
rate for various dilutions of the fuel and/or oxidant streams by chemically
inert or active agents and for various strain rates. Both convective and
radiative heat feedback are included. Empirical methods for extinguishing fires
have been used since prehistoric times. In the last thirty years, sophisticated
models for extinction in gaseous flames have been developed, but little of this
can be applied to fires on solid surfaces. Details of pyrolysis chemistry for
most solid materials of practical interest are unknown. At present, no general,
robust strategy exists to characterize extinction of solid fires under varioius
ambient flow and environmental conditions. Such a strategy is outlined in this
project; it integrates state-of-the-art fluid-phase and chemistry models and
nonlinear systems theory with available experimental data and measurement
techniques for extinction.