* 9710628
* SBIR Phase II:  Extremely High-Temperature                  n-GaN/p-B-SiC/n-GaN Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors on   Large-Area, Compliant Si-on-Insulator Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Fereydoon Namavar, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 03/31/2001
* USD 297,293.00

*** 9710628 Namavar This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project is
to improve the quality of GaN layers by carbonizing the entire top layer of
SIMOX, and to grow GaN by MOCVD on SiC-on-insulator (SiCOI) structures. Phase II
will also fabricate extremely high-temperature (HT) n-GaN/p-beta-SiD/n-beta-SiC
and n-GaN/p-beta-SiC/n-FaN heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT's) on large-
area compliant SIMOX structures. GaN/beta-SiC/GaN HBT structures will be made by
etching the samples from the back and selectively depositing GaN. Phase I
results for partially carbonized Si on SIMOX clearly demonstrated the advantage
of an SOI structure for growth of beta-SiC. A much narrower rocking curve specta
was obtained from SiC grown on SIMOX as compared to that grown on Si.. Rocking
curve data, unlike Bragg-Brentano data, are sensitive to the mosaic structure of
heteroepitaxial growt, and thus measure crystalline quality. Photoluminescence
of MOCVD-grown GaN on SiC/SIMOX shows much stronger purple and weaker yellow
emission than GaN on SiC/Si or on sapphire. Also demonstrated was the
possibility of selective epitaxial growth of SiC and GaN. HT HBT's are useful
for under-the-hood automotive electronics and electronic replacement of avionic
hydraulic systems. ***