* 9710026
* Vibrational Dynamics: Weakly Bound Complexes and Molecule   Surface Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Roger Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 06/30/2000
* USD 559,895.00

Roger E. Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is supported
by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities to continue his high resolution infrared studies on
the state-to-state dynamics of weakly bound complexes. He will focus on the
water dimer, which is of particular interest to the theoretical chemistry
community, and measure the rotational and vibrational photofragment
distributions, scalar and vector correlations, and dissociation energies. In a
newer effort, Miller will investigate the intermolecular forces and vibrational
energy transfer associated with the scattering of vibrationally excited species
from single crystal surfaces. Emphasis here will be on improvements in
experimental methods and the investigation of more complex, polyatomic
molecules. Molecular clusters of two to tens of molecules loosely bound together
can be viewed as the intermediary stage between `isolated` single gas molecules
and the extended arrays of molecules that make up the solid. Understanding the
behavior of such clusters helps us to better understand the nature of the
transition from gas to solid. As it is, clusters are fairly ubiquitous and play
important roles in atmospheric chemistry, thus we need to understand the
dynamics of their formation and fragmentation, the nature of the forces between
the molecules that make up the cluster. The newer effort on the study of the
forces that influence how a single gas molecule interacts with a `supercluster`
or surface can be viewed as a simple extension of the earlier work by Miller.