* 9710259
* Spatiotemporal Patterns in Electrochemically Reacting       System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* John Hudson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2001
* USD 255,971.00

ABSTRACT - Hudson - 9710259 Experimental studies will be carried out on
electrochemical reactions under conditions in which the current changes with
both time and position along the electrode surface. Spatiotemporat patterns
occur under many conditions in other types of reacting systems including liquid
and gas phase reactions, gas-solid heterogeneous reactions, biochemical
reactions, etc. During electrochemical reactions, such as those being considered
here, nonuniform surfaces are typical under dynamic conditions. The
nonuniformities have a strong effect on the overall rate of reaction as well as
the system dynamics. However, very little information is available on
spatiotemporal patterns in electrochemistry and that which is available is
restricted largely to limited, special cases in which the patterns are both
visible and slow moving. An experimental setup shall be developed to study these
spatiotemporal patterns; arrays of electrodes are used so that the current, or
rate of reaction, can be measured independently at many locations on the
reaction surface. Since the current is measured at each electrode and since the
sampling rate at each location can be high, say 5000 Hz per channel, the method
is applicable to all types of electrochemical reactions over a large range of
conditions. The arrays will be in various configurations including square,
hexagonal, and fing patterns. The length scale of the reaction surface is varied
by changing the number of electrodes in an array, the size of the individual
electrodes, or the spacing among the electrodes. The effect of surface
nonunifonnities or pacemakers will be studied by varying the potential of some
of the electrodes in the array A representative and important electrodissolution
reaction, the dissolution of iron in sulfuric acid will be studied. This
reaction will be investigated in two parameter ranges. In the first, low
frequency active-passive oscillations occur; both the fast activation and the
slower passivation phases of the cycle occur by the passage of waves across the
electrode surface. A study of surface wave phenomena and the spatiotemporal
bifurcations which occur among patterns as the potential is changed will be
carried out. Direct visual observations using microscope and video camera of the
slowly moving passivation waves will also be made. Mathematical models will be
developed.