* 9710303
* GOALI:  Process Synthesis Using Units with Integrated       Functionality
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Arthur Westerberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2001
* USD 258,359.00

Abstract - Grossmann - 9710303 Current techniques for process synthesis are
aimed at creating process flowsheets in which each unit performs a distinct
function such as reaction, separation or heat exchange. It is known, however,
that there are cases when integrating functions in one single equipment can lead
to significant economic savings. An example is the Eastman Chemical process for
methyl acetate that involves the use of reactive distillation. From the
standpoint of design research, one difficulty is that there are no systematic
techniques for identifying and synthesizing such process flowsheets. This
research project deals with the synthesis of process flowsheets that involve
units that integrate multiple functions, such as reaction and separation. A
major motivation is to simultaneously perform multiple tasks in a given unit,
which simplifies the structure of the process flowsheet, possibly yielding large
reductions in the investment and operating expenses. The project will first
address this synthesis problems at two different levels. One is at a high level
of representation in which new geometric composition diagrams that will allow
the visualization of design alternatives will be investigated. The objective at
this level will be the identification of cases when the integration of functions
in one equipment is likely to prove to be advantageous. The second level is
detailed in nature and involves the modeling and solution of the corresponding
discrete/continuous optimization problems. New representations of
superstructures and mathematical programming models will be investigated to
search for optimal flowsheets with units that can perform multiple tasks. The
integration of the two synthesis levels will be investigated through a
multilevel synthesis strategy that relies on a modeling approach that allows the
coupling of functions. The project will involve collaboration with Eastman
Chemical Company through joint work in the development of the synthesis
strategy, in the testing with real process examples, and through mutual visits
by the PI's and a graduate student.