* 9710514
* Dissertation Research: Influences of Micro-ecology on       Behavioral Responses to Perceived Risk of Predation in      Sympatric Vervet and Patas Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Lynne Isbell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Predation has been invoked as a strong selective pressure on many aspects of
primate behavior. This project proposes to expand our understanding of predation
as a selective pressure on primate behavioral patterns by investigating the
relationship between habitat structure and anti-predator behavior in sympatric
vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) and patas monkeys (Erythrocebus patas)
in Laikipia, Kenya. Despite being closely related, similar in body size, and
sharing the same community of predators, vervets and patas monkeys appear to
differ in their responses to perceived risk of predation in many ways, including
their choice of sleeping sites, the behavior of mothers and infants in the
presence of predators, and their escape tactics. These differences are
hypothesized to be due to differences in the structure of the habitat used by
each species; including use of different tree species, and differences in tree
height and density of grass cover. This hypothesis will be examined through
quantitative measurement of habitat structure, including tree height and grass
height and density, and by observation of 1) the animals' responses to
predators, 2) responses to naturally occurring alarm calls given by other
monkeys, and 3) responses to pre-recorded alarm calls of monkeys that are played
back to them in a controlled, experimental design. The results of this project
promise to elevate our understanding of predation as a selective pressure on
primate behavior, and to assist in reconstructing the behavioral ecology of
early, sympatric hominids.