* 9710076
* Temporary Anions and Dissociative Attachment: Probes of     Intra- and Intermolecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Kenneth Jordan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 12/31/2000
* USD 342,900.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Burrow (University of Nebraska) and Jordan (University of Pittsburgh)
will continue joint experimental and theoretical studies of temporary anion
formation in gas-phase substituted hydrocarbons. Experimental studies at both
institutions will examine vibrational excitation and dissociative attachment
(DA) reactions in which stable fragment anions are produced. Both total DA cross
sections and vertical attachment energies (VAEs) for formation of temporary
anions will be measured. A new instrument will be constructed to measure the
angular dependence of fragment anions produced by DA. The effect of solvation on
the energies and decay properties of temporary anions will be examined in methyl
chloride (CH3Cl) co-expanded with solvents such as water. High-level electronic
structure calculations will be carried out to predict how the vertical
attachment energy is influenced by the solvation. A powerful means of
visualizing molecular structure and chemical reactivity is provided by the
concept of occupied and unoccupied electronic states, which are also known as
orbitals. Photoelectron spectroscopy has long provided a means of studying
occupied orbitals, but until recently the corresponding data for normally
unoccupied orbitals has been scarce. This work aims at gathering such data,
thereby helping to answer key chemical questions on structure and bonding in
complex molecules. It also offers data crucial to models of electron transfer,
which is the mechanism involved in a large variety of chemical processes, such
as photosynthesis, light-induced desorption from surfaces, chemical
carcinogenesis, and bioremediation.