* 9710109
* RUI:  Natural-Enemy Response to Herbivore Host-Race         Formation:  Specialization to Host-Plant Complexes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Warren Abrahamson, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

ABRAHAMSON 9710109 The incorporation of a novel host into the diet of an
herbivorous insect is a common occurrence, and it is thought to be a significant
early step in the speciation process. One plausible consequence of herbivore
speciation via a host-plant shift is that the herbivore's natural enemies might
also undergo speciation in response. The investigators will examine the
ecological response of the parasitic wasp, Eurytoma gigantea, to a recent host
shift by its herbivorous prey, the goldenrod ball gall inducer (Eurosta
solidaginis). Evidence suggests that tall goldenrod (Solidago altissima) was the
original host of the gall inducer, and that only more recently was late
goldenrod (S. gigantea) incorporated into the gall inducer's diet. The gall
inducer currently exists as two distinct "host-associated races" that differ
genetically, behaviorally, and physiologically. The objective of this study is
to determine if phenotypic differences exist within and among the gall inducer
predators. In particular the investigators ask if wasp populations differ in
terms of adult oviposition preference for the two host races or if larval
performance of the wasp predators differs on the two goldenrod host-races.
Insect herbivores and their predators represent a great majority of biological
diversity and are of considerable economic significance. Host shifts such as the
one described above are common and have been reported for pests of agricultural,
forest, endangered, and other native plant species. A shift by an agricultural
pest to a new crop species may lead to high economic losses of the new crop
species as the herbivore escapes its predators. This study will increase
understanding of what may facilitate or limit a corresponding shift by natural
enemies onto the novel host plant, and what may influence the evolution of
increased efficiency of a predator in the utilization of the new host-plant
complex. By directing research toward the adaptation of natural enemies to the
plants on w hich their hosts feed, this research may improve the biological
control of both native and introduced pests.