* 9710579
* Bioethics in American Society
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Judith Swazey, Acadia Institute
* Continuing grant
* SIEBER,JOAN E.
* 08/31/2002
* USD 290,089.00

The overall objective of this project is to chronicle historically and analyze
sociologically the genesis, development, roles, and significance of bioethics in
American society. The study will address the following topics, and the
interconnections between them: the genesis of bioethics as a field in the late
1960s; the chief intellectual and professional disciplines that have, and have
not, been centrally involved, and the value complexes they represent; the ethos
of bioethics, including the roles that moral philosophy, theology, and religion
have and have not played; the major thematic foci of bioethical interest and
inquiry, including the extent to which and ways in which there are or are not
explicit interconnections as well as more latent social and value linkages
between bioethics and other foci of ethical concerns in American society; the
ways in which bioethics is `more-than-medical` and, however latently, has
involved more-than-ethical themes; the social organization,
institutionalization, and progressive expansion of the field; the ways that and
reasons for which it has increasingly pervaded public domains; and the field's
theories and methodologies. The study will use a combination of historical and
sociological research methods: (1)semi-structured in-depth individual and small
group interviews with key persons from `three generations` of bioethicists, and
others involved in the early `bioethics goes to Washington` policy arenas; (2)
content analyses of the bioethics literature; (3) a social organizational
analysis of the field's progressive institutionalization from the 1960s through
the 1990s; and (4) a sociometric or social circles analysis of the
interconnections between those who entered bioethics across three generations.
During the past 3 decades, bioethics has been a dominant component of what James
M. Gufstason has called `ethics: an American growth industry.` Despite the
prominence that bioethics has achieved in American society, however, there has
been a paucity of work that has examined the field's development. The project
has been designed to address this vacuum: it will be the first in-depth study of
bioethics, and one which also will illuminate broader themes dealing with
American ideas, values, and beliefs. In addition to written products (a book and
papers), the study will generate an important body of archival materials,
consisting primarily of tapes and transcripts of interviews with key persons in
bioethics, which will be deposited at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics.