* 9710596
* SBIR Phase II:  Complex & Large-Scale 3D Computational FluidDynamics and Heat Transfer Analysis for Manufacturing       Industries Using an Adaptive Meshless (hp-clouds) Method
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1998,02/28/1999
* Tadeusz Liszka, Computational Mechanics Company, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9710596 Liszka This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
research, refine, and optimize a novel adaptive meshless technology, named hp-
clouds, for the solution of large-scale 3D incompressible viscous flows with
conjugate heat transfer. In hp-cloud methods, the solution of the governing
differential equations is obtained without resorting to a finite element/volume
mesh or finite difference cells -- the approach removes the burden of mesh
generation. High-quality local approximations are built around a 'sprinkle' of
nodal points (such local supports being termed as 'clouds'), and can be
h-adapted (by simply inserting more nodal points) or locally enriched i.e.
p-adapted by stacking-up more degrees-of-freedom at a chosen node. The proposed
hp-clouds technology is an original generalization of the moving least squares
approximation methods used in various existing meshless implementations (such as
the Element-Free-Galerkin-Method). Current research shows that hp-clouds is
computationally efficient, is easy to adapt to the geometry, evolving and
directional solution features, and possesses high potential for parallel
computations. Since no mesh connectivity is required, this method offers immense
flexibility in design optimization processes when changes to geometric shapes
and addition/removal of components are frequent. A successful completion of the
proposed project will result in pre-commercial technology and software which
will be ready for immediate application in computer-aided-engineering (CAE)
design and analysis tools. These tools will find immediate application across a
wide range of manufacturing industries, including automotive, casting, molding
and extrusion, food and chemical., turbo-machinery, and others. ***