* 9710722
* SBIR PHASE II: Marker Gene Directed Substrates for Cell     Regulation
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2000
* John Naleway, MARKER GENE TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 10/31/2000
* USD 298,940.00

*** 9710722 Naleway This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
aims to develop new commercial uses of conjugates capable of exploiting common
marker gene expression in transformed cells to control the growth and character
of cells in living tissue. From our successes in Phase I we propose research
that will provide breakthroughs needed to advance commercial uses of these
recombinant gene systems in biotechnology. In Phase II of this project, Marker
Gene Technologies, Inc. proposes to establish this technology by preparing new
conjugates of common growth regulators, drugs and enzyme inhibitors, for
administration to a variety of animal cells or bacteria in tissue culture that
contain gene fusion marker genes. In addition, Marker Gene Technologies, Inc.
will develop new vectors and systems for defined control of marker genes in
vivo. These new conjugate systems will provide innovative methods of detecting
gene fusions and utilizing these fusion systems in transformed cells in vivo to
control selected biological properties of these cells. Potential Commercial
Applications of the Research The success of this project opens up commercial
possibilities in the fields of medical intervention in genetic diseases, new
drug delivery systems, and improved biotechnological production of new proteins
and drugs in cell-culture systems. ***