* 9710572
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhanced Subsurface Injection of Chlorinated Solvent Degrading Microorganisms
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/1997,10/31/1999
* Mary DeFlaun, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Phase II SBIR project involves the development, testing and modeling of a
surfactant foam/bacterial delivery system for in situ remediation of dense non-
aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contaminants. The Phase I study demonstrated the
efficacy of combining a surfactant foam technology with bioaugmentation, to
remediate trichloroethylene (TCE) contaminated aquifers. Results from this
initial work suggested that foam facilitated transport of specialized
microorganisms into subsurface aquifer sediments would result in the remediation
of DNAPLs through mobilization and dispersion of the DNAPL and delivery of
viable organisms for biodegradation. Objectives for the Phase II study include
optimizing the foam and bacterial injection in order to maximize the scouring of
the DNAPL and to enhance bacterial survival and TCE-degradation. In addition,
this technology will be tested with: 1) numerous sediment types, 2) weathered
sediment, and 3) other DNAPL contaminants. Data collected from the Phase II work
will be used to develop a mathematical model to predict the fate of DNAPLs
(extent of TCE mobilization and rate of TCE degradation) under field conditions.
This model will be used to identify factors effecting the mobilization and
degradation of TCE in the subsurface and will be used to design and predict
field remediation efforts. Potential Commercial Applications of the Research
Development of this technology will lead to a cost effective in situ
bioaugmentation technology for treating even the most highly TCE-contaminated
aquifers. Chlorinated solvent contamination of aquifers is one of the most
common environmental liabilities at both government and industrial sites,
therefore a process that can cost-effectively solve this problem will most
likely be a commercial success.