* 9710568
* Characterization of High-Density Interconnect Structures    for High Speed Digital and Wireless Communications Applica- tions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Kathleen Melde, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/1999
* USD 59,420.00

9710568 Virga Research Activities - This research is directed at characterizing
the performance behavior of high-density interconnect and distribution
structures employed in compact high-speed digital and wireless communications
circuit packages, The primary focus is to develop advanced measurement-based
characterization techniques for complex, three-dimensional (3-D), multi-layer,
interconnect structures. Examples of complex interconnects include non-ideal
(non-circular and non solid) multi-layer vias, many closely-spaced vertical
conductors, fuzz buttons, and transitions between vertical and horizontal
conductors. Embedded interconnects are typically inaccessible in a package, thus
there are currently no means to directly measure individual structures. Since
advanced high-density circuit packages incorporate very mixed-signal
technologies, such as digital, analog, and RF signal conductor traces, hybrid
measurement methods must be developed to accurately identify interconnect
performance. High payoff is achieved when measurement results are linked with
advanced packaging design simulation tools. The coordination of computer-aided
design (CAD) and computer aided test (CAT) results in improved first past design
success and enables the rapid development of novel, low-cost advanced packaging
technologies. The research will involve both time-domain and frequency-domain
measurement techniques. The work will entail a balance between microwave-based
(scattering parameters) and microelectronics-based (unique voltages and
currents) methodologies. The specific objectives of this research are develop
advanced measurement methodologies based upon a hybrid of time-domain and
frequency-domain approaches as well as microwave and microelectronics based
approaches for three dimensional embedded interconnect structures employed in
high-speed digital and wireless circuits, develop links between measured
characteristics and circuit analysis and design simulation tools, characterize a
few complex inter connect structures and make test results available to code
developers to be used as benchmarks for comparisons with high performance
simulation tools. The research will first involve defining various advanced 3-D
interconnects for high-speed digital, RF, microwave, and MEMS (Micro-
Electromechanical Systems) packaging. The theoretical background and
implementation details of current measurement techniques for calibration and
interconnect de-embedding will be evaluated. New measurement techniques that
overcome the fundamental limitations of existing methods will be developed. Such
methods will be developed from hybridizing time-domain &amp; frequency-domain
techniques. The new methods will be used to provide accurate calibrations that
do not rely on unrealistic packaging assumptions. Interconnect de-embedding and
statistical-based interconnect characterization will also be developed. Several
structures will be fabricated in order to provide validations to the new
approaches. The last part of the research will be geared toward creating links
between measured interconnect characteristics and design simulation tools. One
novel approach to use in these links is the space-mapping technique that has
been successfully used in the simulation-based optimization of some microwave
circuits. ***