* 9710244
* Human Settlements and Changing Landscape in Northern China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* George Rapp, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2000
* USD 48,220.00

Civilization arose independently in many areas of the world and archaeologists
wish to understand the underlying processes responsible for this phenomenon. To
achieve this goal they have worked to reconstruct each of the individual cases
and then compare them to look for common patterns. In Northern China this
development culminated in the emergence of the Shang dynasty. While Chinese
archaeologists have studied the ceramics and other objects produced by the Shang
and have focused on major sites such as Anyang, the last Shang capital, very
little is understood of how this complex society developed and functioned. With
National Science Foundation support Dr. Rapp and his Chinese collaborators will
initiate a long term collaborative project directed at this question. The
research has two aspects. The first involves a regional survey of the Huan River
valley in which Anyang is located. Preliminary work indicates the presence of
numerous archaeological sites some of which date back to Paleolithic times.
Through a study of the distribution of sites, their age and their location in
the landscape it is possible to delineate settlement systems, to infer social
and economic relationships and to determine how these changed over time. The
team will conduct extensive survey as well as limited excavation and they will
collect many sediment cores. Given the geologically active nature of river
valleys and the cumulative effect of thousands of years of human impact, one can
not assume that the landforms and pattern of vegetation one observes today were
constant over time. Through the analysis of cores it is possible to gain insight
into such changes. This work will be complemented by an extensive environmental
reconstruction program. This will include coring, geomorphological analysis, and
collection and examination of pollen and macro botanical remains. Magnetic
susceptibility measurements will be used to reconstruct climatic changes. This
research is important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of
the processes which led to the rise of civilization. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists and it will help to introduce into Chinese
archaeology a set of techniques widely used in the United States but rarely
employed in China.