* 9710616
* Models, Data, Technology, and Politics: Climate Science in  Historical Context
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,07/20/1999
* Paul Edwards, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/20/1999
* USD 105,328.00

This proposal would support final research and writing of a book on three key
aspects of climate science as it has evolved since World War II: climate models
(especially global general circulation models), networks for gathering global
meteorological data, and new technologies for modeling, data collection, and
data treatment (primarily computers and satellites). Developments in these
areas-the most essential underpinnings of modern climate science-were tightly
intertwined and interdependent. The book will illuminate the significance of
these interdependencies by framing them within a broader political history.
Early weather and climate models were developed in a Cold War context, including
weather and climate control as possible weapons of war. Later in the Cold War,
with the International Geophysical Year and successor international projects,
international collaboration for data collection served as part of a trust-
building agenda. With the rise of the environmental movement, global climate
change began to achieve recognition as a policy issue. Anthropogenic global
warming became an important public policy issue beginning in 1988. Since then,
global climate change has been among the most hotly debated science-based policy
issues in the international arena. Involving library and archival research and
oral history interviews, this project will result in numerous articles and
presentations, as well as one of the first book-length histories of climate
science. The book will explain how such models work, where climate data come
from and how they are processed, and how technological development has
influenced the nature of knowledge about climate change. It will also treat the
important topic of science/policy interaction. Finally, the book will contribute
to our understanding of a crucial, but insufficiently studied form of
globalization: the dissemination of scientific knowledge, techniques, and
instrumentation. Global data networks require high levels of standardization,
creating new commonalities in practice and understanding worldwide. With the
emergence of climate politics, they are among the forces creating concepts of
global systems, global problems, and global common interests.