* 9710963
* Constructing a Supranational Constitution: The Reception and Enforcement of European Community Law by National Courts
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Alec Stone, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 02/28/2001
* USD 230,227.00

Abstract Stone 9710963 This project is a competitive renewal of an ongoing
investigation that seeks to account for the dynamics and mechanics of European
legal integration, the process by which the European Community has constructed a
transnational rule of law polity. The first stage of the project focused on
collection, coding, and analyzing data; developing a theory of legal
integration; and testing a set of hypotheses, derived from the theory, against
the data. The new work involves intensive analysis of litigation, judicial
decisionmaking, and the impact of this decisionmaking on national and
supranational policy outcomes in three domains of EC law: the free movement of
goods, gender equality, and environmental protection. Analyses of data are
focusing on how and with what effect individuals, companies and national and
transnational interest groups are able to use national courts to obtain policy
change, and the extent to which intra-judicial interaction and decisionmaking
shape policy making at the national and supranational levels. This research
addresses important concerns of international relations theory and redirects
attention from ECJ's case law which has been amply studied to the impact of that
case law on policymaking and adjudication processes. %%% This project is a
competitive renewal of an ongoing investigation that seeks to account for the
dynamics and mechanics of European legal integration, the process by which the
European Community has constructed a transnational rule of law polity. The first
stage of the project focused on collection, coding, and analyzing data;
developing a theory of legal integration; and testing a set of hypotheses,
derived from the theory, against the data. The new work involves intensive
analysis of litigation, judicial decisionmaking, and the impact of this
decisionmaking on national and supranational policy outcomes in three domains of
EC law: the free movement of goods, gender equality, and environmental
protection. Analy ses of data are focusing on how and with what effect
individuals, companies and national and transnational interest groups are able
to use national courts to obtain policy change, and the extent to which intra-
judicial interaction and decisionmaking shape policy making at the national and
supranational levels. This research addresses important concerns of
international relations theory and redirects attention from ECJ's case law which
has been amply studied to the impact of that case law on policymaking and
adjudication processes. ***