* 9710990
* SBIR Phase II:  Diatom Transformation for Product           Enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/2000
* F. C. Thomas Allnutt, Martek Biosciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 09/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to advance the
number of tools available for manipulation of algae, specifically diatoms, for
commercial purposes. Relatively little effort has gone into molecular
manipulation of algae. Most of the algal molecular biology effort has been
concentrated on a handful of species. Advances in microalgal molecular biology
have not kept up with the rest of molecular biology and application to
commercially important species is lacking. Until the Phase I research, no
molecular manipulation of diatoms was reported. During Phase I, we developed the
techniques to transform diatoms for the first time. Simultaneously, another
laboratory reported that they developed methods for transformation of another
diatom. So we were one of the first two groups to transform diatoms. Now the
challenge is to continue this research to perfect the methods of diatom
manipulation and provide a commercial payoff for this research. Phase II
research will focus on perfecting transformation techniques for diatoms. We will
apply these optimized techniques to a number of different diatoms, expanding
from our current test organism, Phaeodactylum tricornutum. The existing fcp
promoters will be analyzed and quantified to determine the best promoters to
utilize. The fcp promoters will also be analyzed for application in other
diatoms and several other microalgal systems. We will be exploring ways to
change the fatty acid profiles of these diatoms to further commercial
utilization of the oil produced. A number of different strategies will also be
evaluated that could lower the cost of production of diatoms. Since Martek is a
company committed to single cell oil production, an obvious area for exploration
and eventual exploitation is the oleagenous diatoms. We have identified a number
of strains that produce commercially important oils. This research will explore
ways to manipulate these algae to make the oils they produce economically
feasible. In addition, a number of diatom strains are important aquacultural
feeds. Another of Martek's focus areas is aquacultural feeds. We will also work
to make some of these diatoms more attractive to use as a feed by lowering their
production costs or adding additional characteristics that enhance their use as
a feed.