* 9710403
* The Reliability of Survey Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Duane Alwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2000
* USD 129,407.00

This is a methodological study of the reliability of survey data. Given the
heavy reliance of the social, economic and behavioral sciences on the results of
surveys and other question-answer methods of gathering important data, it is
essential to know the overall reliability or dependability of survey results.
This project will conduct a systematic analysis of the measurement of
reliability of responses to survey questions, to better understand the nature of
survey data and the processes by which they are generated. A secondary goal is
to make practical recommendations about the attributes of survey questions that
will maximize their reliability of measurement. The unit of analysis is the
survey question. The project will assemble a database for survey questions,
consisting of question-level information on reliability and question
characteristics for more than 1,000 variables from six large-scale panel surveys
of national populations in the U.S., which will provide a basis for testing
several hypotheses regarding variation in reliability of survey measurement. The
survey interview is conceived of as a method for gathering information, which
involves a number of critical elements --comprehension, accessibility,
retrieval, and communication -- that play a role in affecting the quality of
data. These factors are theorized to contribute to measurement errors in a way
that can be linked to the survey question and the context of measurement. In
contrast to other approaches, this research will estimate the reliability of
single survey questions, and will examine variations in reliability as a
function of differences in the method of analysis. Specifically, the project
will compare estimates of reliability based on structural equation models with
those based on Rasch models based on item-response theory, and will explore
categoric data approaches to the same set of issues. The approach taken relies
on multi-wave panel data for the estimation of reliability. Six such panel
studies from probabi lity samples of the U.S. will be used: 1) the 1956-58-60
National Election Study (NES) panel, 2) the 1972-74-76 NES panel, 3) the
1990-91-92 NES panel, 4) the 1992-93-94 NES panel, 5) the 1986-94 Americans'
Changing Lives (ACL) panel study, and 6) the Study of American Families (SAF)
1980-85-93 three-wave panel on young adults and more than 5 waves on their
mothers, dating to 1961. The research will address the following question areas:
a) How reliable are survey data in general? b) Does reliability of measurement
depend on the nature of the content being measured? In particular, is factual
information gathered more precisely than attitudinal and/or other subjective
data? And, do types of nonfactual questions (attitudes, beliefs and self-
assessments) differ in reliability? c) Does reliability of measurement vary as a
function of the properties of the approach to measurement? In the case of
factual data, are proxy reports as reliable as self-reports? How reliable are
interviewer observations? d) Does the nature of the question affect the quality
of data? For example, in attitude measurement, how is reliability affected by
the nature of the question-phrasing, the number of response categories, the
extent of verbal labeling, and other properties of the response format? e) With
respect to attitude and other subjective data, is reliability affected by
changing the context of the questions? The research proposes to assess questions
in these areas within the framework of a set of working hypotheses derived from
theory and research experience on the sources of measurement errors. Simply put,
the analysis will focus on explaining variation in reliability due to these
several factors. Assembling information on measurement reliability from the
panel surveys will not only improve knowledge about the strengths and weaknesses
of particular forms of survey measurement but will also lay the groundwork for
developing a large-scale data base on survey measurement reliability that can
addr ess basic issues of data quality in the social, economic and behavioral
sciences. Increased knowledge regarding these aspects of data quality will help
evaluate techniques for gathering survey data and will improve the quality of
survey measurement.