* 9710717
* SBIR PHASE II: High Temperature Superconducting Materials   Development for High Power Radio Frequency and Microwave    Components
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Kolagani Harshavardhan, NEOCERA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 02/29/2000
* USD 299,986.00

9710717 Harshavardhan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
has the primary objective of developing high temperature superconducting (HTS)
films with a high power handling capability for high power RF (radio frequency)
and microwave components. Even though HTS thin film components exhibit very
high-Q values, their power handling capability is often limited, imposing
restrictions on the range of possible applications. Power handling capability of
HTS films continues to be a challenging arena requiring improvements. Leveraging
on several successful advances made in the area of epitaxial HTS thin films and
prototype device development on various technologically important substrates,
the proposer explored new materials with possible high power handling
capability. The approach combined improved superconducting microwave properties
in Ag-doped YBCO films with the design flexibility offered by a low dielectric
constant substrate (MgF2) in achieving this goal. Microwave measurements have
been carried out. Parallel Plate Resonators made from the YBCO films on MgF show
no inter- modulation products within 41 dB of the carrier at surface field
strengths of up to 0.5 mT at 77-80 K indicating a possible high power handling
capability in these films. Based on the success achieved in Phase I, the
proposer will, refine the materials properties of AG:YBCO for optimum
performance in the Phase II program. By further refining the AG:YBCO materials
base, they will build prototype band pass filters with high power handling
capability (30-40 dBm) operating at 77 K in the frequency range around 2 GHz and
10 GHz. The major reduction in volume and weight together with improved
performance of such devices in emerging high performance Transmit/Receive
systems have a large market potential both in defense and civilian
telecommunications. ***