* 9710655
* SBIR Phase II:  Cloning and Automated Screening of Genes Encoding Cold-Adapted Lipases From Bacteria  Inhibiting Lipid-Rich Whale Skeletons
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Dan Robertson, Diversa Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/1999
* USD 281,229.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop
recombinant esterases and lipases for use in detergent and other industrial
applications. To reduce the need for high temperature wash conditions and
thereby conserve energy, the detergent industry has targeted high specific
activity/low temperature lipases for use in detergent formulations. During Phase
I of this work recombinant `environmental` DNA libraries were constructed from
uncultivated bacteria encrusting lipid-rich whale skeletons located in deep sea
basins. To subsist on the copious lipids exuding from the whale skeletons in
this frigid (2-5 degree C) environment, members of these diverse bacterial
communities manufacture cold-adapted enzymes. Recombinant expression clones were
discovered from the whale environmental libraries during the Phase I work using
high throughput screening methods. In Phase II the esterases and lipases
expressed from these clones will be overexpressed and characterized kinetically
to determine their suitability for use in detergent and other industrial
applications. In addition, the discovery and screening processes will be
optimized to generate a large collection of esterase and lipase genes that will
serve as templates for a directed evolution project to create enzymes with high
activity at low temperatures yet that are stable at high temperatures. This work
will result in a collection of stable cold-active enzymes with the long shelf
life required for enzymes in detergent formulations. Potential Commercial
Applications of the Research Detergent formulations, anti-stalling and ripening
agents for food and beverage applications, interesterification processes in
chemical industry.