* 9710980
* SBIR PHASE II: Illustrated, Interactive, American Sign      Language/Science Videodisk Dictionary
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Laurel McLagan, Technology International Incorporated of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Technology
International Incorporated of Virginia (located in LaPlace, LA) focuses on
research leading to a complete set of specifications of features and
applications of a computer-based, illustrated, interactive American Sign
Language/Science (ASL) Dictionary for deaf and hearing impaired children. Since
deaf and hearing impaired children have a greater challenge in gaining fluency
in English, traditional dictionaries are often of limited value as a means to
acquiring knowledge. The goal of this research project is to provide a means of
expressing, teaching, and learning technical terms and science concepts in ASL
as well as in English, using a format that makes academic content more
accessible to children who are deaf and which promotes self-study. The outcome
of the Phase II research will be identification of the content, user-interface,
and mode of presentation of the dictionary as well as incorporation of ASL
features in a way that is unavailable in the extant educational material
designed for deaf children. The combination of ASL, written English, animation
and graphics will enhance the learning of the English terms and the underlying
science concepts. The software architecture of the dictionary will allow for
implementation on IBM-compatible and Macintosh platforms, as well as allowing
accessibility over the World Wide Web. As a resource, the Multimedia ASL Science
Dictionary has various applications in the special education arena, inasmuch as
it would reinforce both the learning of sign language as well as science
concepts among children who are deaf. The concept can be applied to a diverse
body of education materials for a wide range of population, such as illustrated
dictionaries for adults, games, entertainment, and training products. In
particular, the utility of the concept of such a dictionary extends to materials
for English-as-a-Second Language (ESL) learners.