* 9710948
* SBIR PHASE II: Improved Accuracy for Student/Scientist      Networks
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Thomas Carter, ADA Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 05/31/2001
* USD 296,153.00

*** 9710948 Carter This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project from
ADA Technologies, Inc. addresses a fundamental difficulty encountered by a
number of groups that desire to have networked students collect scientifically
valid data for use by scientists. The challenge is to have students collect
accurate data which has been scientifically validated without sacrificing the
educational aspects of the program. An example network might measure the pH,
dissolved oxygen, and temperature in a river from its head waters to its outlet
as an indication of the river's environmental condition. ADA Technologies
proposes to address this issue of data accuracy and validation by using a unique
set of hardware developed by ADA along with unique software algorithms to be
developed under this Phase II project. The hardware includes a low-cost, hand-
held, four channel data logger with a set of self-identifying sensor modules.
The unique calibration and data tagging aspects of this system provide an
opportunity for data tracking that does not exist for any other product. All
this information will be processed using innovative software algorithms which
will perform a number of internal consistency tests to validate the data. These
checks will be part of an education organizational model that will help students
learn critical thinking skills and can be replicated in all the network
programs. This model will link students with scientists and promote direct
interaction focused around a specific scientific goal. The aim of this program
is to develop an organizational model combined with unique hardware and software
that can aid networks in gathering scientifically valid data while insuring an
educationally significant experience for the students. This project will lead to
commercial data acquisition and analysis tools for use in science classrooms.
The capability of involving students in an authentic scientific research effort
prepares students for a future in a scientifically and technologic ally-oriented
society as well as teaches them much of what they must learn in a science
course. ***