* 9710958
* Mass Political Conflict: Origins and Impact on Political    Change
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2001
* USD 192,381.00

This is a study of the origins and consequences of mass political conflict. The
project will achieve three goals: (1) develop multi-dimensional indicators of
mass political conflict; (2) analyze the sources of mass conflict and associated
changes in civil society during the Cold War and post-Cold War periods; and (3)
examine the impact of mass conflict on democratization and political crises.
Most political conflict is non-violent and occurs in the context of
institutionalized civil society. It can be conceptualized in terms of three
distinct dimensions, along which individual cases may vary: (1) contentiousness
(or extra-institutionality); (2) coerciveness (intensity of negative sanctions);
and (3) violent outcomes. This project will use behavioral measures to map
recent global trends in these dimensions on an annualized basis between 1980 and
1998 and construct indicators that are backward compatible with the conflict and
political change indicators in the World Handbook of Political and Social
Indicators, thus creating a continuous time-series of 50 years. Mass conflict
will be examined in terms of relative deprivation, resource mobilization and
dependency theories, alongside newer theories about international political
opportunities, ecological arguments about population pressure, ethnic
competition processes, and state repression as contributing to conflict
escalation. In addressing civil society, the research examines market
development and ecological evolutionary explanations alongside religious and
structural constraints on democratization. Democratization is examined as a
process of stable regime transition driven by non-violent protest as well as
elite bargaining and social structural facilitation. Analyses will rely on
descriptive trend, lagged panel, pooled time-series and event history
techniques. The research will employ innovative automated event coding
techniques to analyze text from the Reuters World Newswire. The coding system is
based on the Kansas Events Dat a System (KEDS) parser, and it uses the Protocol
for Nonviolent Direct Action (PANDA) which defines the rules linking word
phrases to coded events. This research will contribute to the important current
debates about the future of civil politics around the world. It will provide an
improved understanding of the factors that cause ethnic wars, genocides and
state breakdowns that threaten the social fabric, or that manage potential
conflicts peacefully. The research employs innovative computer techniques for
analyzing written text, and thus it is a testing ground for improving these new
tools that are so crucial for the future information infrastructure.