* 9710148
* Economic Evaluations, Issue Activation and Party Support:   The European Union and the British Party System
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Marianne Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2001
* USD 100,000.00

In late 20th century democracies, a party's standing with the electorate can
change very rapidly. Great Britain provides an excellent example - - the massive
reversals of fortune experienced by the Conservative and Labour parties since
the April, 1992 general election demonstrate how party support can vary greatly
over short time periods. Although political scientists long have been interested
in such dynamics, efforts to develop theoretical models capable of explaining
them have provoked heated controversies, and important disputes remain
unresolved. The proposed study is designed to address several of the most
significant debates, and thereby illuminate forces shaping the prospects of
individual parties and party systems as a whole in Britain and other
contemporary mature democracies. Building on prior research, the current
investigation is especially timely because it investigates factors affecting
party support in Britain at a critical juncture in that country's relationship
with the European Union. Analyses show that the set of issues activated by the
development of that relationship, as envisaged under the terms of the Maastricht
Treaty, has exerted strong effects on public support for British parties and
their leaders in the early and mid-1990s. Injected into the political arena by
provisions of that treaty, EU issues such as the single European currency will
continue to exercise significant effects during the fire-year period (1997-2002)
encompassed by the proposed project. The project constitutes an extremely cost-
effective means of gathering the time series data essential for investigating
the evolution and impact of public attitudes toward the issues posed by the EU
in the context of developing and testing rival models of the dynamics of public
support for political parties and their leaders. The data are generated by
questions placed on 48 consecutive monthly national surveys conducted by the
British Gallup organization. Questions asked include the standard British
Election study battery on party identification, evaluations and (dis)approval of
Britain's membership in the European Union, and evaluations of and emotional
reactions to national and personal economic conditions. These questions are
supplemented by standard Gallup questions concerning vote intentions, past vote,
prime ministerial and opposition party leader approval, the relative competence
of major parties to manage the country's economy, and a variety of important
sociodemographic characteristics This dataset will be of immense value to other
scholars interested in the topic.