* 9710640
* SBIR Phase II:  A Compact Betatron for Nondestructive       Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Charles Gary, Adelphi Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 11 project could significantly
reduce the cost of radiologic nondestructive assessment. Adelphi proposes to
construct an inexpensive compact betatron, capable of high-flux x-ray emisson,
for the purpose of Nondestructive Evaluation (NDE) in civil structures. The
proposed x-ray source would replace more expensive RF linacs and thereby reduce
the cost of radiological equipment. In conventional betatrons, eddy-current
losses in the iron limit the frequency and the maximum field, thereby limiting
the output beam power. With the use of proprietary low-loss, high-frequency
materials, higher driving frequencies permit much higher x-ray fluxes while
still reducing the size of the source. Radiologic NDE requires just such an
inexpensive x-ray source to provide rapid, high signal-to-noise analyses. As a
proof of principle, a prototype betatron x-ray source will be constructed and
tested. The proposed research will demonstrate that the betatron will provide an
x-ray flux necessary for rapid evaluation of concrete structures up to 70 cm
thick. The betatron-based x-ray source developed under this proposal will find
immediate commercial application as a replacement for the linacs currently used
in industrial NDE. A second application for such an inexpensive high-flux x-ray
source is radiotherapy treatment of cancer in developing countries.