* 9710358
* Workshop on Shallow Drilling Systems for U.S. Antarctic     Program Research Vessels, August 1997
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Sherwood Wise, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 22,190.00

Wise and Janecek OPP 9710358 This award supports the activities of a committee
of marine geologists, designated SHALDRIL (shallow drilling), to investigate the
technical feasibility of installing a shallow drilling system on vessels of the
US Antarctic Program (USAP). The committee held an organizational meeting in
December, 1996, at which it discussed several existing systems that might be
suitable for use on USAP vessels. Some of the systems are still in development,
but two seemed particularly promising for use in Antarctic waters. These are 1)
The Dolphin in situ sampling and testing system by Fugro McClelland Marine
Geosciences, Inc., Houston, Texas, and 2) the Terrabor system developed by A/S
Terrabor-Namsos in collaboration with the Institute of Solid Earth Geophysics-
Bergen, both located in Norway. The SHALDRIL committee plans to hold a workshop
in late August, 1997, to further evaluate these drilling systems with a goal of
field testing one or more of them on USAP ships in the near future. Prior to the
August workshop, however, an technical evaluation of the suitability and
feasibility of installing these systems on the USAP ships Nathaniel B. Palmer
and L. M. Gould must be carried out by a professional engineer. With that
information in hand, the committee can then consider recommending future field
tests and eventually field studies. This award provides funds to support the
SHALDRIL committee's activities during 1997, namely to 1) commission the
engineering study of the candidate drilling systems, and 2) to cover the costs
of its meeting in late August. This meeting is expected to be held in or near
Tallahassee, Florida, over a three day period.