* 9710208
* Ethnic Minorities and Political Support: An Examination of Attitudes in Three Former Soviet Republics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Lowell Barrington, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 06/30/2000
* USD 199,977.00

How loyal are ethnic minorities to their state of residence? How supportive are
they of its political system and political leaders? If variation exists within a
given minority, what explains this variation at the individual level? Is
political support by ethnic minorities a rational calculation or is it the
result of subjective, identity-related factors? These are the central questions
of this research investigation to be undertaken in three former Soviet
republics: Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. The investigators combine mass
surveys and focus groups to examine the attachment of minorities, especially
ethnic Russians outside Russia, to their state of residence and their level of
support for its institutions. The project addresses four major shortcomings in
the existing literature on attitudes in the post-Communist states: the emphasis
on attitudes within Russia; the dominance of aggregate level data analysis; the
confusion of the elements of political support; and, the limited use of multiple
methods within a given study. This multi-country, multi-method study produces a
better understanding than now exists of the reasons for `political support` by
an ethnic minority, variation in it within a given ethnic group, and variation
in it from newly independent state to newly independent state. Understanding
such support and its variation enables scholars to make sense of the puzzle of
why we have ethnic conflict in one post-Soviet state and not another, and it
will help in understanding the future of ethnic nationalism and relations
between Russia and its neighbors. The implications for this understanding thus
include both a better ability to understand and predict domestic and
international politics in the region and a better understanding of the types of
policies and practices that Western countries and international organizations
should be encouraging in the former Soviet Union. The dataset to be produced
will be of great value to scholars interested in exploring this topic.