* 9710145
* The Long-Term Profitability of Automobile Leasing
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Julie Hunsaker Seiler, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1998
* USD 14,865.00

Since 1990 car leasing has grown rapidly. In 1994, three million vehicles, one
out of every four cars and trucks, were leased. Some automobile executives
expect that, by the year 2000, half of all cars and trucks will be leased. In
the short run, leasing is profitable because dealers reduce new car inventory.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the recent surge in automobile leasing stems
from substantial increases in new car prices in the face of stagnant wages.
Consumers prefer leasing because of its greater affordability - the down payment
is minimal and monthly payments are lower. Proponents of leasing also argue that
it creates brand loyalty. A Ford Motor Company study finds that those who lease
their products are twice as satisfied as traditional buyers. Skepticism over the
long-term profitability of leasing arises because of uncertainty surrounding the
used car market. After a car's lease expires, it is returned to the manufacturer
who must sell it in the secondary market. There is a risk that consumers will
view these low-mileage, well-maintained cars as a good substitute for a new car
and firms may end up competing with themselves. Furthermore, a firm's finance
arm is at risk. A customer who leases a car only pays for the proportion of the
vehicle's worth she uses. Companies determine a consumer's payments by
estimating the car's wholesale value at the end of the lease (i.e. residual
value). A flood of off-lease cars to the used car market as well as other
unforeseen events could result in a resale price lower than expected. Ex post,
the company discovers that the consumer's monthly payments were too low and it
loses money on the lease. In order to analyze the profitability of leasing in a
theoretical framework, one needs to accurately capture the benefits and risks of
this marketing tool. The issues mentioned above are for the most part ignored in
the research on durable goods. With few exceptions, the existing literature
focuses on durable good monopoly, which is not appropriate for investigating
brand loyalty. Research on switching costs does not examine durable goods. In
addition, the ability of the secondary market to limit the profitablility of the
primary leasing market is unexplored. Optimal maintenance and its effect on the
quality of cars in the secondary market also plays an important role. This
project analyzes a theoretical model which extends durable goods research by
allowing for brand loyalty and by endogenizing the consumer maintenance choice
for rented goods. A two-period model in which duopolists produce a horizontally
differentiated durable good is examined. Firms lease new products at the
beginning of each period and later sell the used goods in a perfectly
competitive market when the lease expires. The firms generate brand loyalty by
offering a contract for maintenance which stipulates lower fines for loyal
customers. These results are compared to a situation whereby firms sell new
goods each period. The results of this preliminary model are then used to
develop a theoretical model which provides conditions under which firms offer
both sales and leasing contracts in equilibrium. There are plans to test the
theoretical results empirically.