* 9710129
* Benign Synthesis, Bioremediation and Safer Chemical Design: Factors in P450-Substrate Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,02/11/1999
* Barry Goldstein, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 02/11/1999
* USD 206,772.00

9710129 Jones This proposal details studies on the use of cytochrome P450
enzymes in the pursuit of green chemistry. Studies on the nature of P450-ligand
interactions will be exploited as a biocatalyst to design an innovative
synthesis for the industrially important carboxylic acid, 2-ethylhexanoate. The
biocatalysis pathway will lead to pollution prevention since it will obviate the
need for toxic and carcinogenic heavy metals in this synthesis. This synthesis
was chosen as a model for how the P450 enzyme family can be exploited as a
biocatalyst in general. These same studies will be used to develop predictive
methodology that can be exploited in the design of safer chemicals. The
predictive methodology will allow for rapid decision making about the potential
of bioactivation in the development of new chemicals. Thus, less toxic chemicals
can be designed into chemicals for new applications and potentially hazardous
chemical identified rapidly. The cytochromes P450 are a ubiquitous family of
enzymes that catalyze the reduction of molecular oxygen to a very reactive
monooxygen species. This enzyme system is responsible for the metabolism of both
endogenous and exogenous chemicals. The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme family has
been called the most versatile biological catalyst known. This trait is a double
edged sword that makes the CYP enzyme family a diverse detoxifier of chemicals,
as well as, the major enzyme system responsible for the production of toxic
metabolites. Thus, while the enzymeis important in biosynthetic reactions, it is
also important in bioactivation of benign chemicals to carcinogens and toxins.
The general objective of this proposal is to understand the structural factors
that govern cytochrome P450-ligand interactions. Active site mutants of P450cam
will be constructed and kinetically characterized. Structural information from
these mutants, gained from Xray crystallography and molecular dynamics studies,
will define factors important in substrate binding to P450cam. This information
can be used in the design of P450 mutants to perform benign synthesis, in the
design of safer chemicals and in the design of P450 enzymes for bioremediation.
While the development of bacteria for bioremediation is not within the scope of
this grant, the results obtained during this project will be directly applicable
to this endeavor. Furthermore, general knowledge about the mechanism of ligand-
enzyme interactions, that can be applied to enzyme systems other than P450, will
be obtained. The following are the specific objectives of this proposal: (1.1)
Produce P450cam active-site mutants F87W, Y96W, L244A, and T185F. (1.2)
Chemically and kinetically characterize regio- and stereospecificity of
oxidations to the industrially important product 2-ethylhexanoic acid by the
wild-type and mutant enzymes. (1.3) Study enzyme-ligand interactions at the
active site using molecular dynamics. (1.4) Test the dynamics models by
examination of crystal structures of the enzyme and enzyme-ligand complexes. ***