* 9710789
* In-Situ X-ray Structural Study of Electrode less-           Metallization Using a Chemical Deposition Process
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 59,999.00

9710789 Martinez-Miranda Nanometer size particles or films of materials have
structural, electrical and mechanical properties that differ from those of the
bulk material, due to confinement effects and the presence of a large number of
interfaces. These materials have potential new applications in devices. Their
use as device elements depends on the careful control of the materials'
properties, achieved through the careful control of the processing methods used
to develop these materials. Many methods are used to prepare nanoscale
materials. This proposal concentrates on the analysis of materials grown by
solution chemistry, specifically using a non-aqueous, alcohol-based route known
as the polyol method. Scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory have used this
method in the metallization of electronic ceramic substrates. Little information
exists about the process of metal precipitation on the substrate, and of the
eventual process of nucleation and film growth. Similarly, the structural
evolution of the film during the deposition process is not known. This proposal
describes a collaborative effort to study the in-situ structural evolution of
metal deposition on AIN substrates between the University of Maryland and the
Naval Research Laboratory. Film structure can be probed using diffraction
methods. The project consists of two activities: 1. the development of a
deposition cell suitable for in-situ diffraction studies; 2. An in-situ combined
grazing incidence asymmetric Bragg (GIAB) diffraction study and small angle
x-ray scattering (SAXS) study of film evolution during deposition. This study
will examine the following issues: 1. the possible existence of predeposition
nanometer size agglomerates; 2. the formation of (reaction) layers during the
first stages of deposition; 3. metal deposit evolution. These two activities
combine expertise available at the University of Maryland (characterization) and
at the Naval Research Laboratory. The activities will expand the charac
terization capabilities available at the University of Maryland as well as
provide an increase understanding of how processing parameters affect film
formation. This project will impact other potential collaborations involving the
solution-based deposition of magnetic multilayers and ceramic materials' films
and particles. ***