* 9710181
* Cataloging and Computerizing the Paul S. Martin Collection  of Archaeological Materials at The Field Museum
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Jonathan Haas, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2001
* USD 172,919.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Field Museum of Natural History
will construct an up to date catalogue of items in the Paul S. Martin
Archaeological Collection, enter it into an electronic data base and make this
available via the Museum's World Wide Web connection. Martin spent his
archaeological career, which began in the 1930s and spanned more than 40 years,
in the U.S.Southwest. His excavations and resultant collections constitute a
unique national resource representing the coordinated efforts of a single
individual in two relatively small areas: southwest Colorade and East Central
Arizona/West Central New Mexico. Martin surveyed and excavated extensively in
both areas and brought back to the Field Museum large systematic samples of his
fieldwork. They are accompanied by extensive notes and photographs which make
them useful for addressing many modern research questions. Martin was meticulous
in his methods of excavation and survey and his work provides a solid data base
for exploring issues of evolutionary precess, social relations, culture history
and human behavior. Not only is a large corpus of ceramics and lithic artifacts
represented, but hte materials include tens of thousands of corn cobs, seeds and
other archaeobotanical samples which can be used to understand plant genetics,
evolution and past environments. Currently, much of the collection is
uncatalogued and the previously catalogued items consist of litte more than an
electronic list. No detailed provenience information is included and there is
limited consistency to the artifact descriptions, artifact material types or
site characteristics. Therefore it is extremely difficult for researchers to use
the collection in an effective manner. With NSF support, the catalogued
information will be upgraded and the remaining materials will be entered into
the system. An electronic database will be constructed. All pertinent `hard
copy` records will be updated to agree with the corrected and upgraded
electronic databases. Provenience data and artifact descriptions will be entered
into the catalogue books. Access to the entire collection wiill ths be greatly
facilitated and greatlyh improved service can be provided to the large number of
archaeologists working in the Southwest USA. `