* 9710463
* Hydrodynamic Modeling of Impact Ionization Based on High- Energy Electron Subpopulation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Ting-wei Tang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2001
* USD 219,555.00

ECS-9710463 Ting -wei Tang Impact ionization is one of the most important
factors limiting the performance of today's advanced semiconductor devices. The
impact ionization is the source of hot-electron-induced device degradation and
is responsible for avalanche breakdown of transistors. The main issue of impact
ionization is the modeling of the impact ionization coefficient, (.
Conventionally ( is modeled as a function of electric field or the average
energy of total electron population. Unfortunately, these models do not properly
describe the non-local of impact ionization. In this research, we propose an
innovative approach to model ( as a unique function of the average energy of
only those high-energy exceed the impact ionization threshold energy. This
average macroscopic variable describes the behavior of ( more accurately than
the electric field or the average energy of total electron population. The
objective of this research is then to find a system of hydrodynamic transport
equations, when solved, will provide information about this macroscopic
variable. A preliminary investigation indicates that the system of transport
equations for the high-energy electron subpopulation can be reduced from three
to a single transport equation. This enables us to solve the transport equation
easily and use our newly developed novel impact ionization model as a post
processor to any existing device simulator which does not have an impact
ionization model. A great impact of this research on the computer-aided design
of semiconductor devices can be anticipated. The model can be readily
incorporated in existing device simulation tools for more accurate prediction of
impact ionization related phenomena occurring in the transistors, including the
prediction of the avalanche breakdown voltage. The additional computational cost
is very minimal.