* 9710380
* Transition Metal Catalyzed Olefin Polymerizations:          Mechanistic Studies and Catalyst Design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Maurice Brookhart, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 07/31/2001
* USD 400,000.00

Dr. Maurice Brookhart, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina -
Chapel Hill, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Program of the Chemistry Division, with a contribution for instrumentation from
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, for mechanistic and design studies of late transition
metal olefin polymerization catalysts. The major thrust of the project will be
the study of Ni(II) and Pd(II) complexes of bulky alpha-diimines, which have,
for example, the ability to control polymer chain branching through ligand
variation. Rigorous mechanistic studies of the polymerization reactions will be
carried out in order to gain understanding of the factors that control the
behavior of the catalysts and that determine the properties of the resultant
polymer. A variety of alpha-diimine based catalysts, with a variety of ligand
architectures, will be synthesized with the objective of probing the effect of
ligand structure on polymer microstructure and mechanisms of monomer
enchainment. These catalysts will be evaluated for the polymerization and
copolymerization of new monomers. Using insights from these studies new neutral
Ni(II) and Pd(II) catalyst systems will be prepared containing bulky bidentate
anionic ligands. These systems should exhibit great functional group tolerance
and be especially good catalysts for the copolymerization of ethylene and polar
olefins. Intensive research has been directed toward understanding fundamental
aspects of metal-catalyzed olefin polymerization and the results of these
studies have been used to develop new catalysts. These have been enormously
important contributions since over thirty billion pounds of polyolefin are
produced in the United States each year. Most of the commercial olefin
polymerization catalysts are based on early transition or lanthanide metals. In
this project a series of highly versatile late transition metal catalysts will
be investigated. These will provide fundamental information on how catalysts
join olefins to one another during the polymerization process as well as new
catalyst systems with potential industrial applications.