* 9710444
* Science in the American Vernacular:  Improvisations in      Natural History Across the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Katherine Pandora, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 06/30/2001
* USD 98,012.00

C.P. Snow's Rede Lecture in 1959 declared that the humanities and sciences had
grown so far apart that they had become `two cultures.` In the decades since
others have taken up the argument, contending that increased professionalization
and specialization in science have widened the rift. But concealed within many
versions of the `two cultures` argument is an implicit assumption that `science`
means `physical science,` or at least those sciences that most resemble the
physical sciences in their methods and conceptual organization. Throughout the
twentieth century, however, there have been forms of science within the United
States that are not easily categorized into either of the two cultures, and
which have, in fact, served as an intellectual commons for meetings among
researchers in various disciplines and for meetings among scientists and the lay
public. Natural history is perhaps the most powerfully resonant of such meeting
grounds, though there are others. Drawing on representative individuals selected
from areas of biology and the social sciences, this study will highlight areas
of scientific investigation that transcend or defy the two cultures. The project
will contribute to several fields within the history of science, particularly
those areas of research in which scholars are examining relations between
science and the polity, the nature of scientific change, and the development of
theories at the intersection of the social and biological sciences.