* 9710345
* The Body as Property:  Disputes Over the Control of Human   Tissue in a Biotechnology Age
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Lori Andrews, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

A series of scientific and commercial developments in the past decade relating
to the collection and use of body tissue raise profound issues for scientific
researchers, health care providers, health care institutions, patients, and
society at large. Blood, tissue, genes and other human body parts have become
valuable resources -- sources of information and raw materials for
pharmaceutical products. This is a study of the scientific, social, ethical and
legal underpinnings of a series of emerging disputes over the research, clinical
and commercial uses of body tissue. The project will analyze seven recent
disputes over body tissue. The disputes provide an opportunity to examine the
interests, the discourses and the stakes of the actors. Each case study will
explore the scientific and technological processes involved; the way scientists,
patients, consumer groups, and other participants in the process characterize
body tissue; the manner in which values such as the autonomy, privacy, and trust
in the scientific enterprise were evoked in the dispute; the social and legal
criteria that were discussed in resolving the dispute; the recommendations of
professional organizations about how the dispute should be handled; and the
implications for future scientific endeavors. Drawing upon theories emerging
from studies of the culture of the body and studies of resistance to new
technologies, the project will analyze the extent to which a conflict between
differing concepts of the body provoked the initial dispute and the extent to
which policy makers' failure to consider the social meaning of the body led to
further disputes. The information uncovered and analyzed will be available to
help those designing policies to better understand people's view of their bodily
materials and their expectations about the appropriate handling of those
materials. The research is intended to aid scientists, clinicians, judges, and
policy makers who are increasingly confronted with demands and concerns arising
from the collection, analysis, and use of body tissue. It will contribute to the
quality of decisions that to date have often been constrained by a limited
contextual understanding of the social meaning of body tissue. Products from the
project will be widely disseminated; they will include articles and
presentations, as well as a broadly accessible book, jointly authored by the two
principal investigators, a lawyer and a sociologist.