* 9710174
* Optical Stark and Zeeman Studies of Gas-Phase Metal         Containing Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Timothy Steimle, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2000
* USD 271,700.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Timothy Steimle of Arizona
State University in his continuing investigations into the geometrical and
molecular properties of small metal-containing transient molecules. The
permanent electric and magnetic dipole moments will be determined. The magnetic
hyperfine and nuclear electric quadrupole interactions will be analyzed and
combined with the dipole moments to construct a molecular orbital-based
description of trends in chemical bonding. Three experimental projects are
proposed: (i) the detection and characterization of small polyatomic transition
metal-containing compounds suspected to be products of simple model
organometallic reactions; (ii) the first Zeeman study of transition metal
dimers; and (iii) the detection and characterization of gas-phase gallium
nitride. Supersonic molecular beam samples will be generated using a laser
ablation/reaction scheme and high resolution laser-induced fluorescence spectra
in the presence of static electric and magnetic fields will be recorded. Time-
of-flight mass spectrometry employing resonance enhanced multi-photon ionization
techniques will be developed for the gallium nitride beam diagnostics. The
transition metal systems are important having relevance to catalysis, surface
chemistry, ligand field theory and ultimately to the understanding of electronic
and geometrical requirements for chemical reactivity. The particular study of
gallium nitride may eventually prove useful to the semiconductor industry.