* 9710360
* The Genetics Research Community in China - A Critical       History of its Formation and Development, 1920-1986
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Laurence Schneider, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,342.00

This project will produce a book-length history of experimental genetics in
China, from its inception in the 1920s through its post-Maoist efflorescence in
the 1980s. Of the very few case studies of modern Chinese science, this will be
the first one to span the Republican and Communist eras. Genetics has been
chosen because its history is exemplary, embodying a full range of issues faced
by China's natural science community, including the creation of a research
community from scratch, the role of foreign scientists in that creation process,
the involvement of the state, and the interplay of science and ideology. A
premise of the study is that historians, which concerned with such abstract
topics, must not lose sight of the actual research conducted by scientists,
because one cannot speak meaningfully about scientists and their community
without describing and evaluating their research. This case study will
demonstrate that, paralleling its accomplishments, there was a persistent and
growing ambivalence about the modern scientific enterprise in China, generally
expressed in nativist and populist conceptions of science. A broad range of
primary sources will be consulted for this history, including archival data from
Chinese universities and research institutes and from American philanthropic
foundations. Past research activities are accessible through publications of
universities and research institutes, and from conference proceedings.
Interviews with scientists and visits for genetics research facilities in China
complement the archival materials.