* 9710531
* Reciprocity in the Russian Labor Market: Its Role in the    Transition from State Socialism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Mark Granovetter, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2000
* USD 133,162.00

This is a study of the Russian labor market, using this empirical case to
develop fresh theoretical propositions on the role of social networks in
changing labor markets. Research on the transition from state socialism to a
"market" economy has stressed centralized allocation of goods and services and
the shift to allocation by market exchange. The work of Karl Polanyi is often
cited in this connection. Polanyi argued that there are three fundamental ways
that goods and services are allocated, each supported by an institutional
structure: redistribution, supported by strong central governments, exchange,
supported by free markets, and reciprocity, supported by symmetrical social
groupings which include social networks. Existing research slights the role of
reciprocity, typically invoking social networks as supports for redistribution
or exchange, but not clearly grasping their role as supporting reciprocity. This
project explores the possibility that reciprocity is in fact important both in
market and in state socialist societies, and that during complex transitions
such as those occurring in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, it takes
on an especially vital role. This study examines how working people in Russia
have coped with the tumultuous changes in the labor market brought on by
dramatic restructuring of both private and public enterprises, and the virtual
disappearance of many long-standing employers, accompanied by the rise of new
organizations and organizational forms. It will conduct a substantial survey in
Samara, a large industrial city in the Russian heartland, which will provide the
first systematic picture of how productive organizations and workers are being
matched under the conditions of transition. By studying a probability sample of
both firms and the workers themselves who find work in these firms, the study
will investigate the significance of restructuring, the origins of workers who
enter the newly developed private sector, the fate of workers cut loo se by the
shrinking of the public sector, and the strategies by which people may survive
and under some circumstances prosper, amidst these unprecedented changes. The
research focuses upon how labor market allocation is influenced by previously
existing ties between workers and employers, the continuing role of kinship
networks in directing workers to one or another work situation, and the extent
to which ties to previous or new political authorities results in influence that
has labor market consequences. Analysis of these survey results will give the
first full account from the ground up of how individual Russians have coped with
transition, and thus will help construct a fuller theoretical account of how
economic, political and social institutions are linked following the collapse of
state socialism.