* 9710223
* Investigation of Laminated High Saturation Magnetic Films on Sloping Surfaces &amp; High Data Rate Magnetic Recording
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Shan Wang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 09/30/2000
* USD 191,841.00

9710223 Shan Wang It is anticipated that the date rate of hard disk drives will
be ~ 100 MB/s in the beginning of the new millennium, corresponding to recording
frequencies of 300-450 Mhz. This will be a daunting engineering and scientific
feat because it requires new recording head materials and pathbreaking device
innovations. In particular, magnetic write heads must operate effectively at
300-450mhz, and write field rise time needs to be ~ 0.4 ns, close to the
magnetization rotation speed limit. Laminated high saturation magnetic films are
very important to high density, high data rate magnetic recording heads,
However, the field rise time of the most advanced recording head is ~ 2 ns, too
large for use in a data rate of 100 MB/s. Furthermore, the soft magnetic
properties and permeability of the magnetic materials degrade significantly once
the write heads are fabricated, presumably at the sloping areas of the device.
The low frequency leads to the necessity of using large write currents without
helping the field rise time. The objectives of the proposed research are to
understand and avoid the degradation of soft magnetic properties of high
saturation magnetic film when fabricating recording heads, and to investigate
the fundamentals of high data rate recording as related to laminated FeRhN/AIN
films, and extremely small field rise time and nonlinear transition shift. It is
proposed to investigate high saturation, high permeability, corrosion resistant,
and magnetically soft laminated FeRhN/AIN films, particularly when sputter
deposited on sloping surfaces, and to incorporate these new materials into a
prototype magnetic write head with a field rise time of &lt;1 ns so that an
unprecedented date rate of 100 MB/s can be realized. The proposed research will
provide new knowledge on how crystal texture and perpendicular anisotropy of
FeRhN films evolve under oblique incidence and how desired texture and soft
magnetic properties can be achieved by understanding processing-m icrostructure-
property correlation. Microstructural characterizations of magnetic films on
sloping surfaces by synchrotron X-ray radiation diffraction and cross sectional
TEM are very powerful techniques which can find wide acceptance in magnetic
solid state device research. Magnetic recording heads with data rates as high as
100 MB/s will greatly advance the state of the art of modern computing and
telecommunication. The proposal has a mixture of scientific investigation and
technological innovation, and will greatly help the related education program as
well.