* 9710081
* Implementation of Accurate Estimation Methodology for Compartmental Models
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Martha Contreras, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 11/30/2001
* USD 18,000.00

My research interests are in the design of experiments and the development of
statistically meaningful yet computationally tractable estimation methods for
compartmental models. Compartmental models provide a valuable tool in analyzing
a wide variety of problems, such as the the kinetics of drugs through a body or
the flow of nutrients through an ecosystem via the design of tracer experiments.
In most cases, cost and/or feasibility are issues when designing a tracer
experiment since such experiment is often non-repeatable due to high cost,
ethical issues, or possible damage to the organism. Nonetheless, the careful
design of an experiment involving compartmental models can be accomplished
through proper collaboration between the scientist who has understanding of the
biological or physiological mechanism of the system and the compartmental
analyst who has knowledge of the mathematical and computational issues that
arise in the identifiability and stability of the parameters or flow rates which
describe the system. Once a model, deemed reasonable for the process under
study, has been proposed, the objective is to estimate the parameters of the
model from a set of observations gathered through time. However, the commonly-
occurring non-constant variance of biological data and/or the presence of
outlying observations discourage standard application of ordinary least squares
or equally weighted L_2 estimation. Although L_1-norm estimation would reduce
the influence of outliers, for statistical reasons, it is generally not
preferred. To obtain statistically optimal estimators, workers often perform
weighted least squares using empirical weights, iteratively reweighted least
squares, or transform the data and/or the model often using the logarithm
transformation. However, in practice, the optimal weights are not known, thus
application of weighted or iteratively reweighted least squares is not
straightforward. Moreover, methods involving current transformation methodology,
such as Box-Cox transformations, while succeeding in stabilizing the variance,
often do not yield a computationally more desirable problem to solve. My
immediate research consists of investigating the use and properties of integral
transform methods in estimation. Such integral transform should be `natural' to
a given problem; natural, in that applying such transformation should yield a
problem which would be computationally no more costly than current methods but
more amenable to the model, in that such transformation should stabilize the
variance yet be computationally simple. Currently, I am looking at these issues
with the Laplace transform applied to linear time invariant compartmental
models.