* 9710048
* Doctoral Dissetation Improvement: A Laboratory Study        of Asset Markets with Negotiation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Richard Day, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary E. Deily
* 08/31/1999
* USD 5,100.00

Project abstract Households allocate their wealth between different classes of
assets. One way to classify these assets is by the institution in which they
trade. Some assets are traded in an auction institution, such as shares of a
corporation, while others trade infrequently in an institution which involves
search and bargaining. For ease of exposition, I refer to these classes as
financial and real assets respectively. Inadequate data has prevented
econometricians from decisively determining whether real assets should be
considered a subset of the set of assets households use to optimize their
portfolio or if they are a distinct type of good that does not belong in the
finance paradigm. This question can be answered by looking at how the returns on
real assets adjust to changes in real their per-period benefits given returns on
financial assets. In the proposed study, subjects in the laboratory have the
option of allocating their wealth between two types of assets. The first type
has a rate of return which is exogenous of a subject's actions. The second type
has a return based on an price changes. To examine the impact of institutions,
the second type of asset is traded under two types of institutions. First, it is
traded in a double auction institution, which is frequently used to organize
trade of financial assets. This establishes a baseline of how well subjects are
able to price an asset relative to a risk-neutral asset pricing formula in an
institution previously shown to have superior performance characteristics. In
another treatment, the asset trades under an institution similar to the one in
which heterogeneous real goods general trade, such as homes and small
businesses. The salient features of this institution are that sellers attract
buyers by advertising a price, buyers and sellers negotiate by sending binding
offers, and no absolute time restriction on bargaining is imposed. In the
proposed implementation, the information available to subjects is similar to
what is available in naturally occurring markets. This project has theoretical
and policy implications. Theoretically, this experiment help us understand why
real assets prices are not well explained by asset pricing models. This is
typically attributed to a number of factors such as: the lumpiness of the asset,
absence of futures contracts, incorrect expectations, and asymmetric
information. This project isolates the impact of trading institutions as a
possible explanation. This will also provide insight into how data are smoothed
by real asset trading institutions. Laboratory data generated by this study will
also help us understand the Real Estate cycle. Ultimately, better regional
economic stabilization policy could result form a better understanding of how
these asset markets work.