* 9710265
* Masters Level Materials Program Incorporating Significant   Industrial Interaction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Owen Devereux, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 08/31/2001
* USD 371,110.00

9710265 Devereux This program creates a new two-year MasterOs Program in the
field of materials science at the University of Connecticut. Three existing
groups collaborate in the program: the Institute of Materials Science (IMS)
Associates Program, the Connecticut State Technology Extension Program
(CONN/STEP), and the U. Conn. Materials Science Department. This program exposes
first year students to industrial activities and related business and finance
issues. The students travel with CONN/STEP field engineers to industrial sites
to experience industrial problems and their solutions. In their second year the
students research an industrial problem that has educational value as well as
industrial impact. They write a thesis and a final report on the Masters
Program. Through this approach the Masters Program provides the students with a
combination of industrial perspective, problem solving skills, teamwork and
pertinent business issues related to management and finance. This education
grant is funded through the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the
Division of Materials Research. %%% This grant promotes novel opportunities for
students to prepare for academic, industrial, government and non- traditional
roles (such as communication, business, leadership, ethics, mentoring) and
assists in integration of research and training with curricula. ***