* 9710718
* Promises To Keep
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Vivian Kleiman, Cultural Research & Communication, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 03/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9710718 Kleiman Cultural Research and Communications, Inc. is developing a
project that will center around a one-hour documentary program entitled Promises
to Keep. The film, now in its planning phase, will chronicle the day-to-day
efforts of students, teachers, and parents at one inner city public high school
as they work to implement standards-based math and science reform while
maintaining their commitment to full educational equity. The goal is to inform
viewers about a significant reform effort underway, heighten their awareness of
the possibilities of high quality math and science education for all, and
stimulate them to support or initiate similar efforts themselves. During the
planning phase, the applicants will focus their efforts in several critical
areas: 1. Develop a better definition of the target audience so that the next
stage can be designed best to address the needs and interests of that audience.
2. Clarify the goals, structure, and content of the program. For example, is the
proposed film to be primarily motivational or should it provide a "blueprint for
change?" How, specifically, does the school achieve its goals of excellence and
how will this be conveyed in the film? How can school around the country relate
to the examples set by Thurgood Marshall High School? 3. Design a strong
outreach, promotion, and distribution plans to assure that this will reach the
intended audience. 4. Assess the location constraints that will be present
during production. 5. Familiarize the advisors with the school where the film is
to be made. The Co-Principal Investigators and film producers for the project
are Vivian Kleiman, an award winning producer of such programs as Color
Adjustment and My Bodies My Business, and Sharon Wood who has produced,
directed, and or written programs for Portrait of America and Super Chief: The
Life and Legacy of Earl Warren. Project advisors include Dennis Bartels, Yolanda
George, Donna Gerardi, Nancy Kreinberg, and Tom Romberg.