* 9710310
* Minority Perspectives on Attitudes Toward Informed Consent  Procedures for Adolescent Risk Research
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Celia Fisher, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 205,000.00

US scientists are increasingly aware of public distrust about research
participation following some abuses, most notably the Tuskegee study which
failed to appropriately inform and provide treatment for African American men
with syphilis. This project will assess the strength and impact of the `Tuskegee
effect` on the attitudes of African American and European American parents and
youth regarding social science research and associated ethical issues. A major
goal of this project is to enhance community trust in the scientific enterprise
by gathering information that can improve approaches to informed consent for
research conducted with adolescents at-risk for health compromising behaviors,
juvenile delinquency, and academic failure. A two-pronged methodology will draw
upon community perspectives and incorporate both qualitative and quantitative
techniques that can document common and unique dimensions of ethical attitudes
in different ethnic groups. Ultimately it will empower individuals in ways that
improve ethical procedures. Qualitative data will be collected through focus
groups on parents' and adolescents' opinions on (a) trust and suspicion of
social science research; (b) the perceived value and potential cost of
adolescent risk research to individuals and communities, and (b) attitudes
toward different ethical arguments on requiring and waiving guardian consent.
Building on the qualitative data, the PI will create culturally valid
questionnaires to quantify significant aspects of parent and adolescent
responses to ethical issues in informed consent procedures for adolescent risk
research. Focus groups for community input at the outset and throughout the
project will insure that the issues raised in the qualitative portion of the
project reflect community concerns, that the terminology and format of the
quantitative instruments are appropriate for the participants, and that
conclusions drawn from the study are culturally valid. Project results will be
disseminated through scholarly publications, meetings with IRB members, and
newsletters reaching both scientists and African and European American community
members. At the end of the second year a Community Forum held at Fordham
University will engage the original participants, their community leaders, and
scholars from diverse ethnic backgrounds in open dialogue about how to improve
ethics-in-science practices and how to increase ethnic minority interest in
social science research and sensitivity to both its promise and risks. The
community forum will provide an opportunity for African American and European
American clergy, teachers, parents and youth to work in partnership with
developmental scientists to create socially meaningful and ethically responsible
guidelines for social science research. It will provide the basis of a Guidebook
for Informed Consent Procedures for Ethnic Minority Adolescent Risk Research to
be distributed to developmental scientists, IRB members, ethnic minority
scholars, and community members.