* 9710010
* COLLABORATIVE PROJECT: Physical Mechanisms of Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Gabor Forgacs, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2001
* USD 134,250.00

Forgacs 97-10010 The behavior of tissues during development, wound healing,
tumor invasion and other morphogenetic events depends, in part, on quantitative
relationships among physical properties such as surface tension, viscosity and
elasticity that such tissues share with all semi-solid materials. Drs. Forgacs
and Newman propose to extend their characterization of the viscoelastic
properties of model tissue systems based on assembling collagen matrices, using
the oscillating disk and magnetic tweezers microrheometers. These techniques
will permit the simultaneous analysis of viscosity and elastic modulus of
assembling matrices. They will also permit them to analyze the dependence of
these properties on the presence of cell-sized particles with defined surface
characteristics, on living cells that interact with collagen, and on cells whose
interaction with the collagen matrix is abrogated by the presence of anti-
integrin antibodies. They also plan to establish conditions under which a
parallel plate tissue compression apparatus, previously used to measure
effective surface tensions of embryonic tissues, can be used to measure
viscosities of these tissues. This apparatus will then be used to measure the
surface tensions and viscosities of fore and hind limb bud tissues, which they
have previously shown to exhibit distinctive physical behaviors and
extracellular matrix organization, and of such tissues which have been
genetically modified to have altered extracellular matrix organization.
Viscoelastic characteristics of embryonic flank tissue will be compared with
those of limb tissues to test the hypothesis that the emergence of the limb bud
from the embryonic flank is due to development of tissue immiscibility.
Viscosity of normal and retinoic acid-treated limb tissues will be analyzed to
test the hypothesis that the effect of this substance on limb development is
mediated, in part, by changes in viscosity. This work will provide new knowledge
concerning physical mechanisms of morphogenes is and their relationship to the
expression and organization of specific gene products.