* 9710286
* Reactive Polymers: Applications in Organic Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Neil Schore, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2000
* USD 319,500.00

With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professors Mark J. Kurth and Neil E. Schore, of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California, Davis, are developing broadly
applicable methodologies for the preparation and evaluation of reactive polymer
systems of use in organic synthesis. Polymers with functionalized cross-links
provide more homogeneous sets of environments for substrate, catalyst, and
reagent linkage, while polymers based on cyclopolymerized functional monomer
units afford less flexible polymer backbones and potentially greater
stereocontrol of linkage sites. New traceless linker strategies are designed for
use in both organic and organometallic cycloaddition reactions of utility in
combinatorial studies, and an iterative strategy affords access to novel
polyisoxazole-based polypyrimidine and polypurine systems. Following the
successful development of solid-phase peptide synthesis, a technique which
allows the rapid and efficient preparation of polypeptides, the possibility of
carrying out other sorts of organic transformations on solid `supports` has
attracted a great deal of attention. Professors Mark J. Kurth and Neil E.
Schore, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Davis,
with the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, synthesize new polymeric solid supports designed to facilitate
specific chemical reactions of importance in the synthesis of significant
organic molecules. They investigate new strategies for the attachment of
molecules to these solid supports, for the conversion of these molecules to new
species via various types of reactions, and for the release from the solid
support of the products of these reactions. These solid-phase organic synthetic
strategies are of direct relevance to the field of combinatorial synthesis,
wherein `libraries` of related molecules of potential activity may be rapidly
prepared and screened for activity.