* 9710615
* Complexity and Critical Pluralism
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Sandra Mitchell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 06/30/1999
* USD 93,729.00

In many scientific disciplines, political discussions, and social policy forums,
there has been increasing interest in diversity as an inherent good. There is
corresponding concern about sliding down a slippery slope to complete relativism
with an accompanying loss of critical standards. In philosophy of science, this
tension takes the form of a debate between defenders of the unity of science-
those who advocate strong critical standards based on metaphysical and
methodological monism-and supporters of the disunity of science-some of whom
endorse forms of pluralism that verge on the brink of an `anything goes`
leniency. In this research Mitchell explores a middle ground. The aim is to
develop a pluralistic picture of scientific practice that retains critical
standards of acceptability within science. The strategy adopted is two-pronged,
focusing on both metaphysical questions and epistemological issues. Contemporary
biology provides the location for exploring these topics and testing the
results. The metaphysical investigation involves a comprehensive analysis of the
metaphysics of complexity. Three forms of complexity are identified: complexity
of structure, complexity of process, and complexity of evolved domains. In the
epistemological part of the research, Mitchell clarifies the possibilities and
constraints on representing scientific laws, models and explanations. Particular
attention is paid to the idealized character of models, the need for integration
of multiple models in explanation and the degrees of contingency symbolized in
laws of nature. The framework of critical pluralism that will result from this
work will provide three practical benefits: 1) it will allow one to distinguish
between real and spurious scientific disputes; 2) it will offer a taxonomy of
types of conflict; and 3) it will allow a better understanding of different
kinds of compatibility and complementarity between alternate theories.