* 9710243
* Photodissociation and Reaction Dynamics of Molecular and    Cluster Anions Using Femtosecond Photoelectron              Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Daniel Neumark, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 07/31/2001
* USD 464,653.00

Dan Neumark of the University of California at Berkeley is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities to use his newly developed time-resolved experimental technique,
anion femtosecond photoelectron spectroscopy (FPES) to investigate the
photodissociation and reaction dynamics of negative ions. Specifically, he will
use this method to probe the potential energy surfaces governing
photodissociation and bimolecular reaction processes in isolated and clustered
negative ions. In anion FPES, a femtosecond (fs) pump laser excites a negative
ion to a dissociative electronic state; the evolving system that results is
photodetached with a fs probe pulse and the photoelectron spectrum is measured.
The photoelectron spectrum as a function of pump-probe delay yields a picture of
the dynamics initiated by the probe pulse. Neumark will first apply FPES to the
isolated anion, then to the anion chromophore in a size-selected cluster.
Systems to be investigated include clusters of iodine dimer anions solvated with
carbon dioxide or water, bare or clustered iodine trimer anions, ozone anions
and carbonate anions, and time-resolved anion-molecule reactions. Negative ions
play important roles in atmospheric and solution phase chemistry. Results of
this research will find immediate application in chemical kinetics and
spectroscopy, with subsequent application in modeling a wide range of physico-
chemical phenomena, such as atmospheric pollution and transmission of optical
and radio frequency waves in the normal and perturbed atmosphere. In addition,
these studies should shed new light on the nature of chemical reactions in
solution, and the methods may eventually be of utility in the study of protein
dynamics.