* 9710005
* ESH - Post-Glacial Reef Accretion History and Drowned Shore- lines as Constraints on Abrupt Sea-Level Movements in the  Northern Main Hawaiian Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Charles Fletcher, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 238,637.00

9710005 Fletcher The submerged slopes of the northern main Hawaiian islands of
Kauai and Oahu are marked with a flight of terraces that are fossil carbonate
reef tracts dating from sea-level stands during the late Quaternary. The
seaward-facing front of each reef terrace is a near vertical wall that displays
drowned shoreline features such as intertidal notches, beachrock, and growths of
fossil coral (Fletcher and Sherman, 1995). Of special note are the submerged
intertidal notches that are found island-wide at predictable depths with well-
preserved overhanging visors. These, and related paleoshoreline features,
indicate the occurrence of abrupt jumps in relative sea-level, which, in the
absence of a local mechanism for coseismic displacement, are best explained as
the product of glacial melt-water pulses. The occurrence of these shorelines is
reminiscent of melt-water pulses identified in cores of fossil coral from
Barbados (Fairbanks, 1989) and elsewhere (Edwards et al., 1993; Bard et al.,
1996; Montaggioni, submitted). Other drowned shorelines have also been
described, such as those found in south Florida (Locker et al., 1996) and New
Zealand (Carter et al., 1986). Four drowned shorelines are identified in Hawaii.
The deepest (approx. -110 to -120 m) probably correlates to the glacial lowstand
of sea level which occurred around the same time as Heinrich Event H-2 (?).
Drowned shorelines at depth ranges of -90 to -95 m and -58 to -60 m are
approximately in the same depth range as Barbados melt-water pulses IA and IB,
resp., however there are discrepancies of several meters in cases. We speculate
that the shoreline at -58 to -60 m is cut into a reef dating from the last major
interstadial (Stage 3). The shallowest shoreline, -24 m, correlates to records
of a prominent melt-water pulse in the North Atlantic (Keigwin and Jones, 1995)
and a drowned shoreline on the Great Barrier Reef Shelf of Australia (Larcombe
et al., 1995). This shallowest shoreline is carved into fossil carbon ate of ca.
190 to 240 kyrs age (Stage 7). Additionally, the three shallowest shorelines
correlate in their depth ranges with the controversial catastrophic rise events
(CRE's) postulated by Blanchon and Shaw (1995) in their analysis of the Barbados
coral sequence. Hence, there is a rationale for interpreting the Hawaiian
submerged shoreline series as an archive of abrupt sea-level events during the
post-glacial and early Holocene interval. However, the possibility of a
correlation (if any) to other global records is untested and requires a detailed
examination of various types of cored, datable samples to determine the age of
drowning. Major uncertainty exists regarding the true nature of the relationship
(if any) between these features and the stratigraphic record of sea-level
movements from the tectonically active margins of Barbados and Papua New Guinea,
the stable shelf of Tahiti, or the marine stratigraphy from the North Atlantic
that identifies episodes of ice-rafted debris (Bond and Lotti, 1995). Further,
because the Hawaiian record offers the possibility of better constraining the
exact position of paleointertidal positions through analysis of the drowned
notches (both msl and mllw correlate to aspects of notch morphology), it will
provide an improved constraint on the behavior of sea level during two specific
times of the post-glacial and Holocene interval. Hawaii is an important station
in establishing whether the climatic record of the North Atlantic is of regional
importance or carries a global signature, and if global, its influence on
eustatic sea level. The role of sea level in melt-water events of the last
deglaciation has not been well-constrained with regard to magnitude, chronology,
or impact on the coastal/shelf system. MacAyeal (1993) calculates that a purge
phase of Heinrich event oscillations of the Laurentide ice sheet is capable of
producing a 3.5 m shift in the position of global sea level within 250 yrs.
However, Clark et al(1996) propose the Antarctic ice s heet as the source for
melt-water IA. Hence, the position of abrupt sea-level events in the chain of
process and response is still very much ill-defined. The model of Blanchon and
Shaw (1995), although derived from an interpretation of geological records,
still requires additional testing and extension to the Pacific Basin. Important
questions have been raised by the new records from Tahiti regarding the
occurrence of meltwater events and climatic episodes (Bard et al., 1996).
Questions also remain regarding the relative timing of Heinrich Events, melt-
water pulses, and sea-level movements (Clark et al., 1996) that require
additional dating before cause and effect relationships, and sources, are fully
understood. An important missing component of deep-sea records of ice-rafting
events and fresh-water discharge is the role of sea level...a component that
cannot be constrained by those records. Dating an erosional notch is not easy.
Research will focus on the two shallowest drowned shorelines, -24 m and -58 to
-60 m. We will use datable carbonate records to define sea-level chronology and
position. The age of cored coral reef sequences that are post-glacial and
Holocene in age will constrain the back-stepping history of accretion. Fossil
intertidal faunal assemblages preserved on the face of drowned notches, and
perhaps contemporaneous beachrock exposures, will all be hydraulically cored by
divers to obtain samples for age-dating as proxies for past sea level. Coral
grew beneath the seas that cut the drowned shorelines, and later it grew above.
Exposures of that coral are prevalent at the base and upon the visors of the
paleoshorelines. Aragonitic samples (determined with XRD) from cores of these
exposures, early Holocene and late Pleistocene in age, will be dated at the
SOEST-TIMS facility (run by K.Ruben, UH faculty member) and at the University of
Arizona accelerator radiocarbon facility (G.S. Burr has agreed to participate as
geochronologist). Samples from within the arc of the paleo-notches will also be
petrographically analyzed for cementation histories indicating vadose-zone
diagenesis (L. Montaggioni has agreed to participate). We will also sample for
stable light isotopic content (B. Popp, UH faculty member runs the UH stable
light isotope mass spec. facility and has agreed to participate). Likewise,
cores of coral successions landward of the drowned shoreline, marking the final
position of sea level following its abrupt movement, will be chronologically,
petrographically, and geochemically analyzed and described. The goal for most
cores will be to penetrate the entire Holocene and post-glacial sequence present
at each drill site. Hence, we will employ the concept of "basal dates" where the
post-glacial/pre-glacial contact is marked by a subaerial surface characterized
by diagenetic alteration. Basal dates marking the first incidence of newly risen
(and stabilized) sea level are an important and recognized sea level index point
that has served the tidal marsh stratigraphy community of the passive margin
coasts of the U.S. in their investigations of relative sea-level history in the
middle and late Holocene. In our case, we will determine the distribution of
basal coral dates as they relate to sea-level movements responsible for the
drowned notches. As a consequence of our drilling the Holocene section, we will
also obtain samples of the fossil reef tracts that form the stair-step
bathymetry of Oahu. Dates (TIMS-HAS) of pristine aragonite in these Hawaiian
reefs will provide improved understanding of sea-level movements at the end of
the last glacial and during the early phases of the present interglacial. We
have developed the capability of coring at these depths during the course of our
project EAR-9317328 using oxygen-rich breathing gases for decompression and
carefully controlled safety procedures employing redundant breathing