* 9710350
* Biomathematical Research Planning Activities
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Evans Afenya, Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

The research planning activities will involve studies and investigations of
leukemia from a biomathematical viewpoint. The project will focus on preliminary
explorations of the following: a) Construction of mathematical models that
quantitatively and qualitatively describe and characterize leukemia; b)
Contributions to the understanding of leukemia cell kinetics; c) Construction of
models that describe treatment schemes and protocols for leukemia; d) Studies
and comparison of various treatment protocols through the use of mathematical
models; e) Treatment optimization models; f) Suggestion of ways to improve the
treatment of leukemia; g) Development of analytical and numerical techniques
that aid in the solution of model equations that involve nonlinear ordinary and
partial differential equations; h) Interpretation of model results and
predictions within the context of the biomedical situation; i) Studies of
leukemia data as it pertains to insights and predictions obtained from models;
j) Development of collaborative activities with physicians, biomedical
researchers, and other mathematicians and scientists interested in this
endeavor; and k) Extensions of the studies to include other cancers. Specifics
of the preliminary studies and investigations will include biomathematical
descriptions of leukemogenesis; studies of models of normal and leukemic cells
considered as interacting cell populations; investigations of normal and
leukemic cell behavior in the bone marrow, blood, and the active and resting
phases of the cell cycle; studies of the inherent effects of time lags in
leukemic development; explorations of leukemia from diffusion-oriented
perspectives; considerations of bone marrow transplantation models and
chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic treatment models for leukemia. Exploratory
mathematical models will be used to investigate treatment schemes and protocols.
Mathematical techniques for the development, analysis, and solution of models
will be explo red. Particular attention will be paid to gathering of leukemia
data from various sources and statistical analysis of such data will be pursued.
Numerical and analytical techniques for solving large model systems of coupled
ordinary and partial differential equations, differential-difference equations,
and delay differential equations will also be explored and studied. It is
envisioned that the research planning activities will lead to a comprehensive
biomathematical research project that will advance knowledge in understanding
cancer cell dynamics, mathematically and biomedically, and will aid the
biomedical community in its search for better therapeutic strategies.