* 9710654
* SBIR Phase II:  Production of Periclinal Chimeric Potatoes  Containing New Multigenic Traits for Pest Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Carolyn Sluis, Tissue-Grown Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1999
* USD 299,883.00

*** 9710654 Sluis This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
addresses the transfer of pest resistance traits from wild species to domestic
potato via the generation of periclinal chimeras. Tissue-Grown scientists have
developed a novel method for combining the best characteristics of two types of
potato by forming chimeras. Chimeric plants are composed of cell layers from
different parents. The goal of the proposed research is the creation of new
potato varieties with the epidermal layer of a wild species and the core layers
of a commercial potato variety. The germplasm targets of this proposal would
combine commercial potato varieties with wild species lines selected for insect
resistance and tolerance to late blight (Phytophthora infestans). The potential
commercial application of the research is the rapid generation of new potato
varieties that can take advantage of wild germplasm traits for pest resistance
without the undesirable wild tuber traits so difficult to eliminate through
breeding. Wild species contain a wealth of disease resistance genes and genes of
horticultural interest, but they also come with a heavy burden of genes
detrimental to potato tuber production, such as delayed tuber set, odd colors,
shapes and sizes of tubers, and excessive tuber glycoalkaloids. Using chimeras,
many well-established and valuable varieties can be enhanced without disturbing
or damaging their primary commercial tuber traits. ***