* 9710456
* Gas-Phase Studies of Substituted Aromatic Radicals,         Biradicals and Polyradicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2000
* USD 328,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, Professor Hilkka I. Kenttamaa, of the Department of Chemistry at
Purdue University, carries out gas-phase studies of substituted aromatic
radicals, biradicals, and polyradicals. By generating aromatic radicals which
incorporate a positively charged group, Professor Kenttamaa is able to employ
Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry to examine their
intrinsic or solvent-free reactivity under clean conditions, permitting the
assessment of reaction rate constants, product branching ratios, and
thermochemical parameters such as bond dissociation energies. Substituent
effects are explored for phenyl, benzyl, and other aromatic mono- and
polyradicals carrying neutral substituents in addition to the remote charged
groups, and radical traps are employed to probe the importance of polar effects
in different types of radical reactions. For biradicals, the relationship
between reactivity and predicted ground state multiplicity is examined, and this
information is used to search for spin-selective gas-phase reactions. Professor
Hilkka I. Kenttamaa, of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue University, with
the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, studies the
chemistry of molecules containing one or more unpaired electrons (`radicals`).
By appropriate choice of radicals, Professor Kenttamaa is able to employ gas-
phase techniques to study their formation and reactivity, permitting an
assessment of their intrinsic properties in the absence of the complicating
influences of solvents or other potentially reactive species. Through these
studies is gained fundamental knowledge regarding the chemistry of electron-
deficient molecules, advancing the understanding of the roles of substituent
effects and polar effects in governing their reactivity and offering potential
advances in the areas of radical-based organic synthesis and organic materials
research.