* 9710664
* SBIR PHASE II:  Multimedia for Learning Structural          Biochemistry
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Donald Mackay, ScienceMedia Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9710664 Mackay This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from
ScienceMedia develops an interactive multimedia tool ("Molecules of Life") to
teach students how information, structure, and chemistry give rise to biological
function at the molecular level. This project uses advances in computer,
multimedia, and information technologies to respond to the national priority of
improving scientific literacy. During Phase I, molecular graphics and virtual
reality technologies were integrated into a prototype multimedia system. Content
covering enzyme structure and mechanism was developed that showed that the
system could teach structure-function relationships in a visually compelling and
intuitive fashion. During Phase II, under the guidance of a development team
including a molecular modeling specialist, a multimedia programmer, a graphic
artist, and a cognitive scientist, the content will be expanded to include
examples in six other areas of biochemistry, along with additional background
material. "Molecules of Life" will be reviewed by teachers and students both
during design and following implementation. The feasibility of distributing
"Molecules of Life" at least in part over the World Wide Web will also be
investigated. The result of the Phase II project will be a multimedia product
ready for testing in the marketplace. The explosion of technological and
fundamental advances in molecular genetics and biotechnology in the last twenty
years is increasingly having an important impact on the health sciences,
agriculture, environmental cleanup, forensics, and other diverse fields. By
utilizing emerging technologies in interactive multimedia to provide
individualized, interactive learning experiences, this project will contribute
to overcoming some of the barriers to effective teaching and thus will
contribute to meeting the need for basic literacy in the biological and health
sciences among the general public as explicitly included in the National Science
Education Stand ards. "Molecules of Life" will be sold to college level students
enrolled in biology, biochemistry, and molecular biology courses. ***