* 9710577
* Protection of Mayan Archeological Sites in Southern Mexico  from Biodeterioration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Ralph Mitchell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 07/31/2000
* USD 98,525.00

9710577 Mitchell There is an urgent need to protect Mayan archeological sites in
southern Mexico from further deterioration. The combination of high humidity and
temperature, together with increased tourist activity, is causing rapid
deterioration of these important historic sites. Much of the material used in
the construction of Mayan buildings was soft limestone, which is mechanically
weak and susceptible to biodeterioration. The objectives of this research will
be to determine the degree of susceptibility of these materials to degradation
by microbial activity and to test methods for protection of the building
materials against further deterioration. This research program will be carried
out in close cooperation with the Escuela de Ingenieria, Universidad del Mayab.
In the first phase of the research we will determine the nature and activity of
the microorganisms on limestone samples taken from archeological sites.
Qualitative analysis of the microflora will utilize both physiological and
genetic methods. Quantitative determination of the attack of the stone will
involve image analysis of the microflora and measurement of calcium release from
the stone. Degradation studies will be made on the stone from a number of
different sites. In the second phase of the research both artificial polymeric
consolidants and biocides will be tested for their ability to protect the
limestone. AR polymers will be tested under a variety of environmental
conditions for susceptibility to biodegradation. Electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy will be used as a primary analytic tool. Biocides to be tested will
be environmentally acceptable and will need to be compatible with the
consolidants. The final phase of this project will be to test the protective
ability of combinations of consolidants and biocides in the field. Treated stone
samples will be placed at different test sites with varying temperature,
humidity, and organic carbon deposition. Analysis will incl ude protection
against growth of fungi and bacteria, deterioration of the polymer, and
degradation of the underlying stone. The significance of this project will be to
provide information about the mechanisms of deterioration of Mayan archeological
sites. The research will provide information about methods for protecting these
sites. It is expected that the research will help to provide protection of these
important historic sites in southern Mexico and other similar areas. In
addition, we expect that graduate students and post-doctoral scholars from
Escuela de Ingenieria, Universidad del Mayab will spend time at Harvard, and
that we will assist in their training. ***