* 9710548
* SBIR PHASE II: Computer Simulation of Science and Technical Laboratory Exercises for Physically-Disabled Students
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Walter Woltosz, Simulation Plus
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 03/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9710548 Woltosz This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
from Simulations Plus (parent company of Words Plus) addresses the need for
students with a variety of disabilities to be able to conduct laboratory
experiments in the physical sciences. The project builds on work carried out
during the Phase I effort, as well as on work supported by Words Plus after the
completion of Phase I, to develop efficient computer simulations of laboratory
experiments that can be run by severely physically disabled students with
minimal motor input. The ability to experience firsthand the results of
simulated experiments and to control the setup and operation of those
experiments will enable students to assume the role of active participants as
opposed to being limited to their current role as spectators. This new
opportunity should motivate more such students to take a lively interest in the
sciences. Being a scientist can be an ideal occupation for those whose brains
function well, but whose bodies prevent them from participating in activities
requiring more physical proficiency. Professor Stephen Hawking, world famous
theoretical physicist of the University of Cambridge in England (a Words Plus
user since 1985), is a clear example of a severely physically-disabled person
who is making major contributions to science through a single switch interface.
Software that can be run by the physically-disabled can also be run by able-
bodied students. Whereas the ability of many disabled students to participate
actively in the sciences would seem to require the use of simulation software,
the use of such software in the education of all students is also projected to
be of growing importance. It will enable all students to augment their
experiences via personal computer, providing expanded learning opportunities by
allowing simulations of situations that are infeasible to present to students
because of cost, safety, or other complexities in a traditional laboratory
environment. ***