* 9710946
* RUI: Three Challenges to Procedural Justice Theory: Studying the View of the Boss, the Beat, and the Bench
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Larry Heuer, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 02/28/2001
* USD 107,429.00

Abstract Heuer 9710946 Research and theory from social exchange, group dynamics,
and attribution perspectives support the claim that the relation between
respectful treatment and fairness judgments is qualified by the individual's
belief that he or she deserves respectful treatment. Further, research indicates
that decision makers and decision recipients define fair treatment differently.
This disparity has the potential to frustrate a decisionmaker's best efforts to
implement procedures fairly. In addition, motivational variables contribute to
the link between procedural concerns (especially respectful treatment) and
perceived justice. This research consists of three field studies. The first 960
New York City police officers are surveyed about their encounters with other
police officers and with the public. This study is a 2 (in-group vs. out-group
encounter) X 2 (respondent as authority/decisionmaker vs. respondent as decision
recipient) X 2 ( officer as course of treatment vs. Officer as target) between
subjects randomized factorial that permits a strong test of all three
theoretical factors above. In addition, 400 civilians are surveyed about their
encounter with a sub-sample of the police thus permitting a direct comparison of
police and civilian perceptions of the fairness of police treatment. The second
study asks 400 trial court judges to report heir perceptions of their treatment
of a litigant or a lawyer who recent appeared in their courtroom and asks the
litigant or lawyer to also complete a questionnaire assessing their perception
of the treatment. The final study surveys 400 employees of organizations using
the same design. These studies contribute to procedural justice theories as well
as make an applied contribution in facilitating decision makers' efforts to
implement procedures in a just manner. ***