* 9710432
* Social Equity, Group Identity, and the Management of        Difference in Research on Human Populations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Steven Epstein, University of California-San Diego
* Fixed Amount Award
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2000
* USD 95,757.00

This project analyzes the management of difference and the concern with social
equity in scientific research on human populations. Specifically, the project
tracks the incorporation of gender and race as variables in the design and
evaluation of biological and biomedical research. While some argue that these
policies promote research that is both more equitable and more capable of
producing adequate, generalizable data, others suggest that such requirements
interfere with the conduct of rigorous research. The central case study will be
the recent mandates to include women and members of racial minority groups in
experiments such as randomized clinical trials. In addition, the project will
analyze the extent of concern with issues of gender and racial diversity in
other domains of biological research, including the Human Genome Project. The
project seeks to identify the causes and consequences of the recent push for the
inclusion of diverse subject populations in biomedical and biological research.
It asks how, and in what ways, scientific institutions should be sensitive to
conceptions of social and bodily difference. And the study explores the
practical consequences of this management of difference for the acquisition of
biomedical and biological knowledge about the human body, as well as for broader
cultural understandings of gender and race as bodily markers and determinants of
social identity. The methods to be employed include: 1) analysis of government
records and content analysis of published reports of clinical trials to measure
changes in the demographic diversity of biological experiments on human
subjects; 2) open-ended, semi-structured interviews with researchers, government
officials, politicians, and activists to reconstruct the history of recent
policy changes regarding the inclusion of women and racial minorities in
biomedical research; and 3) database searches to retrieve relevant articles in
the mass media, the scientific press, the Congressional Record. and other
sources. This study holds significance for scientists, practitioners of science
and technology studies, and the public at large. For scientists, the project has
considerable relevance because it will analyze the causes and consequences of
policy shifts that centrally affect their work. For practitioners of science and
technology studies, the project contributes to debates concerning the public
negotiation of the credibility of experiments (particularly experiments
conducted on human subjects, such as randomized clinical trials) as well as
contributing to research on the public accountability of science and the
relation between science and social movements. For the general public, the study
analyzes the impact of `identity politics` upon actual scientific practice.
Study findings will be presented in the form of journal articles directed to
specialized audiences, presentations at conferences, and a book intended for a
wide audience of academics and educated lay readers.