* 9710547
* Absolute Kinetic Studies of Carbenic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Robert Moss, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 09/30/2001
* USD 440,900.00

Professor Robert A. Moss, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State
University of New Jersey, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program for his
kinetic studies of carbenes and related reactive intermediates. Professor Moss
uses direct spectroscopic techniques, particularly laser flash photolysis,
complemented by ab initio molecular orbital calculations, to study the
fragmentation reactions of alkoxyhalocarbenes (RO-C-Cl), exploring the
concertedness of R-O and C-Cl bond cleavages as a function of the alkyl
substituent. The kinetics and products of the 1,2-H shift rearrangements of
benzylhalocarbenes and alpha-phenylethylhalocarbenes are also under exploration
in order to deduce the influences of solvent, carbene structure, and halogen
identity on the linearity of the Arrhenius correlations for these
rearrangements, the possible incursion of tunneling, and the simultaneous
occurrence of intermolecular reactions. Professor Moss also investigates the
possibility of modulating the rates of intramolecular rearrangements and
intermolecular capture by the intervention of transient carbene/benzene pi
complexes, competing 1,2-acyl and 1,2-H (or 1,2-C) migrations in
acyloxycarbenes, and the potentially pi-mediated rearrangement of
acenaphthenylfluorocarbene. With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program,
Professor Robert A. Moss, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State
University of New Jersey, carries out kinetic studies of carbenes and related
reactive intermediates. Such compounds, containing a central carbon atom bearing
only two attached groups rather than the more commonly seen (and more stable)
four, are formed transiently in a wide variety of chemical processes. Through
the application of fast experimental techniques complemented by calculational
studies, Professor Moss determines the effects of various factors on the
chemistry of these reactive intermediates. These studies contribute to our
understanding of the fundamental atomic level processes occurring in many
chemical reactions and, ultimately, to our ability to control them.