* 9710729
* The Work of Organization and the Organization of Work:      Mapping the Evolving Structure of Biotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Kenneth Koput, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 08/31/2000
* USD 99,714.00

This project continues a line of research into the origins and development of
the biotechnology industry. The focus of that research has been on the varied
and novel forms of collaborative arrangements that have linked universities,
research institutes, venture capital firms, established chemical and
pharmaceutical corporations and research hospitals with new science-based
startup companies specializing in commercializing biotech discoveries. In
particular, our research tests the idea that, when knowledge and skills are
widely distributed, the locus of innovation is found in a network of
interorganizational relationships. To stay current in a rapidly-developing
scientific field requires that an organization have a hand in the research
process. Internal research capability is essential to evaluate the quality of
research done elsewhere and to attract premier partners, while external
collaboration provides access to news and resources that cannot be generated
internally. In our view, research breakthroughs occur through intensive
interaction among participants from diverse scientific fields and institutional
contexts. To test these ideas, we have assembled a relational data base that
allows us to examine patterns of collaboration in biotechnology. Drawing on an
industry reference source, Bioscan, annual reports, Security and Exchange
Commission filings, and other reference sources, we have compiled a record of
the formal, contractual agreements undertaken by dedicated biotech firms in the
human therapeutics and diagnostics field. The present study will use these data
to examine high-speed learning and collaboration among such firms. To do this we
will continue our network analyses of relations among organizations, and will
add qualitative material based on face-to-face interviews as well as other
quantitative analyses