* 9710275
* Dissertation Research:  A Study of Zhoukoudian              Locality 15
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John Olsen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 8,400.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Olsen, Mr. Xing Gao will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. He will analyze archaeological material collected from
the very important site of Zhoukoudian Locality 15 (ZL15), and clean the
original profile of the excavation to describe the stratigraphy and collect
materials for geological and chronological analysis. `Zhoukoudian` includes a
series of sites which together likely span a major part of the last Ice Age and
therefore probably represent an interval of over half a million years. The
majority of the archaeological work at these sites predates World War II and is
best known for the fossil Homo erectus crania which were recovered in
association with faunal remains and stone tools. This East Asian hominid
material has recently been a subject lively interest because it is uncertain
whether the lineage they represent terminated prehistorically or whether a link
exists with current Asian peoples. In this context ZL15 is particularly
important because preliminary analysis indicates that in its lowest level it
overlaps with the Homo erectus material in time and that the uppermost level may
be fairly recent in date. It thus may provide a needed bridge. However the
abundant cultural and faunal materials from the site have not been studied and
the geology and chronology has not been addressed using modern techniques. Mr.
Gao will conduct both field and laboratory research. In the field he will survey
Zhoukoudian Hill and the immediately surrounding area. He will clear the ZL15
section and collect sediment, faunal and floral (including pollen) samples which
will be subject to detailed analysis including absolute dating, palynological
analysis and pedological and sedimentological study. Uranium series dating on
fossil bone and speleothems, fission-track dating on ash and burned materials
and amino acid racemization and electron spin resonance dating of fossil teeth
will help to determine the ages of the individual levels. Approximately 10,000
pieces of worked stone were recovered from the site and Mr. Gao will conduct
typological and technological analyses of these. He will also, with the help of
colleagues, study the faunal remains both to identify species represented and to
reconstruct subsistence practices. This research is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on the basis for the physical variation observed
among human populations today. It will increase our understanding of the
prehistory of a little known region of the world and provide data of interest to
many archaeologists. It will also assist in the training of a promising
scientist.