* 9710996
* Mother Goose Asks "Why?": Planning for Dissemination of the Parent Literature and Science Activity Program Through Libraries in Fourteen States: A Planning Grant
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Gregory DeFrancis, Vermont Center for the Book
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 05/31/1998
* USD 30,444.00

9710996 Anderson Mother Goose Asks Why? is a program of the Vermont Center for
the Book currently being brought to 1200 parents in Vermont. Centered around
exemplary children's literature and science activities, the program provides a
series of four reading/discussion/activity sessions to parents of preschool
children. Through exploration of basic questions such as "What Is It?", "How
Many?", and "How Do You Know?", parents gain experience, skills, and confidence
to introduce science to their 3-7 year old children. The Vermont Center hopes to
expand this program to twelve additional states, the District of Columbia, and
the U.S. Virgin Islands. Before initiating this expansion, however, the Center
needs to address two issues: 1) how to create appropriate strategies for
reaching, recruiting, and retaining families in locations that are quite
different from Vermont, and 2) how to create an evaluation strategy that will
assess parental behavior and attitudinal changes over time. Toward this end, the
Center will gather representatives from the participating expansion sites and
experts in family outreach to examine local issues and differences, to establish
local contacts, and to begin development of effective implementation strategies
for the sites. They also will work with The Network, Inc., a national education
evaluation and research organization, to produce concrete measurements for
parental behavior changes.