* 9710272
* Doing Business Under Conditions of Persistent Instablilty:  The Use of Law by Russian Enterprises
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Kathryn Hendley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2001
* USD 178,364.00

Abstract Hendley 9710272 Soviet-era methods for doing business in Russia which
relied on formal enforcement of contractual obligations by industrial ministries
and communist party officials have been destroyed. The legal infrastructure that
is ostensibly necessary for a market economy has been put into place. Whether
these new laws and legal institutions that draw more from Western than Russian
experience are actually being used remains open to question. This research will
answer two basic empirical questions. First, how do Russian industrial
enterprises do business under these conditions? Second, under what circumstances
do they us law to protect and/or advance their interests? This research will
explore these questions using six detailed case studies of Russian industrial
enterprises. Three hundred enterprises are being surveyed and will form the
sampling frame and the broadbased background for the case studies to be chosen.
Factors to be taken into account in choosing cases include the product mix,
corporate structure, size, and propensity to litigate. Observations and semi-
structured interviews with managers will be used to collect the in-depth case
data. Results will fill a void in the extant literature by providing answers to
questions about the implementation of law where the newly relaxed atmosphere in
Russia makes this research possible, and the transition makes it timely. %%%
Soviet-era methods for doing business in Russia which relied on formal
enforcement of contractual obligations by industrial ministries and communist
party officials have been destroyed. The legal infrastructure that is ostensibly
necessary for a market economy has been put into place. Whether these new laws
and legal institutions that draw more from Western than Russian experience are
actually being used remains open to question. This research will answer two
basic empirical questions. First, how do Russian industrial enterprises do
business under these conditions? Second, under what ci rcumstances do they us
law to protect and/or advance their interests? This research will explore these
questions using six detailed case studies of Russian industrial enterprises.
Three hundred enterprises are being surveyed and will form the sampling frame
and the broadbased background for the case studies to be chosen. Factors to be
taken into account in choosing cases include the product mix, corporate
structure, size, and propensity to litigate. Observations and semi-structured
interviews with managers will be used to collect the in-depth case data. Results
will fill a void in the extant literature by providing answers to questions
about the implementation of law where the newly relaxed atmosphere in Russia
makes this research possible, and the transition makes it timely. ***