* 9710184
* Regulatory Reform and Bureaucratic Responsiveness to Firms: The Impact of User Fees in the FDA
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Mary Olson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1998
* USD 17,997.00

This project studies how the introduction of user fees for the review of new
drugs has affected bureaucratic incentives and output in the Food and Drug
Administration. The study has two objectives. First, it develops an
understanding of the mechanism by which user fees impact bureaucratic behavior
in the FDA review process. This requires an understanding of the relevant
institutional environment inside the agency and the relevant constraints and
incentives facing FDA bureaucrats. Second, it empirically analyzes the impact of
user fees on FDA review times for new drugs and the impact of user fees on the
responsiveness of bureaucrats to pharmaceutical firms. Previous work by Olson
(1997) empirically examined the effect of firm characteristics on the length of
time required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to review and approve
new drug applications between 1990-1992. The primary finding from the analysis
is that FDA reviewers respond systematically to the differences between
pharmaceutical firms. The reason is that firm characteristics contain
information which reduces reviewers' uncertainty about approving a dangerous or
ineffective drug and leads to faster review times. Other firm characteristics
such as firm size and country of firm ownership also influence the speed of the
review process. This project extends this analysis by examining how bureaucratic
responsiveness to firms changed after the adoption of user fees for new drug
review. The approach taken is one which treats regulatory decisions as
endogenous and explains the variation in FDA review times as a function of
differences that exist between firms and drugs. The analysis considers the set
of new drugs approved by the FDA between 1990-1995. Coefficients of regulator
responsiveness to various firm and drug characteristics are estimated for the
1990-1992 new drug approvals (prior to the implementation of user fees) and
these coefficients are compared to estimates of regulator responsiveness to firm
characteristics for the 1993-1995 new drug approvals (following the
implementation of user fees). User fees are expected to shift regulatory
responsiveness to pharmaceutical firms because they provide a financial
incentive for regulators to process more applications and because they convey
information to regulators that may reduce type I error. Results from this study
have policy implications concerning the continued use of user fees in the FDA.
This study also contributes to the growing body of empirical research which uses
positive political theories to generate and test hypotheses about bureaucratic
behavior in regulatory agencies. ó ¬ñ«¬^Ñ¬½¼^+á(ñ +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«^¼?&ñ^ó|ñ^|<ú +?+¬ ó
¬ñ«^½¼¼½^ó|úñ^|<ú +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«^&¬|&^¬¼+ª^ó|úñ+?+¬ ¬ñ«^&¬|&^¬¼+ª^ó|úñ^|<ú ó
¬ñ«^¬¼¬+^úá¼ñ^|<ú ??+¬ ó <á½¼^¡&ú¼^¡½ñ¬ +?+¬ ó <á½¼^¡&ú¼^&ª( +?+¬ ó
<á½¼^¡&ú¼^¼(½& +?+¬ ó Ñ|½^¼?¼ +?+¬ ó ªñ+ú^ó|úñ +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^|+ñ +?+¬ ó
¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^¼»| +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^¼º¬ññ +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^Ñ|¡¬ +?+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^Ñ¿«ñ
+?+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^½¿? +?+¬