* 9710366
* Racial Identification in Brazil
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Edward Telles, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2002
* USD 93,735.00

This is a study of racial identification in Brazil. It has a methodological
component, focusing on a difficult issue of measurement. Analysts of race and
ethnicity use data that generally code racial and ethnic categories on the basis
of respondent self identification. However, self identification of race and
ethnicity is often inconsistent with the way persons are socially classified.
Therefore data based on respondent self identification may be inappropriate for
measuring racial inequality or discrimination. Differences between these forms
of racial classification are noteworthy in the case of Brazil. Comparisons of
racial self identification with racial social identification in Brazil are
possible for the first time due to data collected in a recent national survey.
Using these data, this research project will examine how Brazilians self-
identify by race and how this may deviate from their socially ascribed race. The
research will also study the determinants of racial self identification and the
consequences of using self identification for estimating racial inequality. This
phase of the work addresses six chief questions: (1) the extent to which self
identification of race deviates from interviewer (or social) identification of
race using census racial categories, (2) the extent to which there is a
preference for ambiguous racial categories, (3) the extent to which there is a
preference for the Afro-Brazilian identity affirmation category, (4) the impact
of class and racial reference group variables, (5) influences of modernization
and urbanization variables, and (6) whether social identification leads to
estimates of racial inequality, and particularly income inequality, that are
different from those based on self identification. Results from this study will
contribute to the scientific literature on theories of racial and ethnic
identification, changing conceptions of race in Brazil, and racial inequality in
Brazil. Studying the scientific questions in a social environment ve ry
different from that of the United States will provide a useful comparison that
can help guide public responses to issues of race and ethnicity in America.