* 9710569
* SBIR PHASE II: Ultrasensitive Elemental Mercury Pollution   Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1998,09/01/1999
* Scott Hunter, Consultec Scientific, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 09/01/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project concerns the
development of novel types of miniature mercury and mercaptan gas detectors
using recently developed highly sensitive microcantilever chemical sensors.
These sensors are manufactured using standard microelectromechanical systems and
integrated circuit microfabrication techniques. During the Phase I project,
these sensors were shown to detect mercury vapor concentrations down to 0.5
parts per billion(ppb) and mercaptans down to 50 ppb. Simple and rapid sensor
regeneration techniques were demonstrated in the Phase I project, along with
inexpensive and effective techniques for the removal of dust and other possible
chemical interferents. The Phase II project will construct, and test under field
conditions, prototype mercury and mercaptan detectors. The instrumentation will
find application in numerous environmental applications requiring real time,
sensitive analysis of mercury in air, soil, water, and food, and in mercaptan
detection of leaks in natural gas supply lines and appliances. Detectors based
on the microcantilever sensor technology will be far more portable and
sensitive, and also less expensive than currently available instrumentation. The
development of personal monitors and sensors for other vapors based on this
technology is also envisioned.