* 9710160
* A Formal Architecture-Based Approach to software            Integration Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Debra Richardson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9710160 A formal software architecture specification makes the analysis, design,
and construction of a complex system intellectually tractable by characterizing
the system at a high level of abstraction. This project focuses on revealing
defects in the dynamic interaction and communication behavior of system
components through testing techniques applied at the architectural level. While
testing has historically concentrated on the implementation as the target of
inquiry, this research instead considers the architectural specification of the
system as the target. There are five major contributions to software
architecture and software testing technology arising from this research. First,
a set of architecture-based integration test criteria are defined to provide
requirements for testing architectural aspects of a system; methods are also
developed for applying these criteria to architectural styles and domain-
specific architectures. Second, methods are developed for testing an
implementation in terms of its conformance to a specified architecture via
architecture conformance oracles. Third, architecture-level slicing techniques
are defined for localizing architectural defects and minimizing regression
testing. Fourth, methods are developed for using feature tests to discover the
architecture of a system from its implementation. In addition, various
approaches to formal architecture specification are evaluated with respect to
their suitability to testing technologies. ***