* 9710395
* Lithographically Formed Nanoparticles for an Ultra High     Density, Low Noise, Magnetic Data Storage Medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Bruce Clemens, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2000
* USD 349,515.00

9710395 White Lithographically patterned thin film magnetic media offer the
potential for extending the areal bit density of magnetic data storage media
perhaps two orders of magnitude while preserving satisfactory signal-to-noise
properties. Present magnetic media are formed of a continuous featureless thin
film comprised of many very small independently acting single-domain grains. The
size, shape, and position of the data bit is determined by the magnetic fields
from the write head and each bit contains thousands of grains. As data densities
get higher, and bit size smaller, the granularity of the medium has become
troublesome, giving rise to unacceptable "media noise". In principle the noise
could be reduced by decreasing grain size, but grains much smaller than are
presently in use are unstable against thermally activated magnetization
reversal. In this study, the magnetic structure and recording potential of
lithographically patterned nanoparticle arrays will be studied. In such a
medium, each nanoparticle is a single domain and a single data bit. The initial
studies will be on epitaxial cobalt thin films, where the crystalline uniaxial
anisotropy should allow the synthesis of single-domain bar shaped islands
magnetized in plane and also parallel to the short axis of the bar. Such a
nanoparticle array is compatible with present read-write technology. The single-
domain character of isolated individual nanoparticles will be carefully examined
using magnetic force microscopy and Lorentz microscopy. The stability of the
magnetization pattern in an array will be determined, and the signal-to-noise
characteristics of an array measured. To escape the restriction to a Cartesian
or hexagonal geometry inherent in the epitaxial films, synthesis will be pursued
of appropriately magnetized bar-shaped nanoparticles whose orientation on the
substrate can be arbitrary (radial or circumferential on a disk, for instance).
The required uniaxial anisotropy will be achieved using the anisotro pic strain
relief in a bar-shaped nanoparticle, coupled with the magnetostriction of the
material. The amorphous SmFe and SmCoFe family of highly magnetostrictive films
will be explored for this purpose. Again, single domain character, array
stability, and signal/noise characteristics will be evaluated. ***