* 9710137
* Consolidating Democracy?:  A Panel Study of Changes in the  Political Culture of Russia
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1999
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1999
* USD 370,766.00

One of the hallmarks of recent Russian politics is change. From a relatively
totalitarian regime, Russia has emerged as a nascent democracy. Whether this
democracy can be consolidated is one of the most important theoretical and
practical questions facing contemporary social science. Change in the former
Soviet Union provides invaluable opportunities for testing theoretical
propositions about democratization. In this investigation, change provides the
opportunity to study how ordinary people develop (or fail to develop)
attachments to basic democratic institutions and processes. Whether (and how)
ordinary Russians become committed to democratic institutions is an issue of
crucial importance for the consolidation of democracy in that country. As a
consequence of the importance of this issue and the research site, the
Foundation supported a major survey of the Russian mass public in 1996. The
purpose of that survey was to assess and compare the degree of support for
democratic institutions and processes (including political tolerance), to test
micro-level complements to theories of the relationship between institutional
and cultural change, to explore the influence of contextual factors on judgments
about the implementation of rights and liberties in Russia, and to conduct
several experiments within the survey, ranging from the methodological (e.g.,
acquiescence) to the highly substantive (e.g., persuasibility experiments). The
survey was highly successful, and analysis of it is currently under way.
Although this an other surveys are useful for assessing macro-level change in
Russian political culture, they are quite limited in their ability to address
change at the level of the individual citizen. Consequently, the current
investigation undertakes two additional waves of surveys of these respondents,
thus creating a three-wave panel stretching over the period 1996-1998. These
panel data are designed to assess several pressing theoretical and empirical
questions, including: a) to what degree is the short-term change of the
persuasibility experiments reproducible; to what degree does this change
generate more enduring changes in attitudes; b) does cultural change flow from
institutional change; do citizens learn new ways of thinking and acting from the
performance of their political, social and economic institutions; are mass
preferences endogenous; what is the relative influence of political and economic
institutions; c) what are the psychodynamics of the logical inconsistency
between supporting most democratic institutions and processes, but refusing to
tolerate one's political enemies. These and a number of other important
questions will be assessed. In assessing individual-level change, a variety of
micro-level theories (social learning, social networks, and civil society) are
being tested. In addition, the research focuses heavily on the interconnection
between political tolerance and other components of the democratic belief
system. Earlier research has shown that tolerance is little related to other
democratic values, a finding peculiar to Russia. The current project
investigates that non-relationship with considerable diligence, determining
whether the crystallization of democratic belief systems results in the
recognition of political tolerance as a crucial democratic value.