* 9710299
* Engineering Foundation Conference:  Seperations             Technologies  VII
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Charles Eckert, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ
* 09/30/1998
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9710299 Proposal Type: Request for Conference Support
Principal Investigator: David Savage Affiliation: Engineering Foundation This
grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-element of
the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division. The grant is to the Engineering Foundation for partial
sponsorship of the Engineering Foundation Conference on Separations Technology
to be held in Davos, Switzerland, October 26-31, 1997. The conference will
highlight the complex issues associated with integrating thinking about
separation process performance and cost, and environmental considerations.
Emphasis will be on the means for increasing separation selectivity and yield,
leading to less waste and pollution. The conference is designed to bring
together basic and applied researchers with developers of new industrial
processes. Technical and poster sessions, designed to facilitate discussion and
interaction, will prmote an understanding of the complex, interdisciplinary
nature of separations technology and of the environmental challenges facing the
separations community. Bringing together specialists from industry and academia
will promote the interchange of ideas, and will encourage the participants to
apply their unique skills to developing new and better separations processes
that are environmentally sound.