* 9710214
* Becoming Democratic (?): A Panel Study of Learning to       Tolerate in South Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,07/31/2000
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2000
* USD 259,186.00

Abstract Gibson 9710214 This research extends the PI's previous research on the
process of democratization in South Africa. The current project is a second wave
panel study of 3,0331 persons who were interviewed in 1996. The second wave will
explore further respondents political intolerance, and changes that are
occurring in how South Africans are becoming committed to democratic
institutions and processes over the course of the early period of
democratization, the role institutional change plays in creating more democratic
attitudes, values and behaviors, the effect of efforts to induce tolerance
through persuasive communication, and the roles cognitive mobilization and civil
society play in creating more democratic attitudes and values. Great care is
being taken to minimize the loss of respondents in the second wave of the
design, to be sure that respondents can answer in their language of choice, to
be certain the questions and experimental scenarios used in the interviews are
equivalent across languages, that respondents represent the racial and
linguistic heterogeneity of the population, and that reliability estimates for
the instruments are calculable. The sophistication of the surveys in this
project fill a void that previous survey work in Africa has left because of the
questionable methods employed. The project extends theoretical developments in
our understanding of the process of democratization as well as provides an
invaluable dataset that will be available to other researchers at the conclusion
of the project. %%% This research extends the PI's previous research on the
process of democratization in South Africa. The current project is a second wave
panel study of 3,0331 persons who were interviewed in 1996. The second wave will
explore further respondents political intolerance, and changes that are
occurring in how South Africans are becoming committed to democratic
institutions and processes over the course of the early period of
democratization, the role ins titutional change plays in creating more
democratic attitudes, values and behaviors, the effect of efforts to induce
tolerance through persuasive communication, and the roles cognitive mobilization
and civil society play in creating more democratic attitudes and values. Great
care is being taken to minimize the loss of respondents in the second wave of
the design, to be sure that respondents can answer in their language of choice,
to be certain the questions and experimental scenarios used in the interviews
are equivalent across languages, that respondents represent the racial and
linguistic heterogeneity of the population, and that reliability estimates for
the instruments are calculable. The sophistication of the surveys in this
project fill a void that previous survey work in Africa has left because of the
questionable methods employed. The project extends theoretical developments in
our understanding of the process of democratization as well as provides an
invaluable dataset that will be available to other researchers at the conclusion
of the project. ***