* 9710276
* Seismic Shear Strength and Design of High-Strength Composite Steel and Concrete Structural Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* James Anderson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 07/31/2000
* USD 168,856.00

9710276 The objective of this research project is to gain additional knowledge
on flexural behavior of steel-reinforced-concrete (SRC) structural elements.
There is currently a lack of understanding of seismic shear behavior to support
the rational design for composite or hybrid structures. Specifically, the
following issues related to seismic shear design will be addressed. i. Shear
resisting mechanisms in SRC elements ii. Shear strength decay upon the increase
of displacement ductility as considered in design; and iii. Shear strength of
SRC elements of high-strength or high performance materials The research program
undertaken will focus on experimental and analytical investigations of the
cyclic shear behavior of high- strength composite steel and concrete (HS-SRC)
structural elements. Both the experimental and analytical phases of the research
will be conducted on fundamental behavior of high strength SRC elements with
applications to moment-resisting frame structures. The emphasis is on the
evaluation of different shear resisting mechanisms and the influence of
ductility, as well as calibration and development of models to best assess
contributions of various shear resisting mechanisms. Results from this research
will be used to develop acceptable seismic design guidelines. The research will
not only enhance our understanding of HSC structures, but also lead to practical
and reliable design of SRC structures and well as development of HSC systems
using high strength materials. This is a project supported under NSF initiative
No. 94-154 "Composite and Hybrid Structures". ***