* 9710509
* Control of Asymmetric Strain Relaxation in Lattice-         Mismatched InGaAs/GaAs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Karen Kavanagh, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2000
* USD 273,992.00

9710509 Kavanagh This project strives for greater basic understanding of the
origins of anisotropic strain relaxation in epitaxially strained InxGa(1-x)As.
The project addresses fundamental research issues and encompasses identification
of basic mechanisms of asymmetric strain relaxation in compound semiconductors
in general, along with an orientation toward technologically relevant material
combinations. The approach involves a systematic study of the effects of sample
miscut and doping which are expected to provide a precise method to compare the
effects of different mechanisms. Both InP and GaAs substrates will be used
allowing the study of anisotropies in high In compositions, and the
investigation of the effects of a phosphide based substrate on InGaAs relaxation
processes. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally,
the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected
to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices
and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing
and producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important
feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***