* 9710312
* Multi-Joint Dynamics:  A Model for Discrete and Rhythmic    Coordination Tasks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Stefan Schaal, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 07/31/2002
* USD 202,000.00

Even apparently simple tasks like reaching for an object involve the
simultaneous graded activation of a large number of joints and muscles. This
project investigates the principles that underlie the generation of such multi-
joint movements, and how perceptual information guides these actions. Whereas
many of the current theoretical approaches are limited to either rhythmic or
discrete movements, this project will develop an integrated framework that
encompasses both movement types and therefore can be applied to complex
movements. The investigation will proceed in three interrelated directions.
First, theoretical work will develop a model for movement generation on the
basis of a network of coupled dynamic systems. Second, experiments with human
subjects will study the specific features of movement trajectories in tasks
involving multi-joint arm movements. Third, the model will be used to synthesize
movements of a human-like robot arm in order to compare these model-driven
movements with the movements of the human participants. In this way the model's
validity and robustness will be tested in a real physical environment. In
addition to increasing our basic understanding of complex movement generation
the results should be applicable to the control of artificial devices such as
robotic systems or limb prostheses, and may also contribute to the diagnosis and
treatment of movement disorders.