* 9710195
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation into Labor Market Responses to External and Regional Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Daniel Hamermesh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1998
* USD 8,000.00

This research will investigate how labor demand and supply shocks affect wage
inequality and employment patterns. Specifically, external shocks manifested in
trade and migration, regional shocks from changing of political structure, and
localized shocks from government employment programs will be investigated in
order to address the following questions. First, how do changes in trade and
migration flows affect the returns to skill? Second, how do changes in political
structure affect the regional distribution of employment? Finally, can a
government employment program mitigate the effects of external shocks and reduce
wage inequality? In order to address these questions, this research will use
household labor force surveys from the West Bank and Gaza Strip from 1981-1996
and a variety of supplemental data sources in order to estimate the effects of
these changes in labor demand and supply on the returns to different types of
workers. The variety and severity of the shocks to the economies in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip will allow this research to investigate these issues in ways
not possible when using data from the US or other countries. Because of the
uniqueness of these data, this research will be able to simultaneously test
competing theories of the source of wage inequality, which has not yet been done
using US data.