* 9710325
* Emerging Party Systems in Post-Soviet Societies:  A Study of Party Activists
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Arthur Miller, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

Recent political science literature reflects a growing controversy regarding
the formation of political parties and party systems in post-Soviet societies.
The eventual outcome of the controversy holds implications for our basic
understanding of how party systems form and the role parties play in developing
democracies. The substantive debate is focused on the questions of whether or
not the political parties that have emerged in the newly independent states of
the former Soviet Union exhibit the types of political characteristics that
allow us to conclude that they constitute a competitive multi-party system. Two
distinct camps have emerged on either side of this query. One set of scholars,
drawing upon traditional theories of party formation, argue that the formation
of institutionalized party systems in post-Communist states will be a long and
arduous process because these societies lack previous multi-party socialization.
They see the current post-Soviet parties as ephemeral, lacking a firm foundation
in policy preferences, thus reflecting nothing more substantial than a fan club
for the party's leader. On the opposite side of the argument, recent research
reveals a rapid rise in the proportion of post-Soviet citizens who identify with
a political party and who vote for the party with which they identify. To date
the empirical evidence presented in this debate, on both sides, has been limited
and inconclusive. This investigation provides the first comparative data on
Russia, Ukraine and Lithuania that incorporates directly comparable evidence on
the level of institutionalization currently attained by party organizations,
parties in the electorate and the parties in government. Prior research of the
investigator provides the data on parties in the electorate and in government.
This study carries out a systematic study of parties as organizations.
Information on party structures and the attitudes of party activists is obtained
through face-to-face survey interviews with 400 party activists and leaders in
each of Russia and Ukraine, and 200 party activists in Lithuania. The resulting
dataset provides the first comprehensive examination of party organizations in
these three post-Soviet societies. The data provide a benchmark for future
studies of party development in these new democracies. The dataset will be of
great use to scholars interested in political party emergence in new democracies
of the former Soviet Union.