* 9710434
* SGER:  Induction by Beta-Lactam Antibiotics of Beta-Lactam  resistance and other Heritable Alterations in Flexibacter   maritimus
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1998
*  Robert Burchard, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Burchard 9710434 When the bacterium Flexibacter maritimus is exposed to variety
of antibiotics, resistant mutant colonies arise. When ampicillin or other beta-
lactam antibiotics are used, a striking result is seen after four to five days
of incubation. Resistant colonies appear on the plates at a frequency of between
one in 10,000 and 1 in 100,000. This is 10 to 100 times more frequent than would
be expected for spontaneous resistant mutants. In addition, the colonies that
arise have a non-gliding appearance, unlike the parent gliding strain. The non-
gliding phenotype persists with subculturing in the absence of the antibiotic.
Fluctuation tests with Eschericia coli and ampicillin, or Flexibacter maritimus
with other antibiotics such as tetracyline and vancomycin produce results
consistent with selection of pre-existing, spontaneous mutants. Replica plating
experiments with F. maritimus and ampicillin show results inconsistent with the
selection of spontaneous mutants. A number of approaches are being undertaken to
determine the mechanism of production of the mutations, such as the possible
induction of a transposable element that would increase the frequency of
mutations in the bacteria. Another possibility is that there are non-genomically
encoded changes in wall structure that might be heritable. Although the causes
of these mutations may eventually be ascribed to conventional mechanisms, there
is the possibility that an unusual genetic or epigenetic mechanism may be
operating.