* 9710399
* Life Paths of a Generation and Societal Institutions in the USSR and its Successor States: A Longitudinal Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Nancy Tuma, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2001
* USD 408,159.00

This is a longitudinal study of youth in areas of the former Soviet Union. It
is Wave 4 of "Paths of a Generation," a longitudinal study of graduates from a
stratified, clustered sample of secondary schools in 1983-1984, in five of the
successor states of the Soviet Union: Latvia, Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, and
Tajikistan. The researchers will also analyze the data from Wave 4, as well as
data on the same individuals collected in the three earlier waves (in 1983-1984,
1988-1989, and 1993-1994). The main aims are (a) to understand the structure and
mechanisms generating social stratification and social inequalities in both the
Soviet period and the period since the Soviet collapse; (b) to test theories
about the relative importance of structural, cultural, and individual factors
affecting social inequalities; (c) to examine the impact of these factors and of
social inequalities on political attitudes and participation; (d) to compare
these processes in the Soviet successor states with those in other countries,
including both other former state-socialist countries and market-oriented
industrial societies. An important feature of the project will be to capitalize
on a valuable existing longitudinal data base. This research project is among
the very most significant longitudinal studies of individuals in diverse areas
of the former Soviet Union during a period of dramatic social change. Thus it
will provide priceless insight into the transformation of these societies, whose
stability is of such great importance for the world. Employing advanced methods
of statistical analysis, this study will also test fundamental theories
concerning stratification, mobility and other processes of great interest to
sociologists.