* 9710776
* Dissertation Research:  Disciplining Environmentalism:      A Case Study of American Environmental Toxicology, 1965-1995
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Charles Camic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 06/30/1998
* USD 6,840.00

This dissertation project focuses on a case study analysis of American
environmental toxicology in order to better understand the processes involved in
the constitution of interdisciplinary sciences. Preliminary analysis suggests
that, since the early 1970's the field has developed into a well-established
interdisciplinary science. Comprised of government, industry, and academic
scientists with training in various biological and chemical sciences,
environmental toxicology exhibits substantial evidence of both `cognitive and
social institutionalization.` In contrast to much of the case study literature
that documents the institutionalization of mostly larger and older fields
representing the traditional disciplinary pantheon, environmental toxicology
represents a `deviant` case of scientific development -- the successful
institutionalization of an interdisciplinary science. The project focuses on the
questions: How did environmental toxicology achieve institutionalization as an
interdisciplinary science? To what extent have institutional actors outside
science shaped the organization of research on the ecosystemic impacts on
toxins? In answering these questions, the project draws from research on
scientific disciplines and boundary-making, and on the relationships between
science and social movements. The tentative hypotheses focus on the articulation
of environmental toxicology with the environmental movement in creating
opportunities to establish relationships with diverse, extra-scientific
audiences in order to gain legitimacy, secure resources, and recruit new
professionals.