* 9710099
* ESH - Phytolith and Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Early      Holocene Climate and Vegetation Change in the Great Plains  Grassland
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Glen Fredlund, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2001
* USD 153,952.00

9710099 Fredlund Documenting change in semi-arid grassland ecosystems through
time requires better proxy data than can typically be provided by pollen,
macrofossils, or other proxy data. Combining quantitative analysis of grass
phytolith and carbon isotopes is a practicable approach to documenting change
within semi-arid grasslands. The proposed project builds on the work begun under
a small ($30k) "Proof of Concept Award" now being completed (NSF-DEB-9510065).
In response to reviews of that proposal, efforts were focused on a few specific
fossil records. Application of the approach to sequence of late-Pleistocene and
Holocene paleosols and sediments at Wind Cave National Park, South Dakota,
documents the rapid early-Holocene rise of the mixed grass prairie composition
and subsequent climate-driven changes throughout the Holocene (Fredlund and
Tieszen, 1997). A second study, focusing on late-Quaternary records in south
Central Nebraska and adjacent Kansas (Fredlund and Tieszen, n.d.). This study
demonstrates the utility of phytolith analysis in quantitatively reconstructing
grassland vegetation and climate in the Great Plains of North America. The
modern data presented are the typical (average) assemblages for 34 modern
localities taken throughout the Great Plains. Modern assemblage variability
across the region is substantial. This variability shows a coherent geographical
pattern consistent with modern climate data: specifically July mean temperature.
Seven fossil assemblages from three late-Pleistocene localities in the central
Great Plains are presented. Two alternative phytolith-temperature regression
models are applied to these fossil assemblages to estimate paleo-temperature.
Resulting estimates are consistent with other efforts to calculate late
Pleistocene temperature departures in the region (ca.-7.0 to -8.0( C). The
fossil data also show rapid change in grassland composition and climate across
the Pleistocene-Holocene transition consistent with regional hypotheses. These
results demonstrate the utility of phytolith analysis as complement to, or
substitute for, pollen analysis in the Great plains of North America. The
proposed project has two goals: 1) To expand the modern analog data to a
geographically broader and more robust set of localities that can be better used
to quantitatively estimate grassland composition and climate, 2) the continued
development of early Holocene fossil records from the western central Great
Plains region with the end goal being a geographical synthesis showing grassland
compositional and climate over the Pleistocene-Holocene transition.
Methodological developments achieved by this project will be readily
transferable to other semi-arid grassland biomes.