* 9710660
* SBIR Phase II:  Method for Isolating Catalytic Antibodies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Anastassia Bogomolova, ONE CELL SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 06/30/2000
* USD 284,619.00

*** 9710660 One Cell Systems, Inc Trnovsky This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project proposes to isolate cocaine specific antibodies with
catalytic properties by encapsulating cells in gel microdrops (GMD) and
subsequently analyzing and sorting them using flow cytometry. Phase I research
demonstrated the feasibility of using GMD technology to screen cells for
catalytic activity using four different models each representing a distinct
location for catalytic antibody expression. Fluorescent products are retained
within the agarose microsphere and cells of interest recovered for cloning or
gene analysis using fluorescent activated cell sorting. Employing this assay in
defined microenvironments allows the identification and recovery of single cells
based on product formation and/or binding. Since cocaine specific antibodies are
expected to be rare and weakly catalytic, the microencapsulation technology is
particularly suited for these investigations. Successful completion of these
studies will lead to development of a rapid, automated method for isolating,
analyzing and recovering cells producing antibodies of interest. Catalytic
antibodies represent a virtually inexhaustible source of biocatalysts. The
ability to generate specific proteases would have a significant impact on
biotechnology and medicine for use as therapeutics as well as industrial
enzymes. The total worldwide market for catalytic antibodies is estimated to be
in excess of $1.0 billion. ***