* 9710000
* Early Childhood Development and Voucher Programs: Evaluation Using Randomized Assignment
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Michael Kremer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2002
* USD 179,692.00

Education is widely seen as essential for economic growth in developing
countries. Yet despite a large number of studies, there are significant gaps in
our knowledge of the relative effectiveness of different education policies. In
part, this is because it is difficult to separate out the effect of school
inputs from unobserved variables which also affect education, and may be
correlated with school inputs. This project will take advantage of randomized
treatment to evaluate two policies that have been increasingly advocated by
education specialists: promotion of Early Childhood Development (ECD) and
provision of vouchers to allow students to attend private schools. Both topics
are of interest not only to developing countries but also to developed
countries. The study of early childhood development will be conducted in
cooperation with a Dutch nonprofit organization which provides educational
assistance to Kenyan schools. The principal investigator taught secondary school
in rural Kenya for one year, and is currently collaborating with the
organization on a prospective, randomized study of primary education in rural
Kenya. This study will be extended to examine 100 locally run preschools.
Teachers in these preschools typically have no training beyond secondary school,
and receive about $10 per month in salary financed by parent fees. Under this
study, one half of the preschools will be randomly assigned to receive in-
service training and salary supplements for teachers, while the other half will
serve as a comparison group. The study of vouchers will examine the Subsidios
PACES program in Colombia. This program, which has been in operation since 1992,
was designed to allow students from poor households to attend private secondary
schools. Because there were not enough funds to provide all applicants with
vouchers, the vouchers were allocated using a lottery. Outcomes between 1,500
lottery winners and 1,500 lottery losers will be compared. The effect of both
programs on educational outcomes will be examined, including enrollment, daily
attendance, grade repetition, and scores on achievement tests. Further, the
effects of the programs on household decision making and on school organization
will be analyzed. Also, the project will examine whether the effects of the
programs vary with students' sex, socio economic status, age, or current school
performance Each study also raises its own specific sets of questions. For the
preschool study, the questions include the following: I ) Do untrained teachers
change their method of child-care after receiving training? 2) Do absenteeism
rates among teachers fall when they receive salary supplements? 3) Do parents
increase or decrease their support of schools when salary supplements were
provided to teachers? 4) Does improved pre primary education pay for itself by
reducing grade repetition in primary school? The study of the voucher program
will examine questions such as: 1) How many of the students supported by
vouchers in Colombia would have attended school in the absence of a voucher
program? 2) How many would have attended private schools? 3) What is the impact
of the program on educational attainment and cognitive achievement?