* 9710961
* Maya Hieroglyphic Database Project:  The Codices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Martha Macri, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1999
* USD 166,284.00

The goal of the Maya Hieroglyphic Database Project: The Codices is to continue
the task of putting the entire corpus of Maya texts from Mexico and Central
America into a graphics database for the purpose of increasing access to it. The
hieroglyphic texts on monumental sculpture from the Classic Period (A.D.
250-900) were the first to be included. Nearly every large site, and most of the
smaller ones will have been coded by June 1997. During the proposed phase the
hieroglyphic texts of the four Maya codices dating from the Postclassic Period
(A.D. 1100-1600) will be added to the database. These books constitute a major
part of the hieroglyphic corpus, and were the source of many early
decipherments. Line drawings will be scanned and divided into individual glyph
blocks and larger segments of texts (usually four glyphs blocks with
accompanying figure). They will be incorporated into the existing format used
for the monumental inscriptions in order to allow for full integration with
them. Each record will be coded for graphemic, lexical, grammatical, syntactic,
and temporal information. Not only will this increase overall access, but it
will contribute to ongoing research into possible language or dialect
differences between various sections of the codices. Yucatecan and Cholan
languages, the modern language families believed to be closest to the
language(s) of the Classic Maya are frequently put forward as the language of
the codices, but precise dialect differences have yet to be defined.
Phonological, lexical, and syntactic variation will be addressed in this
research. The hieroglyphic database including the low resolution line drawings
of glyph blocks and clauses will allow access to these texts never before
realized. It will also bring the most current transcriptions and translations of
the texts directly to the non-epigrapher, who may then utilize the historical,
archaeological, and linguistic information they contai n. It will provide
epigraphers with the ability to make truly comprehensive searches and
comparisons. This database will be available on a single CD-ROM (for both PC and
Macintosh systems). By fall of 1998, we expect to have portions of the database
will be available on the World Wide Web. The site currently contains a summary
of the project and will be periodically updated:
http://cougar.ucdavis.edu/nas/MAYA/home.html