* 9710795
* CRUI: Observations of PLA2 at the Phospholipid Interface
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Mary Walczak, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2002
* USD 502,615.00

9710795 The organization of the enzymes that work at biological membrane
surfaces will be studied by combining expertise in chemistry, physics and
biology. Indirect measurements suggest that their activity may be determined by
their arrangement (single, dimeric or aggregated) and by the length of time they
spend at the surface. In turn, the organization and dwell time of the enzyme is
altered by the lipid composition of the membrane. The goal is to directly
observe the state of these enzymes under a variety of conditions using scanning
probe microscopy (SPM), and to correlate these results with their catalytic
properties measured under similar conditions. Robust models of biological
membranes suitable for examination by SPM will be developed. Then these model
systems will be adapted for measuring enzyme activities and the membrane state
using optical spectroscopy and electrochemical techniques. Preliminary
experiments conducted by undergraduate students and faculty show that the
methods proposed are feasible and the information obtained will address a
fundamental question about how cell activities are controlled. Over the life of
this project, twenty or more undergraduate students will experience
collaborative, interdisciplinary research with sophisticated equipment,
addressing problems that could not be solved by a single researcher or
discipline alone. Nontechnical Abstract This project focuses on cell membranes,
thin layers of proteins and lipids that are crucial structures within and
bordering the cells of all living organisms. Cell membranes have many functions
including providing a means of organizing other components of the cell and
regulating traffic and information flow between the inside and outside of the
cell. One can describe the cell membrane in terms of its average composition,
but this is not sufficient to tell us how the membrane functions. The tools are
just being developed to describe the cell membrane at the level of detai l
needed to understand its function. One new technique, scanning probe microscopy
(SPM), measures the physical features of the membrane at a molecular scale by
probing in a manner analogous to the way the needle of a record player
systematically touches the record and converts the small changes in the vinyl to
an electrical signal and then to music. This type of probing will allow the
description of the membrane at the level of detail necessary to explain at least
one of its functions, the control of an important signaling pathway that
requires special interactions between a protein and the membrane lipids.