* 9710247
* Collaborative Research: Phrase Structure and C-Command
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Robert Frank, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 09/30/2000
* USD 69,070.00

Throughout modern linguistic theory, it has been assumed almost without
exception that sentences are best represented in terms of certain types of
abstract graphs called trees. The choice of trees as underlying sentence
structure captures a number of intuitions about the building blocks of sentence
structure, what are called constituents: they are contiguous; each constituent
has a unique structural position; every independent sentence comprises a single
constituent; etc. A grammatical theory must have some way of selecting those
trees that represent well-formed sentences. Consequently, it must make use of
some primitive vocabulary for talking about properties of linguistically
relevant tree structures. The question of what enters into this primitive
vocabulary has been relatively neglected. While the domination relation has been
widely assumed as a primitive, this project proposes that c-command, a highly
grammatically relevant structural relation, is a better choice and should
instead play the the central role of characterizing well-formedness. The
proposed research will address the following issues: (1) What is the precise
nature of c-command? What is the range of structural objects that it allows us
to define? (2) Is c-command expressive enough to define the constructs of
grammatical theory, while not being overly permissive as to allow the
definability of linguistically irrelevant structures? (3) To what degree can the
use of primitive c-command elucidate the otherwise puzzling dichotomy between
segments and categories that has been introduced in recent work to distinguish
different ways of relating constituents together? (4) In what respect are views
of grammar that build structural representations using sequences of derivational
steps simplified in the context of primitive c-command, in particular Chomsky's
minimalist proposals as well as Tree Adjoining Grammars, a system which has
achieved significant results both in theoretical and computational li nguistics?
(5) What are the implications of c-command for models of human sentence
processing? In particular, to what degree can the assumption that the parser
manipulates c-command relations account for the relative acceptability of
certain local ambiguities while explaining the existence of processing
difficulty for others? This project also aims to show that the use of c-command
in sentence processing can unify two competing strands of work in the
development of sentence processing models based on semantic dependencies and on
structural configurations, maintaining the advantages of each.