* 9711779
* Kinetic Studies of Simple and Complex Redox Centers Attached to Self-Assembled Monolayers on Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Harry Finklea, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 04/30/2000
* USD 237,000.00

Harry O. Finklea of the Department of Chemistry at West Virginia University is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities to carry out fundamental studies of the nature of
electron transfer reactions at electrode surfaces. By using self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) on gold and other electrodes, large overpotentials can be
reached that are usually inaccessible without being obscured by other processes
taking place at the electrode surface such as mass transport or double layer
charging. Redox moieties will be tethered to the SAM and kinetic studies will
include coupled proton and electron transfer, a comparison of electron transfer
rates through the tethering chain and through the neighboring diluent chains,
and characterization of the rates of various binuclear systems with different
attachment modes. Redox centers based on Co(II/III) will be used to probe the
validity of the Marcus density-of-states model for electron transfer kinetics
for the case of one-electron exchange centers with large and unequal
reorganization energies for the two oxidation states. SAMs will be made with
alkanethiolates. The objective of this work is to extend our knowledge of the
mechanisms of electron transfer reactions. Such reactions are at the heart of
batteries and many biological processes. The particular avenue chosen to
accomplish this is via surface reactions at metallic electrodes covered with a
self assembled organic monolayer. Such an arrangement makes it possible to make
the measurements required in a manner relatively free from other electrode
surface processes that often interfere.