* 9711418
* Random Allocations, Budget Constraints &amp; Walrasian          Equilibrium
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ennio Stacchetti, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2001
* USD 223,332.00

Project Abstract This grant funds two projects, one concerning economies with
discrete goods and agents with budget constraints, the other dealing with macro
policy games. The first is a collaboration with Faruk Gul from Princeton
University, and the second with Christopher Phelan from Northwestern University.
The first project builds on earlier work with Gul which concerns economies with
discrete goods, but without budget constraints, and extends the analysis to
economies where the agents face budget constraints. These constraints introduce
a new obstacle for the existence of Walrasian equilibria, in addition to the
indivisibility problem already present in the previous work. To circumvent this
new difficulty, we introduce random allocations, and expand the commodity space
to the space of lotteries. We argue that the resulting economy can be viewed as
a standard Arrow-Debreu economy with state- contingent commodities. Although
allowing for lotteries results in a standard convex economy, and thus the
existence of equilibrium is guaranteed, not every equilibrium of this economy
can be implemented. It is possible that there is no way of randomly allocating
the discrete goods among the agents, so that each agent's (random) allocation
coincides with one of his optimal lotteries. Besides competitive markets, we
also explore incentive compatible mechanisms, including strategy-proofness,
(interim) incentive compatibility, the dynamic implementation of mechanisms (or
Walrasian equilibria), and production in this setting. The second project
extends earlier work with Phelan concerning a Ramsey tax model. Macro policy
games confront the theorist with challenging technical issues. They involve a
continuum of consumers and state variables, like capital stock and government
debt. Most of the literature has partially adapted the strategic dynamic
techniques developed for repeated games, and uses rather crude punishment
strategies in drastically simplified models. We combine standard Euler
conditions with the dynamic programming techniques for repeated games, to
develop a new method for a general class of games with strategically anonymous
players. We establish analogues of the self-generation and factorization
theorems, which play a central role in the characterization of the equilibrium
value set of an infinitely repeated game. Despite the complexity of these macro
models, the method we develop afford, as in a repeated game, a complete
characterization of the equilibrium value set. Specifically, we are able to
study situations in which the first-best government policy cannot be
implemented. A main focus of the literature has been whether readily available
punishments can credibly sustain the government's optimal policy. Hence, second
best solutions have been almost totally neglected. Another issue we address with
the current method is the credibility of the punishments being proposed. In our
Ramsey tax model, for example, without any institutional constraints, the worst
equilibrium has the government taxing capital at 100% in every period, and the
consumers saving nothing. This doesn't seem to us a very credible punishment. In
the current project we consider the impact of imposing renegotiation-proofness
on the government's behavior.