* 9711626
* MMIA:  Terrestrial Biospheric Responses to Atmospheric      Deposition and Application to Integrated Assessment
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2002
* A. David McGuire, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 12/31/2002
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT Rastetter 9711626 Most integrated assessments of climate change do not
consider the effects of the deposition of atmospheric compounds on ecosystem
biogeochemistry. This project will study these effects in conjunction with the
responses of terrestrial ecosystems to changes in atmospheric chemistry and
climate and to incorporate these responses into an integrated assessment
framework. The work will emphasize the effects of nitrate deposition and of
ozone and sulfur dioxide exposure on global ecosystems. The MBL Terrestrial
Ecosystem Model (TEM) coupled to the MIT Coupled Chemistry-Climate Model(CCM).
TEM will be improved to include the influence of nitrate inputs and pollutant
exposure on ecosystem function. TEM and CCM will enable predictions relevant to
future economic viability of forests and their uptake of CO2. Because it is
expected that the future effects on ecosystems will be sensitive to the relative
mix of CO2, NOx, SO2 and CO emissions, predictions of anthropogenic emissions
from the MIT model for global and regional economic development (EPPA) will be
used as input to the CCM and TEM. The integrated effects and feedbacks of human
activity, atmospheric composition, climate, and ecosystem change will be studied
using the MIT Global System Model for Integrated Assessment of which TEM, CCM
and EPPA are coupled component submodels. Using sensitivity studies, it is
expected that the results of this work will help set priorities for future
research on the effects of atmospheric deposition on ecosystems.