* 9711951
* Conceptual Frameworks and Computational Support for         Organizational Memories and Organizational Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gerhard Fischer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/2001
* USD 735,000.00

This research investigates computer support for learning, working, and
collaborating. It focuses on communities of practice (such as local area network
managers and research teams) as subgroups within and across organizations. It
involves work with specific communities to study their actual and potential
learning processes. Based on the interpretation and assessment of these
observations and theories from the research literature and previous work the
project will develop and articulate a new conceptual framework for computational
support of organizational learning. The research issues to be addressed include
(1) how to capture knowledge and integrate the contexts of work; (2)how to
sustain timeliness and utility of evolving information, and (3) how to deliver
relevant information actively and adaptively. To assess and develop this
framework, organizational memories will be created in collaboration with these
communities, that include (1) mechanisms to capture and represent task
specifications, work artifacts, and group communications; (2) facilities for
practitioners to reorganize and sustain the usefulness of the memory; and
(3)techniques of access and delivery for knowledge relevant to current tasks,.
The project will extend emerging WWW technologies with structured web-site
interactivity, version control of evolving information, software critiquing
agents, and end-user programmability. Finally, the memory and learning
prototypes will be assessed in naturalistic settings.