* 9711406
* The Transition to Adulthood Among Urban Youth
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Karl Alexander, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2000
* USD 236,533.00

This is one wave of a longitudinal study of inner-city Baltimore youth. It
extends an on-going research project, known as the Beginning School Study (BSS),
into the post-high school period. Since 1982, the BSS has been tracking the life
progress of a representative random sample of Baltimore school children (N =
790) from when they began first grade. The majority of the BSS youth are
African-American and/or from poverty-level or near poverty-level households, and
so fit the "at-risk" profile. The BSS over the years has been monitoring the
study group's personal, social and academic development, gathering data from
them, their parents, teachers and schools at closely spaced intervals. This
phase of the work extends the BSS cohort into the years after high school by
conducting a final survey of the group in the spring/summer of 1998, four years
after high school for those who graduated on schedule. The 1998 survey will
secure the information needed to trace out the "natural history" of the group's
transition from adolescence to early adulthood in terms of family formation,
further schooling, and work experiences, while information already in the BSS
archive could be used to link post-high school experiences in these domains to
the details of these youths' personal development, academic development and
vocational development over virtually the entire history of their schooling.
Being able to trace developmental paths from early childhood to young adulthood
is an uncommon opportunity, and especially so for minority and economically
disadvantaged urban youth, who are not often the subjects in long-term
developmental research. Of particular interest is how the course of development
differs according to background attributes that limit (or expand) life
opportunities, comparing African-Americans with whites, males with females,
youth from higher socio-economic status families with those from lower socio-
economic backgrounds, and youth reared in different family structures such as so
lo-parent households versus other configurations. The completed data set will
also permit researchers to distinguish groups of youngsters whose starting
positions are similar in terms of "risk factors" (e.g., African-American youth
reared in low income, solo-parent households) but whose trajectories in the
post-high school period span the extremes of favorable and unfavorable
transition outcomes. With these distinctions drawn, the archived data then could
be used to examine circumstances of children's upbringing, their school and home
experiences, and personal resources that appear to have helped the one group
avoid and the other not avoid the cycle of disadvantage. This project will
provide data necessary for researchers to understand in detail how inner city
youth negotiate the transition to adulthood. The result will contribute to
scientific progress in the sociology of stratification, the social psychology of
child development, and other related fields. At the same time, it will provide
information that will contribute to intelligent policy formation concerning
young people in disadvantaged families and communities.