* 9711286
* Property Regimes and Deforestation:  A Quantitative Study   of the Central Himalayas
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,03/16/1999
* E Somanathan, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 03/16/1999
* USD 176,070.00

The effects of property institutions are central to economics. Yet, quanti
tative work on the effects of property institutions is rare in economics be
cause property institutions generally covary with political boundaries, and
therefore with other important variables. Thus, their impact tends to be
conflated with that of other factors. The main objective of this interdisci
plinary study are: to build a database that gives a measure of the extent of
ecological degradation suffered by forests in the Central Himalayas, and to use
it to perform a quantitative study that examines the importance of property
regimes versus demand-side factors, such as population, in causing such
degradation. The central Himalayan region of North India that constitutes the
study area has three property regimes in forests within the same ecological, eco
nomic, and cultural milieu. In all three cases, the forests are a common
resource, (as is typical in most tropical forests), so regulation or collective
action is needed to overcome the resulting tendency for over-exploitation.
Reserved Forests, which are state-managed, rely mainly on regulation, while
Panchayat Forests, managed by village councils, rely on collective action. The
third category, consisting of village forests not under formal manage ment, also
needs collective action to survive. Data on forest quality in the region is
obtained by analysis of satel lite images in conjunction with field work. A
sample of several thousand small plots of forest is taken and forest quality in
them measured. The presence of thousands of Panchayat Forests adjacent to
Reserved Forests provides an exceptional natural experiment to examine the
effect of property regimes on forest cover. By taking a subsample of plots which
lie across regime boundaries from each other, we can control for the effects of
all variables other than the legal regime. Multiple regression analysis is used
to relate forest quality in a plot of forest to the property regime, the
ecological type, demand-side variables such as accessibility, social character
istics of villages such as size and ethnic composition, and controls. Questions
such as: is local collective action more effective than state control in con
serving forests, how much do prices matter as compared to property regimes, and
do social factors influence the effectiveness of legal institutions, are
answered.