* 9711206
* Impact of Photochemistry on Carbon Cycling in the Sea
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Kenneth Mopper, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2001
* USD 332,579.00

Physical and biological processes are historically considered to be the most
important factors affecting the carbon cycle in the ocean. Specific processes
include air-sea CO2 exchange, surface mixing, venting of deep waters, carbon
fixation, respiration, calcium carbonate formation and sedimentation. Recent
studies now suggest that light-initiated (photochemical) processes also strongly
impact carbon cycling at the sea surface, particularly with respect to the
photodegradation of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and the production of
bacterial substrates. The evidence for the importance of photochemical oxidation
of aged, biologically refractory DOC includes: 1) irradiation of sterile-
filtered seawater results in high production rates of COz, CO and biologically
utilizable substrates, 2) low productivity central gyres appear to be net
heterotrophic (i.e., bacterial C utilization rates often exceed primary
productivity rates), 3) bacterial C utilization rates are estimated to be about
the same as the production rate of biologically labile substrates from DOM
photodegradation in open oceanic surface waters, and 4) a significant fraction
of the carbon assimilated by open ocean bacteria in surfaces waters is
isotonically old. Despite this strong evidence the quantitative importance of
photochemistry in the oceanic carbon cycle is still unknown. Studies will focus
on: (1) the photochemical production of CO2 and CO from marine DOM, (2) the
photochemical loss of DOC, and (3) the microbial uptake and remineralization of
photooxidized DOM. Results will assess the impact of photochemistry on carbon
fluxes and organic carbon mass balances in the water column, including primary
and bacterial productivities, microbial respiration and, at the BATS station,
particulate carbon fluxes. We expect Bacterial utilization of photooxidized,
aged DOM may largely explain the apparent discrepancy between high bacterial C
utilization rates and low primary productivity rates that have been frequently
observed for low productivity waters. Another important goal of this study is to
develop algorithms, based on action spectra, DOM absorbance and surface
irradiance, to predict photochemical rates in surface waters. These algorithms
in combination with remotely sensed DOM fluorescence to Predict CO2 and CO
photochemical production and DOC photodegradation rates over large areas of the
ocean. Previous successes in studying photochemical processes in a variety of
marine environments gives a strong foundation for assessing the importance of
these processes in the oceanic carbon cycle.