* 9711846
* Advanced OODBMS Conceptual Modeling for GIS and Other       Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Nancy Wiegand, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1999
* USD 18,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop high level conceptual modeling and
usage features in Object-Oriented Database Management Systems (OODBMSs) to
improve data analysis and querying. This work contributes to current research
within the database community to provide more comprehensive data management
support. Areas investigated include Geographic Information Systems (GISs),
engineering and other scientific applications. GIS applications have complex
data management needs because of the recent integration of thematic and spatial
data into the same system. Retrieving such information is currently complex and
non-standardized. Interest in GIS modeling and querying has been expressed
nationally by NCGIA and UCGIS. Current work is also being done by ODMG to
develop OODBMS standards for object- oriented modeling and language support. The
work here continues the efforts of these groups by studying modeling and query
needs of advanced applications. Another important application investigated
involves complex modeling and integration of engineering linear referencing
systems. The approach of this research is to analyze modeling and query needs by
working within application areas, evaluating the functionality of existing
application software, and consulting with domain experts. The results of this
research are conceptual models and query constructs that are at a higher level
of abstraction than what currently exists for object-oriented modeling and
languages. These models and constructs will more closely fit the data
organization and query needs of the application to allow more natural
representation of the data and expression of query statements. This research
will provide stronger data management and analysis capabilities for complex
problem solving.