* 9711839
* CONACyT: Subsurface Transport Modeling on Clusters of       Workstations Connected by WAN
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Christopher Freitas, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 09/30/2001
* USD 175,000.00

This project will investigate issues associated with performing distributed
parallel computations on clusters of workstations connected locally by ATM
(asynchronous transfer mode) switches, and local super-clusters globally
connected WAN. This study will be performed in the context of a critical
application area of concern and interest to both the United States and Mexico,
that of subsurface transport of chemical species occurring in the border region
between Mexico and the United States. This proposal has three goals: (1) the
proposed will bring together the resources and expertise of SwRI and ITESM to
investigate critical elements necessary for the creation of a regional meta-
computer ultimately providing an analysis and diagnostic tool to support a
regional water which combines the resources of SwRI and ITESM into a useful
computational facility, (2) investigate the effectiveness of different
programming models (PVM, MPI, HPF, Fortran M, HPC++) applied over a WAN-based
meta-computer in the context of a real world application code, and (3)
demonstrate the utility of the meta-computer through application of the enhanced
MULTIFLO code to the simulation of the border region, subsurface environment.
This research will compliment programs already on-going at both SwRI and ITESM
in distributed parallel computing, network technology, and subsurface transport.
Through this effort, the computational resources of SwRI and ITESM will be
linked through high-speed WAN technology and methods developed for the efficient
use of such a meta-computer.