* 9711203
* The Measurement of Mass Independent Isotopic Compositions   in Atmospheric Species as a New Index of Global Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2000
* USD 350,000.00

9711203 Thiemens This project consists of stable isotope measurements (oxygen,
sulfur) of atmospheric carbon dioxide, molecular oxygen, water, and size
separated sulfate aerosols. These measurements distinguish mass dependent and
independent isotopic compositions as a diagnostic probe of such phenomena as the
photochemical coupling between carbon dioxide and ozone, the global carbon cycle
reservoir transfer, stratosphere-troposphere and stratosphere-mesosphere mixing,
and sulfate aerosol sources and transformation mechanisms. A global sampling
program will utilize ground, shipboard, and aircraft-based, as well as
stratospheric balloon and rocket collection. Stratospheric and mesospheric
carbon dioxide possesses a large and variable mass independent oxygen isotopic
composition, which derives from interaction with singlet atomic oxygen, whose
abundance is not easily measurable. Upper atmospheric measurements will be
continued to determine the quantitative source of this isotopic variation and
the seasonal and spatial variations. In collaboration with international
scientists, samples will be obtained from stratospheric balloons, a sampling
system in the cargo hold of a commercial aircraft, and rockets. Water from
samples collected earlier by rockets will be analyzed for stable oxygen
isotopes, which will provide information on the sources of stratospheric water.
Water from in situ methane oxidation should maintain the ozone mass independent
composition, whereas water from the troposphere is mass dependent. The anomalous
isotopic characteristic acquired by carbon dioxide (mass independent) in the
stratosphere specifically tags it with respect to tropospheric (mass dependent)
carbon dioxide. Therefore, isotopic measurements of carbon dioxide, combined
with simultaneous measurements of a cosmogenic sulfur nuclide, allow the
identification of stratospheric incursions. Carbon dioxide samples will be
obtained from various ground-based stations including La Jolla, the Arctic,
Antarctic, India, a nd on ships in the Indian ocean. Sulfate aerosols will be
collected in six size fractions and analyzed for all three oxygen and all four
sulfur stable isotopes. The isotopic signature possibly reflects homogenous vs.
heterogeneous oxidation pathways. The sulfur isotopes will also partly define
sources. Rain samples will be collected and the sulfate analyzed. A short lived
cosmogenic nuclide will be measured to determine the relative age and deposition
velocity of sulfur oxides.