* 9711062
* A Synthon Approach to Selective Fluorination Using Vinyl-   and Propargylphosphonates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Gerald Hammond, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2001
* USD 201,700.00

The focus of this research involves the development of second generation
fluorophosphonate synthons. To this end, the synthesis of fluorinated gamma-
silyl-alpha-fluoroalkyne phosphonates in conjunction with solid phase
fluorination studies, the use of phosphonate as a leaving group and the
synthesis of cyclic alpha-fluoro- and alpha, alpha-difluoroalkyne phosphonates
will be carried out. The long-term goals of the research include solid phase
fluorine incorporation of a gem-difluoropropargyl unit, synthesis of fluorinated
phosphonic analogs of nucleotides, synthesis of heterocyclic alpha-fluoro
phosphonates and transmission of chirality at the fluoromethylene carbon in
alpha-fluorpropargyl phosphonates. With this renewal Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Gerald B. Hammond of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth. Professor Hammond will focus his work on
developing a group of reagents known as fluorophosphonate synthons. These
molecules are versatile synthetic intermediates as precursors to
fluorophosphonates , an important group of biological phosphate mimics, and as
fluorine containing synthons for the preparation of organofluoro compounds. The
proposed research will be carried out, in the main, by undergraduate students.