* 9711923
* Kinetics and Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Reactions Involving Carbonyl Sulfide in Sulfuric Acid Media
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Michael Hoffmann, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/2002
* USD 430,000.00

9711923 Hoffmann Carbonyl sulfide (COS) is the primary reduced-sulfur source of
sulfuric acid in the stratosphere, and is the most abundant sulfur compound in
the atmosphere. The production of sulfuric acid aerosol from carbonyl sulfide
involves the photodissociation of COS and oxidation by oxygen to yield sulfur
dioxide, which, in turn, is oxidized by hydroxyl radicals to sulfuric acid.
Sulfuric acid condensation leads to the formation of aerosols. The stratospheric
sulfate aerosol layer influences the earth's radiation budget. It is proposed
that certain reaction pathways that link the global sulfur and nitrogen cycles
(via the oxidation of COS and reduction of nitric acid) may play an important
role in the heterogeneous chemistry of the upper troposphere and lower
stratosphere, and may affect the ratios of NOy to NOx in the upper troposphere.
In this project, the bulk-phase kinetics, mechanisms, and thermodynamics of
selected reactions and processes involving COS in concentrated sulfuric acid
solutions will be investigated over a broad range of temperature and solute
conditions. Reactions of COS with water (acid-catalyzed hydrolysis), protonated
hydrogen peroxide, nitronium ion, sulfate radical anion, and nitrate radical
will be studied. Secondary research objectives include: the determination of the
speciation of binary sulfuric acid/water systems and ternary sulfuric/nitric
acid/water systems as a function of temperature, composition, and thermal
history, the determination of the acidic strength of the perhydroxonium ion and
protonated COS, and the determination of the effective Henry's Law constants for
hydrogen peroxide and carbonyl sulfide. Experimental techniques to be employed
include multi-wavelength rapid-scan stopped-flow spectrophotometry, long path-
length laser absorption spectroscopy in a liquid-phase cryogenically-controlled
White cell configuration, Raman spectroscopy, time-resolved Raman spectroscopy,
and attenuated total reflectance FTIR.