* 9711528
* Automatic Active Vision Based Target Tracking for           Recognition in Underwater
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Shahriar Negahdaripour, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/2002
* USD 294,096.00

9711528 Negahdaripour Vision-based automatic target tracking for recognition
(ATR) is an important capability for intelligent or autonomous robotics systems.
Applications include searching for (lost) objects, localization of nearby
obstacles, mapping, docking with structures or moving objects surveillance, and
surveying. Despite progress on the development of vision- based terrestrial and
airborne ATR systems, realization of similar capabilities for submersible
systems is a challenging problem due to the unique conditions of the undersea
environment. This research effort involves a study of the vision-based ATR
problem using a theory-based scientific approach, resting on physics-based
modeling and active sensing paradigms. The goal is to provide an underwater
vehicle system with the intelligence to perform the following functions
autonomously: Explore immediate surroundings without collision with nearby
obstacles. Locate objects of interest and fixate on them. Make intelligent moves
and execute appropriate actions to efficiently examine the target and obtain
useful information for recognition. Construct a knowledge base about the scene
by integration of information from multiple views and different imaging
conditions. Specifically, the researchers seek to develop techniques for
obtaining information (e.g., three-dimensional shape, range, motion, reflectance
properties) about objects in the scene from video data, according to: Physics-
based models of underwater image formation, taking into account scene geometry
and reflectance characteristics, illumination and viewing geometry, and ocean
optical properties. Novel theories for adaptive online adjustment of sensor
parameters (e.g., field of view, focus of attention), and positions and
directions of viewing and scene illumination, to optimize data quality and
information content. Mathema tical approach to registration and merging of
visual information, obtained from various views and under different imaging
conditions. ***