* 9711627
* MMIA: Integrated Assessment of African Savannas with        Spatial- Dynamic Vegetation and Land Use Modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Ellis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2001
* USD 450,000.00

Coughenour 97-11627 Current projections of the effects of global climate change
on terrestrial ecosystems are generated through simulations of climate-
vegetation interactions at regional to global scales. However current models
generally predict new equilibrium conditions and do not emulate process-driven
transient conditions which could last for a long time, or even indefinitely if
climate variability increases substantially. The models do not resolve
vegetation responses to landscape structure, nor do they represent vegetation
responses to herbivory by wild or domestic animals, or other human land uses. A
major objective of this project is to evamate how much one can improve estimates
or climate change effects on vegetation, ecosystems and people, by using
process-oriented ecosystem-level simulauons. Current climate patterns will be
used to drive three different types or models (quasi-equilibrium, SAVANNA-
climate, SAVANNA-biotic), all parameterized to simulate extant vegetation
conditions in the Serengeti Regional Ecosystem; a savanna system where soil,
landscape features, human land use, fire and herbivore impacts all interact with
climate to influence vegetation patterns and ecosystem state. Differences among
models in predictions of responses to global change will be evaluated in terms
of: (a) the accuracy of the models at predicting extant and as potential
vegetation under current and doubled CO2 climate conditions; (b) the effects of
considering herbivory, land-use compared to climate alone; (c) the effects of
spatial scale on the predicted responses Supporting field and remote sensing
studies will result in a better understanding of current vegetation in
relationship to climate, soils, herbivory, and land use. The research will be
relevant to natural resources policy in the East African region. The integrated
modeling approach will have utility for government land management and planning,
for famine early warning, for park and game reserve managers, and for pastoral
peoples. The re search will contribute to the development of dynamic global
vegetation models (DGVM's).