* 9711017
* Dissertation Research: Joseph Dalton Hooker's Scientific    Exploration in India
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Keith Benson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 08/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Joseph Dalton Hooker became one of the most influential British naturalists of
the nineteenth century: he produced impressive taxonomic and phytogeographical
research, served as director of Kew Gardens and president of both the Royal
Society and the BAAS, provided seminal botanical advice for Charles Darwin's
theory of evolution, enjoyed close personal relationships with numerous
preeminent scientific authorities throughout Europe, and played a central role
in the transformation of the amateur natural scientist into the professional
civil servant. Yet despite his distinguished career, he did not hold his first
permanent professional scientific position until three weeks before his thirty-
eighth birthday. This study will examine his life during the formative,
unsettled years of 1845 (when local; politics cost him his bid to become
professor of botany at Edinburgh) and 1855 (when he finally achieved assistant
directorship at Kew), a period anchored by three-and-a-half years of scientific
exploration in India. It will trace his experience as he navigates diverse,
social, cultural, and physical terrain in the quotidian practice of his daily
life, to uncover his methods for acquiring natural knowledge, how he
communicated this knowledge to colleagues and the public, what won his
reputation, what he had to do to provide a living income, and the ways he
harmonized science and family life. Among the historiographic issues addressed
will be the importance of `traditions` within natural history, the apportioning
of scientific authority among field and museum work, the role of
professionalization and institution-building, the methods and purposes of
scientific representation, the relationship between science and imperialism and
between metropole and periphery, and the position of women, and more strictly
wives, within `manly` Victorian science. The decade surrounding Hooker's time in
India provides an excellent opportunity to chart the ways an ambitious, talented
and accomplished but professionally insecure young naturalist negotiated his
identity in high Victorian Britain, and in turn reveals much about the character
of science during a period of distinct social and cultural change.