* 9711498
* Technical Change in Integrated Assessment Models:           Estimating CO2 Mitigation Costs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Hadi Dowlatabadi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

The climate policy discussions have moved beyond issues of scientific
uncertainty to the realm of the path along which greenhouse gas abatement should
be implemented. Reducing greenhouse gases will involve government intervention
to spur greater carbon efficiency in the economy. This can be brought about
through a variety of actions: standards in appliance, building, and
transportation efficiency; imposition of carbon taxes so that consumers choose
fuels which have lower carbon contents, and patterns of activity which are more
carbon efficient; distribution of carbon emission permits which will limit the
carbon dioxide that can be emitted nationally, and; investment in R&amp;D for
renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency. Surprising as it may seem,
we do not have a clear idea of which, individual or combination, of
intervention(s) above is the best route for obtaining climate policy goals. In
fact, in our assessment of carbon dioxide abatement, we have not considered how
policy induces technical change, thus bringing about more cost efficient
technologies for meeting the objectives of the policy. In this research, the
investigators will use historical data to study how past crises and regulations
have brought about technological change. They will examine how the oil crisis
lead to energy efficient gains and how the clean air act led to innovations in
air pollution control technologies. The investigators also will examine issues
in the theoretical treatment of technological change. The goal is to develop the
insights and methods needed to inform policy assessment tools about how to
differentiate between the different actions the government may take to bring
about cost effective greenhouse gas mitigation.