* 9711916
* Remote Sensing of the NE Pacific: Retrospective and         Concurrent Time Series Analysis using Multiple Sensors on   Multiple Scales
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Jan Svejkovsky, Ocean Imaging
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2001
* USD 232,853.00

PROJECT SUMMARY: A significant number of physical and biological variables
covary within and between the boundary currents of the subarctic and subtropical
gyres in the NE Pacific Ocean. These (summarized in US GLOBEC Reports 17, 11 and
7) include the strength of the transports, surface temperatures, zooplankton
biomass and the catch of commercially important fishes. Time scales range from
individual events to interdecadal regime shifts. The mechanisms by which these
physical and biological fields covary are unknown, but it is postulated that the
same mechanisms involved in interannual variability also affect long term
climatic variability. Clarification and quantification of the mechanisms
governing interannual variability will therefore help to `model` the biological
and physical responses of these economically and ecologically important systems
to future climate change. One of the principal strategies for addressing
variability across these time and space scales and their potential linkages is
to make effective use of historical and presently available multi sensor
satellite data sets. The goal of this proposal is to process, archive and
analyze environmental data from a number of satellite sensors and other sources
in order to characterize and quantify the dominant modes of variability in
surface transports, temperature and pigment concentrations in the NE Pacific
Ocean. The analyses will cover multiple time/space scales, considering basin
scale connections, mesoscale circulation within specific regions of the boundary
currents, and small scale, nearshore circulation in two of the regions. In
addition to the analysis carried out in this project, these data will be made
available over Internet and on CDROM to other investigators. On the basin scale,
the project will quantify the exchange between the West Wind Drift (WWD), the
Coastal Gulf of Alaska (CGOA) and the California Current System (CCS), testing
the often used hypothesis that the covariability in the two boundary currents is
due to changes in the location of the WOOD. The alternate large scale hypothesis
is that this is not the case that these boundary currents are forced by the
large scale wind systems and that these atmospheric systems covary between the
basins. Satellite altimeters and scatterometers provide the instruments to test
this hypothesis for the first time. Consistently reanalyzed atmospheric model
winds allow a test of the wind covariability over a longer period than possible
with the satellite data. The largescale modes of transport variability will be
quantified using EOF analysis and Canonical Correlat on Analysis. On the
mesoscale, within each boundary current, the combination of AVHRR SST and/or
satellite ocean color with altimeter data can resolve mesoscale circulation
features with scales of 50 100 km or less. AVHRR and ocean color data, with 1 km
resolution, will be collected and processed in ongoing fashion for the three
years of the project (1998 2000). Historical 1 km AVERR data over the CCS (25Ý
55ÝN) for the period 1981 1997 will also be processed in identical fashion.
These data, will allow an examination of the mesoscale circulation (location and
seasonality of jets and eddies) around the sites proposed for process studies in
Phase II of the US GLOBEC/CoOP study. The direct transport along the boundaries
of British Columbia and the Northwest US will also be examined, to provide
greater details about the large scale connection between the gyres. Other areas
of focus will be: the region around the Columbia River Plume, due to the impact
on out migrating Coho salmon; the region west of Prince William Sound, where
juvenile salmon encounter the Alaskan Stream; and details of the flow from the
coastal ocean along central and southern Oregon into the core of the California
Current oflf northern and central California. The analysis will test the
hypothesis that much of the interannual variability seen off central California
in the CalCOl?I data set comes from the upwelling region off Oregon, rather than
from the WOOD. Combination of the satellite data with in situ data collected
during monitoring studies (funded by GLOBEC or other sources) will be used to
transform the satellite circulation fields into mass, heat and pigment surface
transports. Timing of seasoual transitions will be another focus, due to
possible mismatches of coastal ocean environmental couditions with salmon out
migrations.