* 9711607
* The Economics of Carbon Taxes and Permits:  An Integrated   Climate Economy Assessment of Policy Efficiency Under       Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2000
* William Pizer, Resources For the Future Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2000
* USD 95,960.00

The threat of climate change due to man-made emissions of greenhouse gases has
motivated considerable interest in government policies to reduce or stabilize
these emissions. At the same time, it has been argued that such policies have
the potential to wreak havoc on the economy and should therefore be postponed
until more is known about the mechanism and consequences of climate change. The
essence of these conflicting positions is uncertainty about the cost of reducing
emissions, uncertainty about the benefits associated with those reductions, and
the best course of action to balance the two. This project seeks to identify
optimal responses to threat of climate change in the presence of uncertainty
about both costs and benefits. The first part of this research program develops
an integrated model of the global economy and climate that incorporates
uncertainty about both. Not only are uncertain outcomes modeled, but a
consistent scheme for comparing these outcomes across policies is developed. The
second part of the program uses the model and evaluation scheme to analyze
different policies -- in particular, taxes and permits -- to determine which
alternatives do the best job of balancing uncertain costs and benefits. While
existing economic theory predicts a difference in efficiency between tax and
permit policies in the presence of uncertain costs, it provides little practical
guidance concerning the scale or direction of this difference. Simulations of
the integrated climate-economy model, however, will generate an empirical
estimate of this difference. In addition to advancing the methodology of policy
simulation and evaluation under uncertainty, the resulting analyses can be used
by policymakers to make more informed decisions about how to best combat climate
change.