* 9711691
* Dissertation Research: Stress and Social Organization in    Rural Compared to Urban Communities in Botswana
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Carol Worthman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1999
* USD 11,094.00

Some studies support the hypothesis that impersonal urban environments cause
greater stress than do kin-based rural environments. This project will refine
this hypothesis by addressing three questions: (i) how do potentially stressful
socioecological factors (e.g., wage dependency, community cooperation,
expectations of affluence) relate to the urban-rural continuum; (ii) how do such
socioecological factors influence stress; and (iii) how do individual
differences (e.g., age, personality, life-history) influence stress. The study
will compare 70 individuals in two Botswana communities: a remote village with
under 500 population, and a low-middle income neighborhood of Gaborone with
150,000 population. During nine-months field research, participant observation
and key informants will provide an ethnographic foundation for more focused
methods. Data on independent variables (socioecological and individual
differences) will be collected from each subject during four separate
interviews: (1) one-hour structured life-history; (2) one-hour structured social
networks; (3) two-hours structured personality; and (4) one-and-a-half-hours
cultural models. Stress (dependent variable) and daily experience will be
assessed during three-days using twice-daily visits to collect samples of saliva
and observations of immediate life-history experiences. Saliva samples will be
analyzed using a radioimmunoassay procedure to determine content of cortisol on
return from Botswana. Analyses will use repeated measures design multivariate
linear regression.