* 9711168
* Fabrication of a High Throughput Flow Imaging Cytometer for Analysis of Plankton Populations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/2000
* USD 340,264.00

9711168 Sieracki The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences will undertake an
instrument development project to construct an imaging flow cytometer that can
enumerate and classify plankton in the size range of 3 to 1200 micrometers and
provide a new tool for biological oceanography and coastal monitoring. This
system will allow researchers to rapidly count, image and size medium and large
plankton automatically, instead of with conventional, laboratory intensive
methods. Commercial and laboratory flow cytometers available for marine research
cover the range of cell sizes from 0.3 to 100 micrometers. This is not
sufficient since there are many microbial organisms in the 100 to 1000
micrometer range present in marine and inland waters. Furthermore, these systems
do not take images of the measured cells, leaving the user with limited
information. The instrument proposed is based on a working prototype and employs
cell imaging, digital image processing and fluorescence and scattered light
monitoring to analyze marine particles in the size range mentioned above. The
proposed system will improve the sensitivity and fluorescence and scattered
light triggering of the prototype which has already proven the usefulness of a
portable fluorescence triggered imaging system. The instrument is planned for
use in several studies, including large phytoplankton grazing and toxicity,
harmful algae monitoring, coastal monitoring and the distribution of marine
coccoliths.