* 9711064
* A Planning Grant to Model Peer Review Competitions and      Identify Data Sources
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Stanley Heginbotham, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1998
* USD 14,980.00

This planning project will develop a probabilistic model for evaluating results
from peer reviewed competitions and identify competitions with which to test it.
Standard test-retest replications of peer review competitions have limited
utility in guiding those responsible for the design and conduct of such
competitions towards cost-effective measures to enhance their reliability. This
project uses a probabilistic model, building on a simple but elegant approach
first presented by Stinchcombe and Ofshe. The model assumes knowledge of the
`true` distribution of a set of applications with respect to merit and then
tests for the probabilities of errors (differences between the true and the
judged distributions) under varying circumstances. This planning grant will
allow the investigator to complete the research needed to prepare a paper
explaining the model. He will also identify agencies with competitions that
would provide suitable data with key parameters (inter-judge correlation levels
and variations in judges' rating standards) that can be used to test the model.
He will ask program officers for the terms under which they could contribute
their data to a larger set that can be used for this purpose. NSF will receive
an overview report specifying the range of competitions from which data could be
obtained and the coding format that could make it accessible and useful to other
scholars pursing peer review issues.