* 9711279
* U.S.-Baltics/Former Soviet Union/Central European Workshops in Environmental Chemistry and Short-Term U.S. Visits by    Early Career Scientists from the Region
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Michael Doyle, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2001
* USD 129,300.00

INT-9711279 Malin These three joint workshops in environmental chemistry, in
which U.S. researchers from the American Chemical Society will join with their
counterparts in Lithuania, the Newly Independent States NIS , and the Czech
Republic, will take place in Palanga, Lithuania (June 1997), St. Petersburg,
Russia (May 1998), and Prague, the Czech Republic (Summer 1999). At each
workshop a selected group of around ten U.S. environmental chemical scientists
will confer with fifteen local scientific counterparts to develop plans and
recommendations for scientific research addressing the unique environmental
problems of the region. Also, for each year, the American Chemical Society will
select three early-career scientists from among nominees identified by the
counterpart organizations. Each of the participants will make a short-term visit
of at least two months' duration to a research laboratory in the U.S. The
project will give U.S. chemical scientists an opportunity to consider
environmental problems in unique regions of the Baltics, the NIS, and central
Europe. The participants can be expected to develop long-term cooperation and
joint research in environmental chemistry between U.S. laboratories and some of
the "best and brightest" early-career chemical societies in the
Baltics/NIS/central European region. In addition, the program should strengthen
U.S. relationships with the non-governmental professional societies of the
region. These workshops should result in many new collaborative research efforts
in quantum optics between U.S. researchers and their Lithuanian, Russian, and
Czech counterparts. They fulfill the program objectives of bringing together
leading experts in the U.S. and these countries to combine complementary efforts
and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis
of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit. *** ??