* 9711196
* Technological Knowledge and Social Boundaries:  Technical   Education in an Industrializing City
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Nina Lerman, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 08/31/1998
* USD 28,028.00

This project compares technical education programs in nineteenth-century
Philadelphia in order to understand how people thought about skill, technology,
and what children should learn in that time of industrial change. Technical
education prepares children for productive lives as adults, and the adults
providing it expect to teach boys how to become men and to teach girls how to
become women. Some children will learn to become good factory workers, while
others will become good engineers. Studying technical education allows us to
examine the ways work and technology are related to ideas about gender,
ethnicity and social class. Technical education, defined broadly, includes
teaching juvenile delinquents how to sew as well as teaching promising young
apprentices how to make mechanical drawings. But such opportunities were
provided selectively, based on educators' expectations about what children would
be doing as adults. Careful study of reports, managers' minutes, and curricula
allows the PI to develop evidence about what children learned and how it was
justified. For example, in the public schools of the 1880s and 1809s, when
arguments for curricular change were often couched in language about democracy
and opportunity, some children-middle-class high-school boys-were taught to
understand science and theory and design, while other children-recent
immigrants, expected to work in factories by age 14-were taught to copy an
object chosen by their teacher, with an emphasis on neatness and obedience.
Girls' training, even when it led to paid work in industrial textile design, was
described in terms of women's domestic talents.