* 9711369
* Long-Term Changes in California Current Zooplankton         Assemblages: A Retrospective Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2002
* USD 435,696.00

Title: Long term Changes in California Current Zooplankton A Retrospective
Analysis Project Summary: Marine zooplankton are one of the primary pathways
through which physical climate signals propagate to marine fish populations.
Evidence now shows geographically extensive changes of zooplankton biomass in
concert with variations in the atmospheric and oceanic circulation in the NE
Pacific. However, such analyses of bulk zooplankton biomass do not distinguish
among taxa with diverse life histories, some of which are important trophic
links to planktivorous fishes and others of which are not. The species
composition of the zooplankton can strongly influence the intensity of
zooplankton fish linkages, and consequently alter recruitment success.
Mechanistic understanding and quantitative modeling of climate linkages to
planktivorous fishes will depend upon specific knowledge of the zooplankton
fauna and the differential responses of different zooplankton taxa to variations
in circulation and productivity of the NE Pacific. We propose a retrospective
analysis of the past 43/a decades of the California Current System (CCS). We
will use the high quality CalCOFI zooplankton collection, together with
associated hydrographic data and indices of atmospheric forcing, to understand
the causes of changes in the zooplankton from 1951 to the present. Three aspects
of the zooplankton composition will be investigated: changes in the high level
taxonomic composition of all holozooplankton taxa, including gelatinous and
crustacean forms; changes in the species composition of copepods and selected
other taxa; and changes in trophic structure and nitrogen economy as inferred
from the N stable isotope composition of two species of particlegrazing
copepods. We hypothesize that there have been differential, taxon specific
responses to: Âª Decadal scale changes in the climate of the NE Pacific,
including the 1976 77 warming event. . El Nifio and other interannual variations
in flow from the equatorial region and from the Subarctic Pacific. Regional
differences in the intensity of coastal upwelling and cross shore transport. Our
studies will provide, for the first time, an understanding of multi decadal
zooplankton species changes in the Pacific. We will uncover the taxa responsible
for the longterm 70% decline in CCS zooplankton biomass. We will establish the
temporal coherence of population changes in the central and southern sectors of
the CCS, with which to analyze the covariation with related zooplankton species
in the Subarctic Pacific. These studies will form the foundation for the design
of new GLOBEC field studies and the development of NE Pacific pelagic ecosystem
models.