* 9711851
* Interface Electronic Properties and Growth Parameters of    Heterovalent Semiconductor Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Leonard Brillson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2001
* USD 317,612.00

9711851 Brillson This project seeks to advance understanding of ZnSe/GaAs,
GaAs/GeSi, and GaN/Al2O3 interfaces and growth processes with emphasis on
control of interface band alignment and deep levels. A comprehensive plan is
presented for optimizing heterovalent heterojunction interface electronic
properties, including both interfacial band discontinuities and chemical
stability against defect formation and thermal degradation. The combination of
molecular beam epitaxial growth, low energy cathodoluminescence and
photoluminescence spectroscopies of buried interfaces, surface-sensitive x-ray
and soft x-ray photoemission spectroscopies, and optical trap spectroscopies of
subsurfaces will be employed to optimize growth processes for both improved
electrical properties and chemical stability. It is expected to link interface
chemical and electronic features with the atomic movements leading to deep level
and dipole formation. Use of altered overlayer, substrate stoichiometries, and
epitaxial interlayers will be assessed spectroscopically to develop general
growth principles for optimizing heterojunction interface properties. %%% The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
electronic/photonic devices. Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and
understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
the performance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing a
fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
materials, and materials combinations. An important feature of the program is
the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***