* 9711834
* Geometric Methods for Analyzing and Controlling Undulatory  Locomotion Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* James Ostrowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Jing Xiao
* 08/31/2000
* USD 209,312.00

This research studies the geometric aspects of motion generation and control for
a large class of locomotion systems involving cyclic internal shape changes
(often called undulatory). Particular emphasis is placed on the geometry and
dynamics of robotic swimming motions, with models derived from the basic
locomotion mechanisms found in eels, fish, and paramecia. This requires
investigating continuous (in terms of shape and actuation) dynamic systems and
addressing the associated design and control theoretic challenges. Optimal
control theory is also employed to study both the optimality of gaits found in
biological systems and to design more efficient forms of aquatic robotic
locomotion. Swimming robotic mechanisms offer many potential advantages over
rotor-driven devices, including increased efficiency, flexibility, and agility,
and can be used in underwater search and rescue to enter areas that are not
easily accessible by traditional vehicles. In this work, theoretical results
will be tightly coupled with experimental verification and the development of
robotic systems. This research also builds a foundation for future work in areas
such as dynamic analyses of biological gaits and group swimming patterns,
underwater surveillance and detection, and micro- locomotion. A long-term goal
of this research is to fabricate locomotion devices on the cellular biological
scale using MEMS technology.