* 9711697
* Temporal Variation in Organic Carbon Utilization by the     Deep-Sea Sediment Community at the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Station
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 481,000.00

The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) was initiated to study the oceanic
carbon cycle on time scales of days to decades. Two long time series stations
were established, one in the North Atlantic and one in the North Pacific, to
represent the expansive subtropical oceanic gyres. Although considerable effort
has been expended to resolve the cycling of carbon in the upper water column at
these two stations, the fluxes of carbon at the sea floor remain largely
unstudied. Of particular interest is the coupling between the production and
export of organic carbon from surface waters and the utilization of organic
carbon by the deep sea sediment community. Rapid transport of surface derived
particulate matter in episodic pulses to the abyssal sea floor occurs in both
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. These episodic events are superimposed on a
slower `rain` of particulate matter sinking to the sea floor throughout the
year. Once this material reaches the sea floor, it is transformed biochemically
by the organisms comprising the sediment community. The rate at which this
organic matter is utilized by the sediment biota can be estimated by measuring
sediment community oxygen consumption (SCOC). We will measure SCOC at the JGOFS
Hawaii Ocean Time series station (Station ALOHA). Using the unique capabilities
of the ROVER (a unique, autonomous, bottom-transecting vehicle), we will address
the following questions: 1) Is there temporal variability in the utilization of
organic carbon by the sediment community, as estimated from SCOC, on time scales
of days to months? And, considering data collected by other investigators in the
Hawaii Ocean Time series program (HOT), 2) is there a temporal relationship
between the utilization of organic carbon by the sediment community and the
production and downward flux of particulate matter through the water column?
These measurements will be made with unprecedented temporal resolution over a
two year period, in concert with ongoing monitoring by other investigators of
surface productivity, downward particulate fluxes, and a variety of other upper
ocean parameters. This combined effort will constitute the first long time
series study to provide such a complete suite of measurements from surface
waters to the abyssal sea floor with similar, high temporal resolution. The
results of this study will be valuable for modeling carbon cycling at the deep
sea floor.