* 9711043
* Dissertation Research: Behind the Box: Science, Technology, and the Television Industry, 1920-1970
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 07/31/1998
* USD 7,419.00

Using television as a case study, this study contributes to the broad
understanding of the complex relationship between technology and society in
twentieth century America. It focuses on the technological and organizational
development of television from its beginnings as a laboratory experiment in the
first decades of the twentieth century to its maturity as a large technological
system in the postwar years. The research and business strategy of the
electronics firms involved in television changed fundamentally from the prewar
to the postwar period. As such, television serves as a case study of how an
industry, its research structure, and a complex technological system changed in
response to the profound transformations of World War II and the Cold War.
Drawing from a wide range of documentary sources, the study analyzes the large
technological system of television through much of the twentieth century. It is
driven by a series of questions, much of which are embedded in the broad
historical literatures on American technology, industrial research, and Cold War
science and technology. How did independent and corporate inventors define,
approach, and solve the `problem` of television in the 1930's? What were the
implications of WWII for the technology of television and for the ways in which
research was managed at U.S. electronic firms? How did the Cold War influence
the development of consumer electronics in the postwar years? In what ways was
television applied to military projects?