* 9711522
* Collabortive Research:  Reproductive Ecology in the Blue    Crab, Callinectes Sapidus
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1998,10/31/2001
* Donna Wolcott, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

The investments male animals make in reproduction have profound effects on
mating systems and individual behaviors. Sperm generally are considered
inexpensive relative to eggs, and hence relatively little attention has been
devoted to their optimal allocation, or the possibility that they become
limiting. In `cheap sperm` species (e.g. broadcast spawners), huge numbers of
sperm are produced. Nevertheless, adverse physical factors (e.g. dilution) often
lead to sperm limitation and poor fertilization success. Among `expensive sperm`
species that invest heavily in mechanisms to increase the reliability of sperm
transfer (e.g., courtship, internal fertilization), sperm limitation is more
likely to be caused by factors that hinder successful mating. These biological
factors, acting before sperm are emitted, are subject to natural selection and
provide evidence of evolutionary principles. To understand how individual
behaviors of males affect population-level processes, the PIs propose to study
an `expensive sperm` species, the blue crab (Callinectes sapidus). They have
chosen two widely-separated study sites in the crabs' latitudinal range, which
impose very different conditions on the mating system. High-latitude (Chesapeake
Bay) females have only short reproductive seasons and, unless they live very
long, can produce only a few broods. Low-latitude (Florida) females can produce
as many as 11 broods/year in long reproductive seasons. The probability of
sufficient sperm being available to realize full potential fecundity in these
two environments probably is quite different. Males are subject to
disproportionate fishery pressure, especially in Chesapeake Bay. They thus are
participants in a large-scale experiment that we propose to exploit to better
understand sperm allocation and limitation at the population level. The PIs have
strong preliminary data indicating that in Chesapeake Bay (high latitude,
heavily fished), female spermathecae receive significantly less sperm, and male
vasa deferentia are significantly more depleted, than in Florida where fishing
pressure is lower. At Chesapeake Bay and Florida sites, biotelemetry will verify
where pairing and mating occur; field sampling will reveal the ratios of mature
males to receptive females in mating habitats and how much sperm those males
have to transfer. Laboratory and field experiments will test the effects of male
size and mating history on amount of sperm transferred and on competition for
mates, whether a subset of sperm-depleted males might dominate mating, and how
many eggs/broods can be fertilized by a given amount of sperm.