* 9711529
* El Nino Impacted Coral Reefs in the Tropical Eastern        Pacific: Secondary Disturbances, Recovery and Effects on    Community Diversity and Reef Growth
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Peter Glynn, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 520,000.00

This project will long term study that has focused on ecological disturbances,
causes, and the responses of eastern Pacific reef coral populations and reef
communities during and following the severe and historically unprecedented 1982
1983 El Nino / Southrn Oscillation (ENSO) event. This study involves strong
international collaboration with host country research teams working at several
field sites in Costa Rica, Panama, and the Galapagos Islands (Ecuador), all
areas that were severely affected during the 1982 1983 ENSO disturbance. This
study will continue with (a) monitoring the physical and biological conditions
of eastern Pacific coral reefs initiated in the early to mid 1970s, (b)
investigating the responses of different coral species to ENSO stressors
(chiefly positive sea temperature anomalies) under controlled microcosm
conditions, (c) studying coral reproductive ecology as it relates to recruitment
success in field surveys, and (d) documenting coral community recovery or
changes leading to alternate, non reef building communities. New research
directions initiated in 1994 will be pursued, namely (e) an attempt to link
coral bleaching/mortality with local and global scale sea surface temperature
(SST) anomalies, and (f) modeling the size structure of coral populations and
coral community dynamics based on mechanistic relationships between temperature,
predation, coral growth, and survivorship derived from field monitoring and
experimental results. In addition, (g) analyses of the molecular genetic
structure of the different zooxanthella taxa found in eastern Pacific corals to
assess the importance of zooxanthellae diversity in explaining the variability
in patterns of coral bleaching, and (h) recovering coral populations, to assess
their genetic structure and diversity in relation to population size and
distance from source populations, will be investigated.