* 9711722
* Magma Flow Directions in Ferrar Intrusive Rocks using       Anisotropy of Magnetic Susceptibility Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Anne Grunow, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 12,468.00

9711722 Grunow Abstract This award supports an exploratory program to measure
the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) on existing samples of the
Ferrar intrusive rocks to provide preliminary magma flow directions. The AMS
method represents one of the few techniques available capable of determining
magma flow directions and hence, constrain magma emplacement models. The Ferrar
province (&gt;4000km long), along with the Karoo province in South Africa,
represents the most significant flood basalt province associated with Gondwana
break-up. Various models have been proposed in which the Ferrar magmas are
thought to have emanated from a point source beneath South Africa, beneath the
Dufek massif, or from multiple point sources. The AMS method provides a direct
test of these models. Very little AMS work has been done on the Ferrar province
and so it is uncertain whether the Ferrar rocks will yield any magma dlow
information. Ferrar samples (75 cores) from a 3000 km segment of this province
are presently available and more will be collected in the upcoming field season
and made available to this project. These samples will be analyzed at the
University of Michigan paleomagnetism laboratory. Results will demonstrate the
viability of the method on Ferrar province rocks and may also provide
preliminary constraints on Ferrar plume versus multiple source emplacement
models.