* 9711628
* MMIA:  Quantity and Quality in the Wheat Agroecosystem:     Assessment of Climate Change in the Great Plains
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2002
* Peter Baenziger, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Knute Nadelhoffer
* 11/30/2002
* USD 350,000.00

ABSTRACT 9711628 Weiss, et al This project on methods and models for integrated
assessment combines enhancement of scientific components. The former category
will address modeling ecosystem function, value, and adaptive behavior while the
latter category will address economic feedback mechanisms throughout the
agricultural economy. Quality as well as quantity are major components of the
wheat agroecosystem. Evaluating future hard winter wheat ecosystems in terms of
quantity alone is not adequate, quality must also be considered. Thus, the
following objectives have been identified: To quantitatively evaluate hard
winter wheat quantity and quality responses to climate change scenarios in the
Great Plains; to quantitatively determine the economic impact of climate change
scenarios on future hard winter wheat ecosystems in the Great Plains. An end-use
quality submodel based on the translocation of nitrogen to the grain will be
modified to include protein quality, in terms of gliadin and glutenin
concentrations and dough mixing properties. Validation of this submodel will be
based on detailed field experiments existing data sets, and laboratory analyses
of protein content and dough mixing properties. This submodel will be
incorporated into an existing wheat growth, development, and yield model which
will be validated from existing data sets at selected locations in the Great
Plains. Using generated weather data sets representative of different climate
change scenarios, quantity and quality reponses of different wheat cultivars
will be evaluated. These outputs will be used as inputs to the economics
analysis. An integrated assessment of the economic impact from projected climate
change on winter wheat ecosystems requires the inclusion of both wheat quality
and quantity impacts in the region. The analysis uses equilibria-imposed
feedback mechanisms to analyze how projected climate changes impact wheat and
other agricultural output and input sectors in the Great Plains as well as other
regions. The overall approach models the resource and output substitution
phenomena which regularly operate in the economic adjustment process in an
economy.