* 9711893
* RPGW: Incorporating Structural Response into the Prediction of Disturbance of a Competitive Dominant on Wave-Swept      Rocky Shores
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Emily Carrington, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1999
* USD 16,435.00

Natural disturbances play a fundamental role in the structuring of ecosystems by
altering resources, substrate availability, or the physical environment. Because
the effects of disturbance are typically heterogeneous and patchy, non
equilibrium states prevail in most ecosystems. The rocky intertidal zone has
proven to be an excellent model system for the exploration of how disturbance
and patch dynamics influence non equilibrium ecosystems. This is in part due to
the fact that disturbance in the rocky intertidal is typically dominated by a
single physical factor, the hydrodynamic forces generated by breaking waves.
Recently, a biomechanical approach has been developed that predicts physical
disturbance on rocky shores as a function of time and the `waviness` of the sea
offshore. Preliminary tests of this mechanistic approach are promising,
suggesting that such an approach can be a valuable tool for understanding the
ecological consequences of seasonal and year to year variability in wave
exposure. A critical parameter in the biomechanical approach is the strength of
an organism relative to the hydrodynamic forces it encounters. There are
numerous studies indicating that the ability of an organism to withstand wave
action is modified in response to the flow environment. Such modifications must
be taken into account in order to accurately predict rates of disturbance in
changing environments. This study will provide a detailed understanding of the
mechanics which allows this species to dominate wave swept shores, and will
enhance our ability to predict the rate of disturbance of this ecologically
important species. Furthermore, this study allows for the prediction of the
quantitative response of mussels to any future shifts in wave climate. Given
current evidence that increases in wave exposure may be common in the near
future, these estimations are likely to form a valuable test of our ability to
predict the ecological consequences of climate change.