* 9711294
* ABR:  Axial Magma Chambers and Shallow Fractionation        Processes:  A Comparative Mineralogic and Petrologic Study  of Three Ridge Segments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1998,06/30/2002
* David Bercovici, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Epp
* 06/30/2002
* USD 221,326.00

Processes of shallow fractionation of mantle-derived melts are central to the
creation of oceanic crust. In this study, we will undertake a comprehensive,
systematic and quantitative study of the mineralogy and petrology of phyric
lavas from three mid-ocean ridge segments with very different AMC
characteristics and progressive shrinking and disappearance of the melt lens.
The three ridge segments are the East Pacific Rise at 9 30'N, 10 30'N and the
Mid- Atlantic Ridge at 26 S, for which we have samples that are well studied for
major elements, trace elements, isotopic ratios, and baseline petrography and
mineralogy. The samples we propose to study in detail contain phenocryst and
microphenocryst assemblages, as well as refractory megacrysts containing melt
inclusions. Using a variety of techniques (point counting, Nomarski, crystal
size distributions, and electron microprobe) we will determine the abundances,
compositions and compositional zoning of different crystal populations and their
melt inclusions. These data will be interpreted using available petrologic tools
to constrain the order and relative importance of identified processes of
shallow fractionation relating the various liquids and solids present in each of
the three areas. The comparative nature of the study and the wide variety of
quantitative mineralogic and petrologic constraints will allow us to test
numerous current ideas about AMC processes, including the notion that the melt
lens is the site of extensive magma mixing.