* 9711519
* CAA: Socialization of Children's Emotion in Rural Nepali    Villages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Pamela Cole, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 52,846.00

Emotions, such as joy and anger, are basic abilities that allow people to
respond to situations. Such emotions are seen and recognized by all peoples of
the world but the meaning of an emotion, and the rules of how and when an
emotion should be communicated, vary across cultures. Early childhood is a time
when there are many emotional experiences. When those caring for children
respond to an emotional young child, the child receives implicit messages about
the emotional significance of the situation and the manner in which emotion
should be communicated and acted upon. In this way, culture influences emotional
development. This project extends the PI's work on emotional development into
the area of cultural variations in the socialization of emotion. The cultural
settings are remote villages of Nepal, which represent cultures that are
distinctly different from Western societies in which most research on emotional
development is conducted. These villages can be characterized as `collectivist`
societies in which the people regard themselves more in terms of their relations
to others than in terms of their individuality and independence. The residents
of the two villages also differ in distinct ways that have considerable impact
on social behavior. One, a Chhetri-Brahmin village, is a high-caste Hindu
community that is organized around a strict social hierarchy and a high level of
awareness about one's self and social behavior. The other, a Tamang village, is
a Tibetan Buddhist community that is organized around principles of social
equality and inner quietude. The study predicts that each group's beliefs about
proper social behavior are associated with different socialization practices
that influence children's emotional development and the ideas children develop
about emotion expression and its regulation. The project involves the direct
observation of the social interactions between caregivers and young children
(ages 3 to 5 years) when the children are expressing emotion. Also included are
interviews with caregivers and school age children about the social rules of
emotion expression. These data will provide some of the first empirical
observations on the socialization of emotion in rural Asia and on cultural
variations in these processes. By studying cultural variation, it is possible to
learn what is universal and what is culturally variable about development.