* 9711141
* MII: CAU Interactive and Intelligent Systems Research       and Education Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Nazir Warsi, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 08/31/2003
* USD 1,238,366.00

9711141 Warsi, Nazir A. Rogers, Erika Clark Atlanta University (CAU) CISE MII:
CAU Interactive and Intelligent Systems Research and Education Laboratory
Through NSF Interactive/Intelligent Research Laboratory an infrastructure is
being established to support the development of a competitive integrated
research and student training program in computer science. For a long-term
impact, the research activities are being organized under thrusts of intelligent
systems, display systems, and distributed parallel systems. The related
synergistic research is being conducted via fifteen projects on topics such as
recognition/detection systems, data mining, visual problem solving in robotics
and medical technology, virtual reality (sense of presence), and efficient
distributed parallel computing models and their dynamic reconfiguration. The
laboratory is planned to focus on key activities to have an unprecedented impact
on the state of minorities in the computer science field. Through this effort,
Clark Atlanta University is expected to develop its computing science research
capabilities and a viable base of PhD caliber minority students, paving the way
for an eventual doctoral program. It is hoped that through the efforts of the
laboratory, the nation is helped in building a better racially and ethnically
balanced technological enterprise for the benefit of its present and future
generations.