* 9711381
* Theoretical and Observational Studies of the Ionosphere-    Plasmasphere-Ring Current System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Andrew Nagy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/2001
* USD 365,000.00

This project continues studying the transport and deposition of energy in the
ring current and underlying ionosphere, including (1) the contribution of
magnetotail currents to the Dst index, (2) the importance of superdense plasma
sheets to the formation of the most intense ring currents, (3) the relationship
between energy input into the inner magnetosphere and upstream solar wind
density, (4) the physical processes producing intense midlatitude ion
precipitation during large magnetic storms, and the role of this precipitation
in ring current decay, (5) the association between stretched magnetic field
lines, violation of the first adiabatic invariant and intense subauroral ion
precipitation during major storms, (6) the effects of outflow at the dayside
magnetopause on ring current energy balance during the main phases of large
storms, (7) the impact of electromagnetic ion cyclotron wave interactions in
producing precipitation loss from the ring current, redistributing energy
between ring current ion species and channeling ring current energy into the
thermal populations of the inner magnetosphere, and (8) the major sources and
sinks of suprathermal ion populations in the inner magnetosphere, their
distribution in L value and local time, their relationship to magnetic storms
and to the heating of thermal ions during disturbed conditions. The PI will
investigate these fundamental physical processes, emphasizing the coupling of
ring current energy into the underlying ionosphere by heat and particle fluxes,
and the affect of changing solar wind and magnetospheric conditions on this
coupling.