* 9711340
* Statistical Pattern Matching Between Random Heteropolymers  and Multifunctional Disordered Surfaces; Implications for   Viral Inhibition and Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Arup Chakraborty, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 227,884.00

Abstract Proposal No.: 9711340 Proposal Type: Investigator Inititated Principal
Investigator: Arup K. Chakraborty Affiliation: University of California
Berkeley. This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program
sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. Arup
Chakraborty of the University of California Berkeley. The project is directed
towards the understanding of random heteropolymer adsorption on disordered
surfaces and the rational design of pattern matching between heterofunctional
polymers and adsorption sites. A combination of replica field theory and
ensemble groth Monte-Carlo simulations will be developed to examine the issues
of statistical pattern matching. Elucidating the phenomenon of statitical
pattern matching is expected to impact technologies relevant to biomedical
applications such as drug delivery and drug design, Protein separation
processes, and polymer adsorptioon and adhesion to surfaces. A goal of the
research is the de novo design of random heteropolymer sequence statistics(and
hence chemistry) that will optimally inhibit the attachment of specific viruses
to cells, and to guide the design of inexpensive chromatographic materials that
can discriminate between different types of protein sequences.