* 9711364
* Active Harmony: Dynamic Resource Management in the Large
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Peter Keleher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Charles H. Koelbel
* 08/31/2001
* USD 199,999.00

The PIs plan to develop Active Harmony, a software architecture that supports
distributed execution of computational objects heterogeneous environments.
Principal features include: Dynamic execution environment: Active Harmony will
attempt to maximize data affinity and load balancing through intelligent
resource allocation and object migration. Harmony will support an extensible
metric interface to permit the sharing of resource capacity and utilization
information among components in a distributed system. Automatic application
adaptation: Active Harmony will export a detailed metric interface to
applications, allowing them to access processor, network and operating system
parameters. Applications export tuning options to the system, which can then
automatically optimize resource allocation. Measurement and tuning can therefore
become first class objects in the programming model. Programmers can write
applications that include ways to adapt computation to observed performance and
changing conditions. Shared-data interfaces: Active Harmony will support shared-
memory semantics among computational objects regardless of location, allowing
both peer-to peer and client-server computations to exploit the simplified
programming model and fine-grained sharing permitted by traditional shared-
memory environments. The unique aspect of the Active Harmony work is the
emphasis on adapting to heterogeneous and changing environments and on inter-
relationships between objects in the system. The primary result of this research
will be an infrastructure and a set of algorithms that permit global resource
optimization under changing conditions.