* 9711044
* Microstructural Analysis and Electrical Property Studies on BaxSr1-xTiO3 Ferroelectric Thin Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Sadik Esener, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9711044 McKittrick The development of high quality ferroelectric thin films is
one of the main challenges to achieving giga-bit storage capacity on dynamic
random access memory (DRAM) devices. Bulk ferroelectrics such as BaTiO3 are well
characterized; however, the ferroelectric properties of thin films are not
understood at a fundamental or even technical level. The microstructural
features such as grain size, grain orientation (polycrystalline vs. epitaxial),
stoichiometry, thickness of the film, residual stress, dopant concentrations and
surface roughness have not been systematically studied or characterized. In
order to use ferroelectric thin films, they must be sandwiched between
conductive electrodes. These electrodes have been found to be the source of
current leakage, increasing fatigue and aging damage. To fully exploit the
optimized thin film structures, a basic understanding of the electrode is also
necessary. This two year proposal seeks to systematically investigate the
microstructure-electrical property dependence of paraelectric BaxS l-xTiO3, for
megabyte DRAM applications. The objectives of this work are fourfold: (A) to
optimize a conductive oxide electrode for the deposition of the ferroelectfic
films, (B) to quantify the role of stoichiometry, grain size, thickness, and
residual stress in thin film ferroelectrics and optimize the electrical
properties, (C) investigate the effect of adding donor dopants to BaxSrl-xTiO3
with the goal of improving the electrical properties and (D) to fabricate
superlattice structures of BaTiO3 and SrTiO3 and correlate the microstructural
features with the electrical properties. This work will be performed at UC-San
Diego and the Institute of Physics in Ensenada, Mexico which have different but
complementary facilities. ***