* 9711258
* Symposium on Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics;           September 26-27, 1997; Pittsburgh, PA
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 15,000.00

Symposium on Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics Robert E. Kass Carnegie Mellon
University A symposium entitled ``Case Studies in Bayesian Statistics 4'' will
be held at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on Friday
September 26 and Saturday September 27, 1997. The symposium will include four
extended presentations of applications of Bayesian methods to a range of medical
and industrial applications. More specifically, topics of the selected
presentations inalude: modeling for risk of breast cancer, pharmacokinetic
modeling in drug development, problems of customer value analysis, and
statistical aspects of functional MRI. In these applications the statistician
was an integral member of the research team. A contributed poster session will
also be held. The objectives of the symposium are to: (i) identify and focus
attention on specific implementation and theoretical problems that hinder
applications of Bayesian methods, and to identify candidate solutions; (ii)
provide a forum in which the interplay between statistical theory and practice
will be explored in the context of concrete research projects; (iii) provide a
small-meeting atmosphere within which junior investigators and graduate students
can explore substantial Bayesian applications with experienced researchers; and
(iv) produce a volume containing well-documented case studies and data sets
suitable for use by researchers, practitioners, educators and students of
applied statistics and other quantitative fields. As increasingly much
background information becomes available to scientists undertaking an
investigation, it is important to utilize previous knowledge effectively in
designing studies and analyzing data. Bayesian statistical methods are tailored
to this purpose. There have been many recent advances in Bayesian statistical
theory and computation, b ut scientific meetings rarely spend substantial time
discussing applications. The purpose of this symposium is to concentrate
attention solely on applications of Bayesian statistics. The goal is to
elucidate the interplay between theory and practice and thereby identify
successful methods and indicate important directions for future research.