* 9711233
* Aggregative Behavior of Zooplankton: In Situ and Laboratory Studies of Copepod Swarms and Mysid Schools
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Edward Buskey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2002
* USD 181,458.00

Zooplankton aggregations such as copepod swarms and mysid schools represent one
end of a continuum of plankton patchiness from those controlled mainly by the
behavior of the organisms to those controlled mainly by physical concentrating
mechanisms. By achieving a better understanding of the factors influencing
behaviorally controlled zooplankton aggregations, the range of potential
contributions of behavior to other forms of patchiness will become clearer. By
understanding the adaptive value of swarming and schooling behavior in
zooplankton, the potential effects of patchiness on plankton trophic dynamics
will be revealed. This study will focus on several unanswered questions
regarding copepod swarms and begin studies of schooling behavior of mysids. In
mangrove prop root habitats there are two excellent examples of aggregative
behavior in zooplankton: the swarming behavior of the copepod Dioithona oculata
and the schooling behavior of the mysid Mysidium columbine. One objective of
this study is to determine the sensory information used by D. oculata to find
its way back to the mangrove habitat at dawn. D. oculata swarms are also found
near coral reefs, where environmental and optical conditions are quite different
from mangrove habitats. Swarms near coral reefs will be studied in situ, and the
factors affecting swarm formation and maintenance in these environments will be
quantified. Mysidium columbine is a holoplanktonic mysid that schools in shaded
areas near mangroves. It's well developed compound eyes are thought to have
limited visual acuity but highly developed movement perception. The role of
vision in the schooling behavior of this species will be investigated by
determining the visual threshold and visual acuity of this mysid. The adaptive
value of schooling as an anti-predation device and metabolic costs of schooling
behavior will also be investigated.