* 9711261
* A Zooplankton Population Dynamics Model in the California   Current Region
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,04/08/1999
* Mark Huntley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/08/1999
* USD 111,931.00

Project Summary: We propose to construct a practical zooplankton population
dynamics model based on novel advances in the biomass spectrum theory (Platt and
Dernman 1977; Zhou and Huntley submitted). Testing and application of the theory
will use eddy resolving CTD OPC (Optical Plankton Counter: Focal Instruments
Inc.) data collected in the California Current region during June July 1993 and
September October 1993. The novel advances in the biomass spectrum theory
explicitly include population dynamics parameters such as rates of individual
growth, birth, and mortality. We first developed a general biomass spectrum
theory of size structured zooplankton population dynamics based on Platt and
Denman's model (1977), and then demonstrated that this theory can be practically
applied to estimate zooplankton population dynamics rates and productivity from
observations of the biomass spectrum. In this theory, zooplankton, including all
species and stages, are classified by weight. For estimating population dynamics
rates from field observations and verifying modeling results, we further
developed an objective interpolation method which removes the effects of
advection from observations and calculates statistical properties of the
spatiotemporal interpolation. This objective interpolation method will be
applied to zooplankton data obtained in the California Current region. The
results, together with the biomass spectrum theory and individual population
growth models. will be used to estimate rates of population dynamics. These
rates and zooplankton spatiotemporal distributions allow us realistically to
construct and verify a population model. Then we will develop a numerical model
based on the biomass spectrum theory and analyzed population dynamics rates,
which takes the phytoplankton and physical fields from observations or modeling,
and outputs zooplankton spatiotemporal distribution and productivity. This model
provides the trophic link between models of phytoplankton and fish, and can be
directly embedded into an existing hydrodynamic ecosystem model for ecosystem
study and prediction of secondary production. This approach assertively
addresses the central GLOBEC paradigm First, it directly addresses population
dynamics at the mesoscale. Second, it couples modeling with observations derived
from new sampling technology (OPC). Third, this research involves a conscious
effort to provide a model that can assimilate field data and therefore can be
used to both guide and interpret GLOBEC observations in Northeast North Pacific
Ocean.