* 9711097
* Development of Virtual Reality Tools for Graduate           Materials Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Donald Brenner, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 12/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

9711097 Brenner This grant, cosponsored by the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, supports
development of a virtual-reality laboratory for engineering education at North
Carolina State University that will be used by both beginning and upper- level
undergraduate engineering majors. This funding will be used to enhance a program
currently funded by the NSF Division of Undergraduate Education through the
development of software modules applicable to more advanced topics in materials
science and engineering. The laboratory, which will be associated with the
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, will be composed of virtual-
reality stations designed to take advantage of recent dramatic reductions in the
cost of force-feedback haptics and breakthroughs in the performance of graphics
workstations. Each station will consist of a three-degreeof-freedom haptic
interface and IBM-compatible PCs. %%% This grant from the Division of Materials
Research is one of the first awarded in an attempt to find innovative methods to
integrate research and education. It is to devise teaching methods for materials
concepts based on virtual reality techniques including specifically, a tactile
(haptic) interface. It is also cosponsored by the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. It supports a
program currently funded by the NSF Division of Undergraduate Education through
the development of software modules applicable to more advanced topics in
materials science and engineering. ***