* 9711331
* Noise-Shaping DACs for Delta-Sigma Data Converters
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Ian Galton, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2001
* USD 222,532.00

The unprecedented speed, integration density, and economy of modern CMOS circuit
technology have fueled the rapid evolution of the computer industry, and hold
the promise of similarly fueling the personal communications industry. However,
the circuit technology tends to be highly optimized for digital circuits wherein
precise analog performance is not critical. Since communication systems must
transmit and receive analog waveforms, the most effective use of CMOS circuit
technology for such applications requires on-chip analog-to-digital (A/D) and
digital-to-analog (D/A) converters, and these are often the limiting factors in
overall system price and performance. For low speed applications such as
telephone modems, delta-sigma data converters have emerged as the method of
choice for implementing the on-chip A/D and D/A converters because they are
particularly amenable to high-precision CMOS implementation. The purpose of this
research is to eliminate a major limitation suffered by existing delta-sigma
data converters to facilitate their use in higher-speed applications such as
personal wireless communication systems. Specifically, the research involves the
development of practical multi-bit noise- shaping DACs to be used in delta-sigma
data converters. These DACs avoid the severe component matching requirements of
their conventional counterparts through a digital signal processing innovation
that causes the noise arising from component mismatches to lie outside the
signal band. Such DACs have the potential to significantly increase the present
performance limits of delta-sigma data converters by eliminating the need for
one-bit quantization. The primary goals of the research are to develop practical
high-order noise-shaping DACs that extend the present performance limits of
delta-sigma data converters, and to theoretically and experimentally quantify
their performance.