* 9711172
* The Pursuit of Science in a Commercial Culture
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Deborah Johnson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 12/31/2000
* USD 154,329.00

This project addresses one of the most abiding and important topics in science
and technology studies - the historical relations of science, technology and
industry. Its purpose is to show that a definable and critical phase in these
relations was marked by the emergence of scientific consulting - a new and
hitherto unexamined scientific practice of the mid-nineteenth century. The
project focuses on the careers of the most prominent consultants of the time,
geologists and chemists, and their interactions with the development of the coal
and petroleum industries. It discusses the scientific and commercial
contributions of these consultants as well as the ethical and legal consequences
of this new professional scientific practice. The results of the project will
contribute to several areas of scholarship. In the history of geology and
chemistry, the project highlights theoretical and empirical contributions by
American scientists to the studies of coal and petroleum which will provide a
balance to predominantly European accounts of these sciences. In scientific
ethics, the project shows how the norms of professional conduct for American
scientists were shaped by the commercial practices of consultants. In the
relations of science and the law, the project outlines the emergence of
scientific expert witnessing and the changes in the legal code that allowed for
the patenting of scientific research. And finally, by systematically
investigating this new practice of consulting the project explains how science
became an essential component of technological and industrial development.