* 9711806
* Dissertation Research: A Comparative Study of Primate       Socioecology
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Carel van Schaik, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/1999
* USD 5,800.00

Comparative studies document the diversity of lifestyles observed across
species. The usual goal of such studies is to understand the causal basis for
this diversity. In the research proposed here, diversity in primate behavioral,
morphological, and life history characteristics will be examined using
comparative methods. This study improves on previous research in three ways.
First, it makes use of the largest primate socioecological database to better
document patterns across species. This database also retains information on
intraspecific variation to test patterns below the species level. Second, this
study investigates a recently expanded theoretical model which includes the role
of conflict between males and females in primate social evolution. Finally, this
research applies new methods for dealing with the statistical problems of non-
independence associated with evolutionary descent. Results from these methods
have already identified new patterns and invalidated some previously proposed
associations among traits. Thus, this research has important implications for
the empirical basis of our understanding of primate social evolution.
Comparative studies have played an important role in explaining evolutionary
patterns, and the present work is expected to have implications for future
research and education in primatology.