* 9711720
* Time-Series Studies of Hydrothermal Vent Fluid Temperatures on the EPR 9'49'-51'N: Correlating Geological, Biological   and Geochemical Processes following the 1991 Eruption
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Daniel Fornari, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David E. Epp
* 01/31/2000
* USD 37,089.00

During the course of the proposed study, analysis of the recorded vent fluid
temperature data, and correlation of these data with the findings and
observations made by biological and geochemical colleagues will allow evaluation
of the following questions: (1) How have temperatures at high-temperature and
low-temperature vents in the Bio- Transect area of the East Pacific Rise
continued to change since the 1991 eruption; (2) What are the long-term (months
to years) and short-term (hours to days to weeks) variations in fluid
temperature and how do they correlate spatially along the Bio-Transect. Is there
coupling between temperature changes in high-temperature or low-temperature vent
fluids? Are sections of the Bio-Transect consistently hotter than others? What
are the correlations to variations in fissuring and lava morphology along the
ASC? (3) What geological changes (e.g. collapse of lava flow surfaces,
microseismicity, dike intrusion and lava eruption) have occurred which reflect
the thermal state of the axial summit caldera. (4) How has the composition (e.g.
species diversity) and character (e.g., growth, health, areal coverage) of the
biological communities at the different instrumented sites changed, and how do
they correlate to the variations in vent fluid temperature measured by the
probes. (5) Do tidal cycles provide a major influence on the thermal behavior of
the vents, or do they simply modulate temperature at the seafloor by moving
packets of warm water around in such a way as to influence biological processes
at a local, community-scale.