* 9711812
* Bathyal Microaerophiles:  Life Positions and Adaptations    of the Santa Barbara Basin Benthos
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Joan Bernhard, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2001
* USD 280,000.00

Despite the fact that mats of the filamentous sulfide oxidizing bacteria
Beggiatoa are quite extensive below the neritic zone, very little is known about
the eukaryotic organisms inhabiting these mats. Specimen loss and destruction of
spatial information are significant obstacles to past approaches used to study
these fragile sedimentary communities. To overcome these limitations, a new
sampling technique was developed in which sediment cores are incubated with a
fluorogenic probe to label the contained biota, and then chemically fixed,
dehydrated, and embedded with low viscosity epoxy resin. Combined with novel
thick sectioning methods, confocal microscopy, and state of the art digital
image processing, this fluorescently labeled embedded core (FLEC) technique has
provided unparalleled views of the fine scale structure of the Beggiatoa mat
community in the Santa Barbara Basin (SBB). Based on initial studies using the
FLEC method, it is hypothesized that Beggiatoa structures the chemical
microenvironment to allow microaerophiles to live in close proximity to
anaerobes and aerobes (i.e., these mats might be considered analogous to
bacterial biofilms in this respect). To advance this hypothesis, the major
objective of this study is to correlate meiofaunal life positions and their
physiological adaptations with finescale chemical and spatial information.
Furthermore, the initial FLEC studies of SBB Beggiatoa mats yielded two
undescribed species or higher taxa, as well as three new and unexpected
bacterial eukaryote symbioses, suggesting that the Santa Barbara Basin provides
habitat for yet more undescribed species or symbioses. It is hypothesized that
meiofauna possessing chemoautotrophs inhabit zones below the Beggiatoa mat,
meiofauna possessing metabolic adaptations or heterotrophic symbionts co exist
with the Beggiatoa, and meiofauna without special adaptations inhabit space
available above the Beggiatoa mat.