* 9711270
* Adopting Food Production in Mid-Holocene Arabia: ExploratoryResearch into Choosing Domesticates in Changing Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Joy McCorriston, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1999
* USD 19,979.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Joy McCorriston and her colleagues
will conduct one season of archaeological field research in the desertic Wadi
as-Shumylya region of Yemen. Based on a brief visit to this rugged and
inaccessible area Dr. McCorriston discovered a site, WPT 144, which on the basis
of associated ceramic remains dates at least as early as the third millennium
BC. In addition to lithics, the site contains stone slabs - remains of both a
tomb and associated dwellings. The nature of the sediments makes it highly
likely that both faunal and botanical remains are preserved. Dr. McCorriston
will conduct exploratory excavation to determine stratigraphic relationships
through several deep trenches. Broader horizontal exposures will permit her to
reconstruct the architectural plan and locate refuse deposits which are
typically rich in animal and plant remains. Material for radiocarbon dating will
also be collected. The team will also conduct a regional survey to locate
additional sites and recover rock magnetic and other geological data which will
permit paleoclimatic and environmental reconstruction. The prehistory of Yemen
is poorly known and very little work has been done in the Wadi as-Shumylya
region. Based on cultural materials from the Arabian peninsula it is clear that
a Neolithic occupation occurred and thus the region documents the transition
from hunting and gathering to a settled village agricultural way of life.
However it is not certain when this took place or what plants were cultivated.
The region is of great potential archaeological significance because it lies at
the boundary of three traditions. To the Northwest, a Mediterranean series of
domesticates includes wheat and barley. Prehistoric interaction with Africa was
also strong and neighboring Ethiopia was the center for the domestication of
millet, sorghum and other crops. To the East peoples raised rice and pulses.
Yemen thus offers an opportunity to examine the role of human choice in early
agricultural strategy. Because of its geographical position it is unique in the
range of domesticates potentially available and Dr. McCorriston wishes first to
determine the range of crops cultivated and then ultimately explain the reason
for this outcome. Her work will proceed within an environmental context. The
research is important because it will provide basic data on an essentially
unknown archaeological region. It has the potential to shed new light on human
adaptation to desertic environments and may set the stage for a larger research
project.