* 9711326
* Indentification of Non-Steady State Changes in Surface OceanCirculation from Radiocarbon in Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2001
* USD 427,001.00

-Major objectives are to establish the relative amounts of fossil fuel CO2 in
three regions of the surface Pacific, and to understand the nature of
circulation changes that have occurred at these sites over the past two
centuries. The three regions to be studied are the Norm Pacific (Hawaiian
Islands, 20ÝN, 156ÝW), western equatorial Pacific (Nauru Island, 1ÝS, 167ÝE),
and the eastern equatorial Pacific (Galapagos Islands, 1ÝS, 91ÝW). The methods
used in this study are the measure of high grecision A'4C using AMS (accelerator
mass spectrometry) techniques and stable isotopes (if O and sl3C) of annually
banded coral skeletons. To link these results with circulation changes that may
have taken place several thousands of years ago, another major objective is to
compare interannual variability in surface mLxing and circulation in the North
Atlantic during the past century (Druffel, 1997, in press) to that which existed
earlier in the Holocene. High precision &amp;'4C in ancient reef corals from
South Florida will allow us to determine whether large pulses of ventilation
took place at the end of the Hypsithermal (4200 yBP), during a very large shin
in atmospheric &amp;'4C (2700 yBP) and just before the Medieval Was Period (1300
yBP). These studies will add knowledge about the nature of variability in the
ocean, surface or deep, on human time scales. 14C data provides critical tests
for ocean circulation models and theories of the role of the ocean in past
climate change. Modeling exercises will be performed by the PI to uncover non
steady state changes in near surface circulation in the tropical and subtropical
areas of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.