* 9711250
* Adaptive Algorithm and Mesh Refinement
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Alejandro Garcia, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John F. Foss
* 02/28/1999
* USD 43,889.00

This is a Minority Career Advancement Award. The research is directed toward the
problem of manufacturing techniques used to miniaturize electronic components.
These techniques have recently been applied to the construction of microscopic
mechanical components. Devices using such components often include a gas flow as
part of their design. However, the conventional methods for simulating gas flows
are not accurate when applied to miniaturized systems. Instead one must perform
calculations that track the motion of individual gas molecules. A major
difficulty with performing numerical calculations that track individual
particles is that they are extremely time-consuming, even on a modern
supercomputer. This is especially true if the entire device is large but
contains a crucial component that is small. For example, in a computer disk
drive is relatively large (about the size of an ant) but the air flow that
supports the read/write head above the spinning platter passes through a gap
that is roughly one millionth of an inch wide (about the wavelength of visible
light). The goal is to efficiently simulate microscopic flows that exist as part
of a macroscopic device by combining particle calculations and traditional
hydrodynamic computations into a hybrid computer program. Only the regions that
require a particle description are calculated using particles while in the
larger volume the equations for pressure, temperature, etc. are solved. The end
result of this program will be a composite scheme that will permit the solution
to flow problems that cannot be effectively computed by any single technique.