* 9711151
* Workshop on Research Needs for Coastal Pollution in Urban   Areas; October 16-17, 1997; Milwaukee, Wisconsin
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Charles O'Melia, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1998
* USD 33,000.00

9711151 Christensen This is an award to support conduct of a workshop to
consider environmental problems that are characteristic of urban coastal waters
of the United States. Co-Chairman of the workshop will be Dr. Charles R.
O'Melia, Department of Geography and Environmental Engineering, The Johns
Hopkins University. A resource document to be used for addressing this topic
will be Managing Wastewater in Coastal Urban Areas, a report of the National
Research Council's Water Science and Technology Board. Topics to be addressed
include research needs associated with approaches to determine the nature and
scope of the environmental problems resulting from the presence of contaminated
sediments, prevention of future accumulations of contaminants and appropriate
conditions and approaches for their decontamination. While point-sources of
water pollution are generally readily identifiable, non-point sources such as
those attributable to runoff from developed and undeveloped land as well as
deposition from the atmosphere are not. The product of this conference is
expected to be a report that can be used in planning operation of the
Environmental Systems research program as it addresses problems of special
significance to coastal communities. Results of this research are expected to
lead to improved models that can be utilized in engineering design of systems to
prevent pollution, facilities for pollution control facilities and
decontamination of polluted aquatic resources. ***