* 9711891
* The Development of Sensors for Ocean Buoys: The Real-Time   and Time Series Measurements of Dust, Reactive Iron and     Seasalt Aerosols
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* David Hosom, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 12/31/2000
* USD 504,999.00

9811891 Sholkovitz This ocean science technology development project focuses on
the design, construction, and testing of sensor systems for the elemental
analysis of aerosols on buoys at sea. These systems involve field portable X-Ray
fluorescence spectroscopy (FP-XRF)and an Iron Aerosol Detector (FeAD) which uses
fiber optic spectrometry to measure Fe. The primary objectives are sensors which
can measure, in an unattended manner, the aerosol concentrations of dust and
reactive iron (Fe) from ocean buoys. Research areas that would benefit from
real-time time-series aerosol data from buoys include: measurement of off-shore
dust and contaminants transport, effects of mineral dust on the ocean's
biological productivity (the Fe Hypothesis), and the role of anthropogenic
mineral aerosols on the Earth's radiation balance and climate. This is a
collaborative project between scientists and engineers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, bringing together expertise in buoy technology and
instrumentation, computer software development and marine geochemistry. Given
that aerosol sensors have never been deployed from buoys, this project will
involve designing, building and testing the individual instruments and
integrating these sensors through software into a single buoy system. Bench and
tower testing will be followed by two seasons of field testing on a moored buoy
off Woods Hole.