* 9711277
* International Workshop on Multiphase Systems in             Mineral and Chemical Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 04/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9711277 Peter King and Jan Miller, University of Utah Travel
support will be provided to a group of twelve U.S. academic researchers to
participate at the U.S.-South Africa (S.A.) workshop on particulate and
multiphase processes on June 30-July 1, 1997, and to visit academic and
industrial institutions for promoting collaborative activities in the field of
minerals and chemical engineering. The main purpose of the workshop to establish
trends in fundamental research, present new research results obtained in both
countries, and identify opportunities and topics for future collaborations. The
multiphase particulate systems to be considered include particle comminution,
size separation, flotation, fluidization, three-phase flows, pneumatic and
slurry transportation of solids. The S.A. workshop will be co-chaired by Dr. Roy
Marcus, President of the Engineering Association in South Africa. He will be the
link with other S.A. research institutions and industry. The field of
particulate and multiphase processes is essential in mineral, chemical, and
environmental processes. Research in this field has major relevance in both
countries, and considerable benefits from research have been obtained. A
synergistic effect with benefits to both sides is expected by organizing the
workshop and short working visits by small groups to S.A. universities and
industry. This workshop is being supported by the Division of Chemical and
Transport Systems and the Division of International Programs.