* 9711109
* Material Characterization of Agricultural and Industrial    Solutions and Melts in Extensional Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* M Forest, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* C. F. Chen
* 07/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9711109 Principal Investigator: Bechtel, Ohio
State This is a grant to characterize materials in the manufacturing and
agricultural processes of fiber spinning and spraying. This is an extension of
previous research in which analysis and computer codes were created and utilized
in experimental measurements of the material properties necessary to
characterize behavior in fiber spinning and spraying. Accurate characterization
of these properties, specifically dynamic surface tension, elongational
viscosity, relaxation times, and others, is critical to the understanding and
modeling of these processes. To measure the flow properties relevant to fiber
spinning and spraying processes, the rheometer must measure the properties of
the fluid in the appropriate state, under the same flow conditions and history,
and in the same short time scales. The principal investigators now propose to
bring this research to bear on applications developed with an industrial partner
(Hoechst Celanese Corporation) and a government agency (US Department of
Agriculture), defined by their needs and concerns, and with clear engineering
emphasis and payoff. A new rheometer, developed by a colleague, Dr. Kurt
Koelling will be used to: (1) undertake a systematic elongational
characterization of polymer solutions, employing the technique demonstrated in 1
both to produce the best characterization of a fluid within a given constitutive
assumption, and to sift through a battery of proposed constitutive models to
select the best model, (2) extend the characterization technique to allow for
multiple relaxation times, (3) remove the requirement of a force measurement in
the technique, (4) adapt the apparatus for the dynamic measurement of surface
tension of newly formed surfaces (on the order of a millisecond), and, on a
longer time frame, (5) extend the method to unsteady and non-isothermal
behavior, and (6) characterize the coupling of the development of orientation in
t he filament to flow. The collaboration with Prof. Koelling will continue.