* 9711287
* Symposium and Workshop on Ethical, Legal and Social         Implications of the Human Genome Diversity Project          to be held February, 1998
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1998
* USD 20,961.00

Scientists from several disciplines are planning an international scientific
initiative known as the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) to collect,
analyze, and preserve genetic samples from a wide range of human populations. It
is expected that the HGDP will make it possible to reconstruct the origins,
relationships, and evolutionary history of the different human populations, and
to help us better understand the hereditary basis for differences in human
populations and susceptibilities to diseases. Although its potential scientific
contribution is considerable, the HGDP is a controversial venture. Significant
ethical, legal, and social issues have been raised about the design,
implementation, and implications of data generated by the Project. These issues
include concerns about the selection of populations, the possibilities of
obtaining meaningful informed consent in non-western cultures, confidentiality
of data, intellectual property protection, compensation and benefits to the
research subjects, and ethnic discrimination. The North American Regional
Committee of the HGDP has drafted a Model Ethical Protocol for Collecting DNA
Samples (MEP) to provide a practical guide for addressing some of these
concerns. The AAAS Scientific Freedom, Responsibility and Law Program, in
collaboration with the Center for Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania,
is convening a special one-day event at the AAAS Annual Meeting in Philadelphia
in February 1998. A morning symposium will discuss the nature and goals of the
HGDP, the ethical, legal and social issues raised by such research, and how the
MEP responds to those issues. With that as background, an afternoon workshop
will address provisions of and strategies for implementing the MEP -- its scope
of coverage and content, its usefulness as a set of ethical guidelines for HGDP
researchers and those who evaluate and fund their proposals, and strategies for
implementing its specific provisions. A report of the event will be posted on
the AAAS Web site.