* 9711143
* Collaborative Research: Global Leadership and Organizational Behavior Research Program (GLOBE)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Paul Hanges, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 43,876.00

Cultural differences in societies and organizations are believed to influence
individual expectations for and perceptions of one's environment, modes of
social interaction, and expressions of emotions and global behavior patterns
such as leadership and conflict management styles. The Global Leadership and
Organizational Behavior Effectiveness (GLOBE) research program is an ongoing
effort designed to investigate three issues connected to this topic. First,
GLOBE is designed to determine the process by which culture influences the type
of leadership behavior desired by people in organizations and societies. Second,
GLOBE focuses on differences across cultures in terms of the value placed on
certain leadership behaviors, the scope of leader influence, the social status
of leaders, and the amount of power granted to leaders. Third, GLOBE identifies
country specific and universal cultural syndromes in each of the cultures
studied. The GLOBE sample of countries represents a wide variety of cultures,
and every major region of the world is represented by at least three countries.
These data permit an assessment of the degree to which a number of leader
behaviors that are central to prevailing leadership theory are accepted and
viewed as effective in each of the countries studied. The current project is to
finish coding, analysis, and synthesis of the data already collected for this
phase of the GLOBE research program.