* 9711795
* Dissertation Research: The Political Dynamics of            Decentralization and Decline in the Black Warrior River     Valley of West - Central Alabama.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Cameron Wesson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 11,613.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Cameron Wesson, Mr. Mark Rees
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
excavation at the sites of Fosters Landing and Hills Gin landing, both located
in the Black Warrior Valley of Alabama. The goal of the research is to
understand the processes which lead to the devolution of social complexity. Both
sites date to the early second millennium AD and are associated with Moundville,
one of the largest and most impressive prehistoric occurrences in North America.
Moundville, as its name implies contains large mounds or earthworks which
required the mobilization of large amounts of labor to produce. Elaborate
burials with finely crafted grave goods attest to a centralized form of social
organization with a high degree of social differentiation. After 1,400 AD
however the central site was abandoned and mound construction ceased. While a
collapse is clearly documented, secondary villages located in adjacent areas of
the Valley continued to thrive and Mr. Rees will focus his attention on these.
He wishes to learn whether power shifted from Moundville to such secondary sites
and, if such is the case, to understand the processes involved. To accomplish
this goal he will conduct an auger survey of the sites and make controlled
surface collection to determine areas of densest materials. Extensive lateral
excavations shall then be conducted. With the ceramics and other remains
obtained, he will be able to examine the degree to which elite functions shifted
to these secondary sites, the extent to which they competed with each other and
the subsistence strategies employed. While much archaeological attention has
focused on the rise of social complexity, relatively little has been directed to
the opposite or devolutionary process. In North America, most aboriginal peoples
reached a height of political centralization well before the appearance of
Europeans in the New World and in many regions devolution occurred in pre-
Columbus times. Mr. Rees has proposed a general model which involves increases
in factionalism and changed patterns in subsistence and social organization.
This project will provide data to test these ideas. It will yield data of
interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
scientist.