* 9711814
* Temporal Variability of Pb, Fe, and Al in the Subtropical   North Atlantic and North Pacific Oceans
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2000
* USD 545,000.00

Studies of biogeochemical processes in the upper ocean are often hampered by
the large temporal variations in elemental concentrations and our limited
ability to collect samples on relatively infrequent sampling cruises. This is
particularly important for trace elements which have both a highly variable
eolian source and are involved in biological processes in the euphotic zone. The
PI, Boyle, proposes to examine the issue of the temporal variability of Pb, Fe
and Al using a novel moored in-situ trace element sampler (MITESS) to collect
high frequency trace metal samples. Pb has an anthropogenic source that is
decreasing, and this long term trend is of interest to the PI and the
environmental sciences community. Fe is thought to be an essential micronutrient
and the Fe cycle is currently of great interest to scientists involved in
understanding present and past ocean productivity and the role of the oceans in
the global carbon cycling. Al is being studied to support the Pb and Fe work, as
it acts as a tracer of natural eolian sources (i.e. dust) and scavenging
processes. Sampling would take place in conjunction with ongoing mooring and
biogeochemisty programs at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Site (BATS), and the
Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Site (HOTS). As such, the results of this trace metal
study can be interpreted within the context of concurrent biogeochemical rate
measurements and physical and optical studies, as well in conjunction with time-
series atmospheric sampling at Bermuda. It can be expected that the collection
of these unique sample sets and their interpretation within the context of
ongoing programs will lead to many advances in our understanding of trace metal
cycling, bioavailability, the effects of metals on organism growth, and the fate
of anthropogenic trace metals in the oceans.