* 9711075
* CRUI: Response of Tropical Marine Symbioses to Environmental Stresses: An Integrated Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* John Hardy, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 538,775.00

9711075 Muller-Parker Coral reefs are highly diverse, productive, and
economically important communities that depend on the symbiotic association
between algae (zooxanthellae) and corals. This collaborative cross-disciplinary
study linking optics, chemistry of pigments, and biology will determine the
sequence of events during disruption of the symbiosis in tropical anemones and
corals during exposure to stressors linked to global climate change. Three
aspects of coral bleaching will be studied, using anemones and corals subjected
to ultraviolet light and high temperature: 1) changes in the optical spectra of
symbiotic associations during bleaching, 2) changes in photosynthetic pigments
of zooxanthellae, and 3) changes in animal-algal biomass parameters and
photosynthetic performance of zooxanthellae. The project team includes both
science and science education undergraduate majors who will develop research
projects and curricular materials for use in field teaching and introductory
courses. The PIs will also develop a new interdisciplinary course entitled
"Marine Life and Light" which will involve aspects of physics, biology,
chemistry and environmental science and will include students from all of these
disciplines. Coral reefs are the "rain forests" of the ocean. These highly
diverse, productive, and economically important communities depend on the
symbiotic relationship between algae and corals. Widespread coral "bleaching"
(the loss of the algal symbionts) is attributed to environmental stresses linked
to global climate change. This project will study how the intimate intracellular
relationship between photosynthetic algae and their animal host is affected by
environmental stress, using a collaborative and cross- disciplinary team
approach linking optics, chemistry of pigments, and biology. This project also
provides a model for integrating science and science education programs by
involving undergraduates from both disciplines in the basic researc h and in the
development of educational materials which will benefit school children and the
general public. The PIs will also develop a new interdisciplinary course
entitled "Marine Life and Light" which will involve aspects of physics, biology,
chemistry and environmental science and will include students from all of these
disciplines.