* 9711259
* Nonlinear Systems Identification for Tracking the Mechanical and Structural Status of the Lungs
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Kenneth Lutchen, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 03/31/2002
* USD 311,980.00

9711259 Lutchen This proposal addresses the following question: Is it possible
to a) routinely track the lung resistance (RL) and lung elastance (EL) for
frequencies surrounding breathing; and, b) determine changes in lung structure
responsible for the mechanisms that altered RL and/or EL during disease? We have
developed a new method to reliably measure RL and EL over the range of
physiological frequencies and during typical sized breaths. The method is to
apply an "Optimal Ventilator Waveform" (OVW). This multisinusoidal waveform
simultaneously ventilates the lungs while providing flow and pressures data that
allows estimation of RL and EL even if the lung behaves as a nonlinear system.
So far, widespread practical use of the OVW in humans remains evasive because it
does not permit for passive expiration (i.e., naturall- like expiration). Thus,
it cannot yet be applied to ventilator dependent patients. We now propose a
novel advancement of our OVW approach which will permit monitoring RL and EL for
any disease or clinical condition. With these data we intend to infer the degree
and type of airway constriction and tissue changes occurring in the lung. For
this goal, we will develop computational models that are consistent with the
anatomical details of a real lung. With these models we can directly predict how
changes in lung structure relate to changes in RL and EL that can influence our
ability to breathe. Finally, with real data we must apply simpler models to
identify lung properties and mechanisms. We will use this complicated anatomic
model to generate computer simulated data for testing simpler models. ***