* 9711306
* Toward Measuring in Situ Growth by Marine Synechococcus:    Relationship Between Biochemical Composition, Cell Cycle    Regulation, and Growth Rate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Brian Binder, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 265,542.00

Members of two closely related cyanobacterial groups, Synechococcus and
Prochlorococcus, are ubiquitous and abundant in the world's oceans, and
represent a significant fraction of the overall primary producer biomass and
activity in many marine environments. This study has as its major goal the
development of non incubation approaches for measuring in situ growth rates of
natural Synechococcus populations. Ultimately, the information from such studies
will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms by which oceanic primary
producer communities are structured, and help us predict the effects of
environmental perturbations on those communities. The development of non
incubation growth rate measurements requires a thorough knowledge of the
physiology of cell growth and division in the organisms of interest. A large
part of this project involves gaining such knowledge for marine Synechococcus
species. Representative isolates will be cultured under defined laboratory
conditions. These conditions will be varied in order to achieve a range of
growth rates controlled by a variety of environmental factors. For each strain
growing under each set of conditions, average cellular characteristics (and the
population distribution of those characteristics) will be measured flow
cytometrically. In this way, the relationships between the cell cycle (as
reflected in DNA distributions), biochemical composition, and growth rate will
be established. These data will be used to develop cell cycle or biochemical
indexes that are robustly related to Synechococcus growth rate. Finally, these
indexes will be compared with more traditional methods for measuring growth
rates in natural samples from the north Atlantic Ocean and Sargasso Sea.