* 9711106
* Electrostatic Bearing for Salient-Pole Micromotors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Steven Garverick, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 02/28/2001
* USD 260,651.00

9711106 Garverick The project description and work statement for this revised
proposal is essentially the same as that stated in the original proposal,
ECS-9711106, with the exception of the summary of specific objectives.
Consistent with the reduction in budget, the objectives now include the
demonstration of a hybrid version of a micromachined, rotating mass gyroscope;
but the commitment to fabricating a fully monolithic gyroscope has been
eliminated. The performance of the hybrid gyroscope will not reach the full
potential of a monolithic device, but the hybrid device is adequate for proof of
concept and will serve as an excellent vehicle for continued investigation of
micromotor technology and application. The revised statement of Objectives and
Significance is given below. Objectives and Significance The general objective
of the proposed research project is to investigate the issues and advance the
technologies that are key to the application of micromotors in real-world
systems: control electronics, packaging (process integration), and reliability.
The focus of the effort is the electrostatic bearing which specifically
addresses the issue of wear. A micromachined, rotating mass gyroscope will serve
as demonstration of the advanced technologies. In the process of achieving these
primary objectives, our understanding of micromotors will be increased by virtue
of the measurements and experiments made possible by the closed-loop control
electronics. Analytical models for the new micromotors will be developed and
experimentally verified. Simulation models will be developed to aid future
application of the micromotors. Specific objectives for the three-year project
are as follows: 1) a detailed control algorithm for the salient-pole micromotor
with electrostatic bearing; 2) a circuit implementation that is suitable for
monolithic integration with the micromotor; 3) a fabrication process for making
surface-micromachined levitatable discs and micromotors; 4) a hybri d, closed
-loop system with electrostatic bearing that functions as a rotating mass
gyroscope; The achievement of these objectives will lead to motorized systems
which are significantly faster and smaller than presently realizable. Potential
applications areas are widespread, including automotive, consumer, industrial,
medical, and military. ***