* 9711102
* Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric        Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Arun Phadke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1999
* USD 80,000.00

ECS-9711102 Phadke One of the results of deregulation and the creation of large
independent system operators (ISO) is that the physical size of the system to be
operated will be greatly increased. Systems will be larger both in terms of
square miles and in electrical dimension. It is our premise that there are
effects in such large systems that are not easily understood using existing
models and that valuable understanding can be obtained by taking a macroscopic
view of the system. As the number of buses reach tens of thousands and system
dimensions are measured in thousands of miles, it is useful to imagine a
distributed system with a continuum of transmission, generation, and load. The
phenomenon of electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors caused by
faults and equipment outages is one of the most vexing problems facing the
interconnected network operators. If the protection and control systems do not
function as they are designed to do in the face of a disturbance, the
disturbance can propagate over the network, and expose individual generators, or
groups of generators to the danger of going 'out-of-step' with the rest of the
network. If a sufficient number of generators lose synchronism in this fashion,
a system black-out results, and very expensive, disruptive and time-consuming
restoration procedures have to be followed. These phenomena familiarly knows as
'transient stability' studies - are the subject of the most important
investigations in power system planning. The normal techniques for studying
electromechanical transient phenomena are time-consuming and lead to voluminous
outputs, and very often it is difficult to grasp the sense of the ensuing
phenomena on a global scale. We propose to study the problem of
electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors from an entirely different
point of view. We consider the electric power system with its transmission
lines, generators, and loads to be a continuum. When the power system spans
entire continents, this is certainly a reasonable extrapolation. In doing so, we
give up the detail associated with the motion of each machine rotor. In return,
we gain an insight into the mechanisms by which the disturbances initiated by
faults and other random events propagate in the continuum. When the problem is
cast in this fashion, we find that very powerful techniques developed in other
fields (wave propagation phenomena in plasmas) can be brought to provide
important insights and useful results. One of the Co-Principal Investigators has
done considerable research in this field, and to our knowledge this is the first
time that such a cross-disciplinary approach to the study of power system
transient stability problems has been proposed. The other two members of this
team have a long-standing record of having worked in the fields of power system
monitoring, protection and control, and have made original contributions to the
field of computer relaying and synchronized phasor measurements. This last
technology will have an important bearing on the ideas proposed here. Power
system engineers have long recognized that electromechanical disturbances
propagate over the power network with finite speed, and exhibit dispersion
phenomena. It is only in recent years that simultaneous measurement of rotor
angles (through synchronized phasor measurements) has been made possible with
the help of the GPS satellite system. Using these measurements over long
distances, we expect to observe the traveling wave phenomena in actual power
systems in very near future.