* 9711546
* Dissertation Research: Lithic Technology of                 Paleoindian Materials in Alaska
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* David Meltzer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1998
* USD 10,610.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Mr. Michael Bever will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to characterize the
earliest archaeological assemblages in Alaska and compare them to relevant
materials both from Eastern Asia and the continental United States. While
archaeologists know the New World was originally populated near the end of the
last ice age by Asian migrants who crossed the Bering Land Bridge the exact
route and timing of this process in unknown. Because of its geographical
proximity to Asia, Alaska should contain relevant archaeological information and
it appears that such sites are present. For this time period the primary
materials recovered through excavation are stone tools and the lithic waste
projects associated with their manufacture. Through stylistic and technological
comparison archaeologists attempt to characterize assemblages and then compare
similarities and differences among them. The picture for early Alaska is
complicated by the fact that many assemblages are stratigraphically mixed and
contain lithics from different time periods which are jumbled together. Even for
intact sites however the patterns appear anomalous because materials found
associated do not occur together in either Asia or further South. Some Alaskan
sites for example contain large lancolate spear points which are characteristic
of the earliest archaeological occurrences in the continental US. However these
same Alaskan sites also have very specific types of small tools which are
unique. In his research Mr. Bever will analyze a series of stratigraphically
intact early Alaskan assemblages. Rather than concentrate, as most researchers
do, on the form of the finished stone tools, he will examine the technological
processes involved in tool production. This will provide a unique body of
information with significant cultural content. He will first determine whether
the Alaskan sites share enough similarities to be considered as a single
cultural unit and then compare these materials to remains from both the West and
South. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide a body of
evidence of interest to many archaeologists. It will, hopefully, shed new light
on the peopling of North America and assist in training a promising young
scientist.