* 9711525
* Tropical Marine Endemism and Extinction: Biogeographic      Relationships between the Snapping Shrimp Faunas of the     Eastern Atlantic and the Isthmus of Panama
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Lee Weigt, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1999
* USD 65,826.00

The broad biogeographic patterns that characterize the world's oceans have been
well summarized using classical analyses. The application of molecular
techniques, however, can additionally provide an estimate of the time elapsed
since geographically isolated sister populations or species were last in genetic
contact. The purpose of this proposal is to determine the pattern of genetic
relationships among the snapping shrimp (Alpheus) of the eastern Atlantic,
western Atlantic, and eastern Pacific. Snapping shrimp are an ideal group with
which to characterize biogeographic patterns in the tropics, because of their
high diversity and well documented patterns of divergence across the Isthmus of
Panama (eastern Pacific, western Atlantic). The collected data will be used to
answer the following questions: 1) is there evidence of recent gene flow across
the Atlantic, or is the tropical eastern Atlantic fauna endemic, at least with
respect to close relatives in the western Atlantic? Understanding endemicity is
fundamental to the categorization and conservation of marine biodiversity, 2) if
divergence across the eastern Atlantic predated that across the Isthmus of
Panama (minimally 2 3 million years), when did these faunas separate based on
molecular calibrations using transisthmian data? Dating trans Atlantic
divergences allows molecular data sets to be compared with reconstructions based
on geological or paleoceanographic studies, to their mutual benefit, and 3) do
eastern Atlantic taxa reveal evidence of extinction events associated with the
Isthmus of Panama, e.g. relationships between the eastern Pacific and eastern
Atlantic that are closer than transisthmian relationships? Such undetected
extinctions are a possible explanation for some of the variation observed across
the Isthmus and, if documented, would usefully constrain our estimates for rates
of molecular evolution in this model system.