* 9711441
* RUI:  Influences of Benthic Boundary-Layer Flow on          Distributions and Feeding Rates of Protists in Subtidal     Near-Bottom Water and Surficial Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jeff Shimeta, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 253,996.00

Microbial processes at the sediment-water interface (SWI) and in near-bottom
water are critical for benthic productivity, nutrient cycling, and benthic-
pelagic coupling in numerous subtidal marine environments, including coastal
waters, continental shelves, and the deep sea. The roles of protists in the
microbial food webs of the benthic-planktonic transition zone, however, are
poorly understood. This proposal describes a study of combined field sampling
and laboratory experiments to elucidate influences of benthic boundary-layer
(BBL) flow on protistan ecology. The project is designed to answer the following
questions: (1) what are the vertical distributions and abundances of protists at
the SWI and in near-bottom water, (2) to what extent, and by what mechanisms,
does BBL flow influence these distributions, and (3) to what extent, and by what
mechanisms, do variations in BBL flow affect feeding rates of heterotrophic
protists at the SWI and in near-bottom water? To answer these questions, the
objectives of the research are: (1) to characterize the vertical distributions
of protists in the near-bottom water and surficial sediment of a coastal
subtidal habitat, Buzzards Bay, MA, and to relate these distributions to tidal
variations in flow speed; (2) to investigate in a laboratory flume the
mechanisms by which flow influences vertical distributions of cells as seen in
the field; and (3) to measure in a flume the influences of BBL flow on feeding
rates of heterotrophic protists under conditions similar to the field. The
results of this work will provide novel insights into physical-biological
interactions in benthic microbial ecology and benthic-pelagic coupling in
coastal habitats. Through these processes, the physical energy level of flow in
subtidal coastal habitats may have far-reaching influences on microbial trophic
dynamics, secondary production, and biogeochemical processes in the near-bottom
and surficial-sedimentary zone.