* 9711273
* Retrospective Analysis of Northeast Pacific                 Microzooplankton: a Window on Physical Forcing of Food      Web Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1999
* USD 48,460.00

Retrospective analysis of Northeast Pacific microzooplankton: a window on
physical forcing of food web structure A retrospective analysis of
microzooplankton samples from the Gulf of Alaska is proposed as a means of
relating changes in ocean physics to changes in abundance and distribution of
taxa at higher trophic levels, particularly copepods. The mechanisms by which
climate regime shifts translate into changes in copepod and fish production are
unknown. Many researchers have hypothesized that climate driven variability in
ocean physics alters resource availability to primary producers, ultimately
resulting in variation in prey availability to marine animals. Microzooplankton
are known to be the major trophic link between primary producers and higher
trophic levels in oceanic subarctic waters, and may play an equally important
role in coastal ecosystems. We propose that retrospective analysis of this key
trophic link, when combined with data on meteorology, ocean physics, and
plankton biology, will provide a window onto the mechanisms by which climate
shifts may alter food web structure and function. The sample set consists of
acid Lugol's preserved 1 liter water samples collected during oceanographic
cruises along Line P and at Station P (50ÝN, 145ÝW). Vertical profiles ( 8
discrete depths sampled per profile) are in hand from cruises in 1987, 1988, and
1993 1997 (inclusive), with most sampling focused during winter (Feb.) and
spring (May) months. Additional samples will be collected during 1998 and 1999.
Thus a 13 year time period, with 7 continuous years, ultimately will be
available for analysis. Abundance, biomass, size structure, and species
composition of the microzooplankton community (primarily protozoa) will be
determined. Because quantitative sampling techniques for microzooplankton came
into consist use fairly recently, the data set ultimately obtained will be a
rare if not unique view of multi year variation in this important planktonic
group. Furthermore, all samples were collected during oceanographic research
cruises, providing an unusually detailed contextual framework for the
microzooplankton data. Microzooplankton data will be compared to physical and
biological parameters (e.g. meteorological conditions, ocean temperature, mixed
layer depth, nutrient concentrations, phytoplankton biomass, size structure, and
production, and copepod biomass). Analysis of microzooplankton samples in the
context of related environmental data will increase our understanding of the
mechanisms linking ocean physics and higher trophic level changes, as mediated
through the microzooplankton. An understanding of how the food web responds to
seasonal and interannual shifts in the environment is essential for the
development and validation of predictive models, a major goal of U.S. GLOBEC.