* 9711990
* Micropump/Power-relay Based on the Magnetohydrodynamic      Principle
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Wanjun Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2001
* USD 226,749.00

9711990 Wang There are two major goals for the research work proposed: (1)
design, microfabricate, and test a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) pump which can be
used for pumping electrically conductive fluids; (2) design, microfabricate, and
test a power relay using a MHD pump for switching actuation and liquid metals,
such as mercury, as the conducting medium. The MHD micropump to be developed can
be integrated with any of the commonly used chemical and biological sensing
techniques and may have significant applications in various biomedical and
chemical analyses. It can be used to directly deliver electrically conductive
fluids. For samples with very low conductivity, or even non-conductive samples,
a "carrier liquid" with higher electric conductivity can be used as is commonly
practiced in capillary electrophoresis. Advantages of a MHD micropump include:
no moving parts; reduced risk of failure due to mechanical fatigue; relatively
simple fabrication, and therefore potentially lower cost; reduced risk of
clogging and damage to molecular material being pumped; potential for remote or
tele-operation by control of an applied external magnetic field; potential for
massive parallelization for rapid processing. The advantages of a MHD actuated
power relay using a liquid metal, such as mercury, as a conducting medium
include: high current capacity, high off-resistance, low on-resistance, low
power consumption, and high dielectric strength, and elimination of spark
corrosion. The downside with using mercury is toxicity and handling.
Specifically, the research work in this proposal focuses on the following two
key areas: Characterization of the magnetohydrodynarnic effect and its
applications in micropumping and switching applications. The magnetohydrodynamic
principle has been applied for pumping liquid metals, as well as in various
acoustic transducers and flow sensing applications. However, almost all of the
previous studies and applications have concentrated in macro-systems. Different
pro blems may be faced when the principle is applied to micropumping and
sensing. Effects such as surface tension and friction may become important
factors. Fundamental dynamic and static modeling and experimental research will
be carried out in order to fully understand and develop guidelines for optimal
designs of MHD-based Microsystems. Suitable microfabrication processes for the
proposed MHD micropump/relay will be developed and documented. Thorough
experimental studies will be conducted on the micropump/relay to be developed
and compared with the dynamic and static modeling results. Based on the test
results, guidelines for the optimal design and fabrication of MHD
micropump/relay will be developed. ***