* 9711185
* MII: Development of a Five-Year Plan for the Enhancement    of the Computer Science Program  at AAMU
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Imao Chen, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/1999
* USD 49,997.00

9711185 Hung, Chih-Cheng Alabama A&amp;M University MII: Development of a five-
year plan for the enhancement of the computer science program at AAMU This award
supports the planning and development of a comprehensive five-year project to
enhance the research and academic activities of the graduate and undergraduate
programs in the Computer Science division at Alabama A&amp;M University. The
plan of action includes: faculty development, laboratory expansions, developing
advanced computing and research facilities, establishment of institutional
linkage, outreach to local industry, course and curriculum development to
incorporate technology advancements, and mentoring of minority students. The
main objective of this project is to plan and establish a Center for Research
and Educational Excellence in Advanced Computing that caters to the needs of the
local industry and provides excellent educational and research opportunities for
the minority students in southern region. The proposed center will be of great
potential in designing and developing state-of-the-art research and educational
outreach in advanced fields of computing such as Image Analysis, Distributed
Databases, Computer Security, High Performance Distributed Computing, and Visual
Tools. The project has the potential ultimately to attract and significantly
increase the number and quality of minority students in computer science.