* 9711969
* Laboratory Studies of Heterogeneous Chemistry in the Upper  Troposphere/Lower Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Margaret Tolbert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/2002
* USD 417,101.00

9711969 Tolbert In this project, laboratory studies of particle formation and
heterogeneous chemical reactions under conditions relevant for the upper
troposphere/lower stratosphere will be performed. The composition, formation
mechanism and abundance of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) remain uncertain,
and the role of heterogeneous chemistry in the upper troposphere has not been
established. To probe particle formation, several types of experiments will be
performed. First FTIR reflection absorption spectroscopy (RAS) will be used to
make fundamental measurements of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation
parameters for atmospheric materials. Diffusion activation energies and contact
parameters will be determined to provide the necessary input for nucleation
theory. Other laboratory experiments will probe the formation mechanisms of
PSCs, in particular, type Ia PSCs, whose exact composition is still unknown. In
addition, laboratory studies of heterogeneous chemical reactions of potential
importance in the upper troposphere will be performed. The most abundant types
of particles there are thought to be cirrus, subvisible cirrus, and sulfate
aerosols. A Knudsen cell flow reactor coupled with FTIR RAS to probe the
condensed phase will be used. Oxidation/reduction reactions that may occur
between oxygenated organics and nitric acid condensed on cirrus particles will
be studied, and experiments on the reactivity of deliquesced and crystalline
sulfate salts will be performed.