* 9711355
* Adverse Selection in Durable Goods Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Igal Hendel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 130,304.00

Adverse selection is an important source of market inefficiency and markets for
durable goods are particularly likely to suffer from adverse selection. Indeed
the used car market is the prototypical example of a market subject to adverse
selection. In any of these markets adverse selection is a potential problem
because first owners learn the quality of the good and then decide whether to
trade them in the used market. This research will analyze a market where a flow
of output of new units arrives every period, consumers self-select into buying
new or used cars. Thus, in contrast to the previous literature on adverse
selection, the ownership of cars is endogenous. Preliminary results indicate
that incorporating in the analysis the market for new goods has important
consequences. First, the volume of trade in the used market is always less than
100%, but the used market never closes. This is a consequence of the fact that,
in contrast with the previous literature, in this model a seller of a used car
gets to buy a new car instead of being left with nothing. Second, this research
suggests that there are new dimensions in the analysis of social welfare that
put in question some `common wisdom` concerning adverse selection. In
particular, an example shows that welfare can be higher under adverse selection
than when all consumers are required to trade or, alternatively, when there is
no quality uncertainty. Third, this framework allows consideration of the
effects of adverse selection on the market for new durable goods and, therefore,
on manufacturer incentives to influence the behavior of consumers in the
presence of adverse selection. It is possible that a worsening of adverse
selection may benefit a monopolist, who may then produce unreliable cars. This
research will then analyze contractual arrangements that the manufacturers can
employ to affect the behavior of consumers: the transferability of warranty
coverage between owners, manufacturers refurbishment and certification of the
used, and the structure of leasing contracts.