* 9711974
* Psychological Representations of Multiple Agents in Text and Spoken Discourse
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Richard Gerrig, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2001
* USD 553,676.00

This project probes the nature of psychological representations of discourse and
applies the results to a computational model of "who knows what" in text about
multiple agents. Many kinds of inferences and pragmatic effects depend on
knowing who has access to which information, as well as who shares common
ground. Computational and psychological models of text understanding have
largely ignored the ramifications of multiple agent sources on the
representation and use of textual information. Our objectives are: A) to examine
how people process and represent the distinct knowledge states of agents
depicted or quoted in both constructed and naturally occurring texts, B) to
investigate how readers' representations of texts are affected by the
perspectives they bring to these texts, as well as by how sources are presented,
and C) to apply these empirical results to the construction of a partly-
automated system for extracting, representing, and coding "who knows what" in a
large corpus of naturally occurring texts - news stories from The Wall Street
Journal. This research will contribute to practical goals concerning the
modeling and extraction of information from text and reported speech, as well as
to theoretical goals concerning how people process and represent texts about
multiple agents.