* 9711993
* Dissertation Research:  Identity, Politics and Place in     Immigrant-Receiving Societies:  The Case of Arab Immigrants in London
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Lynn Staeheli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 07/31/1999
* USD 9,990.00

Caroline R Nagel University of Colorado, Boulder The doctoral dissertation
research will examine a series of questions which relate to identity, politics
and place in an immigrant receiving society using the example of Arab immigrants
in London. The project will seek to learn the relationship between group
identity and political action, and the ways group identities shape the
adaptation process in a host society. In addition the research attempts to
depict new geographies which are created from group identity patterns and
political struggles. An initial premise is that immigrant identity reflects
social relations which are rooted in constructions of gender, race and nation.
Space is seen as critical in the analysis and is an integral component of
identity, political struggle, and immigrant integration. Secondary data on the
immigrant community in London will be gathered and organized temporally and
structurally. In addition primary data will be gathered through semi-structured
interviews which will explore linkages between context, identity and political
actions in order to reveal the spatial components of identity politics. The
result will be a deeper understanding of the ways in which space, identity and
politics are woven together in the adaptation process of an immigrant community.