* 9711208
* Fundamental and Technological Basis of Compliant Universal  Substrates for Growing Defect Free Heteroepitaxial Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Stephen Sass, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

The objectives of the proposed research and education program are: (1) to
develop a viable technology for compliant substrates which can be used to grow
defect-free heteroepitaxial materials of large (>15%) lattice mismatches and
different lattice structures, and (2) to understand the underlining physics of
compliant substrates and to establish a physical model to quantitatively
describe the phenomenon of substrate compliance. In brief, this program aims to
establish the theory and technology of compliant universal substrates. As a
result of this research, one or two types of substrates, perhaps GaAs or Si,
will be sufficient to accommodate a large variety of compound semiconductor
epitaxial materials, including those having no proper conventional substrates on
which to grow. The proposed compliant universal substrate is essentially made of
an ultra thin (10 A to 100A) single crystal (e.g. GaAs or Si) bonded to a GaAs
or Si bulk crystal with a large (> 10 degrees) twist angle. It is believed that
the microstructure of the twist boundary and the extremely thin bonded layer
play a critical role in making the structure compliant to the heteroepitaxial
overlayer. We conceive that the twist bonded thin portion of the bicrystal
behaves somewhat similar to a free standing thin template to achieve its
compliance. Our preliminary experimental results show that InGaP, GaSb, and
InSb, with 1%, 8%, and 15% mismatch to GaAs, respectively, can be grown defect-
free on the compliant universal substrates. This proposal brings together the
expertise of Lo, who has developed the concept of the compliant universal
substrate, and of Sass, who has carried out extensive studies of the structure
of grain boundaries contained in bicrystals with the same geometry as in the
compliant universal substrate. The research team made of Lo, Sass, 3 Ph.D.
students and at least 4 undergraduates will perform three tasks: fundamental
materials research, compliant substrate technology development, and material and
device demonstrations. Through these efforts, the physical mechanisms,
technologies, and applications of compliant universal substrates are anticipated
to be established. Compliant universal substrates have been a dream for many
decades for people working on semiconductor materials and devices. The
realization of compliant universal substrates will remove one of the most
serious road blocks in semiconductor research and significantly advance the
technologies of microelectronics, optoelectronics, and the integration of both.
The proposed research will contribute substantially to achieving this goal.