* 9711098
* 51st Session of the International Statistical Institute,    Istanbul, Turkey, August 18-27, 1997
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Ray Waller, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 04/30/1998
* USD 20,000.00

DMS9711098 51st Session of ISI, Istanbul Abstract The American Statistical
Association (ASA), an affiliate of the International Statistical Institute
(ISI), requests funds for approximately twenty (20) travel grants for the
meetings of the 51st Session of the ISI to be held in Istanbul, Turkey, from
August 18-27, 1997. The ISI holds its biennial meetings in capital cities around
the world, in odd-numbered years. Of the approximately 500 United States
residents who are members of the ISI, about 60 percent attend the biennial
meeting. The ISI meeting includes meetings of the Bernoulli Society for
Mathematical Statistics and Probability; the International Association for
Survey Statisticians (IASS); the International Association for Statistical
Computing (IASC); the International Association for Official Statistics (IAOS);
and the International Association for Statistical Education (IASE) Thus, this
will be an umbrella meeting with sessions of interest for thousands of
statisticians. Further, the meetings bring together individuals from various
areas of statistical research. Papers cover theoretical statistics and many
areas of application including engineering and the behavioral, social, physical,
and health sciences. Copies of individual papers are made available during the
meeting and proceedings of the biennial sessions are published. Examples of some
of the presentations by recipients of past NSF travel grants include "The Role
of Electronic Communication in Statistics Education," "Object Oriented Methods
in Statistics-- Graphical Construction and Editing of Plots," and "Time Series
Applications in Astronomy and Meteorology." The travel grants will provide
partial support to defray transportation costs for a limited number of
individuals, who will be selected by a committee of ASA members. Of primary
importance to the ASA is the emphasis placed on encouraging younger
statisticians to participate in the meeting. ASA proposes to awa rd
approximately twenty grants, with the majority of the funds supporting
individuals who received their Ph.D. in 1988 or later. The ASA encourages
applications from all qualified individuals, especially women and minorities.
ASA affirms the policies of the NSF in this regard.