* 9711532
* Intelligent Data Analysis for Identifying Protein Disorder
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* A. Keith Dunker, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2001
* USD 445,768.00

Despite reported examples of proteins with natively disordered regions, their
commonness and function in nature is unknown. Solutions to these problems cannot
be found by searching existing protein structure databases since they are likely
to be strongly biased against natively disordered proteins. The approach
proposed in this project consists of disorder estimation from primary sequence
information through an intelligent data analysis. Preliminary results indicate
that disordered regions can have crucial function and that such regions are
evidently very common in nature. If confirmed by an in depth study, this
represents a major shift in the world view of protein structure and function.
The aims of the current study are to further investigate this problem by: a)
enlarging and improving a preliminary data set of proteins with disordered
regions; b) improving the preliminary protein disorder prediction system
accuracy, interpretability, and accessibility; c) testing the validity of the
obtained knowledge. The techniques for analyzing massive volumes of data are
likely to serve as stepping-stones towards the development of sophisticated
prediction systems for some important problems in biochemistry. Possible
biological applications include studies aimed at understanding protein structure
and function, as well as improving protein crystallization process efficiency.