* 9711808
* Finite Element Modeling of the Seismic and Permeability Properties of Partially Molten Upper Mantle
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Eugene Humphreys, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David E. Epp
* 08/31/1998
* USD 37,331.00

Abstract P.I.: Humphreys Proposal Number: 97-11808 Institution: University of
Oregon Title: Finite element modeling of the seismic and permeability properties
of partially molten upper mantle The frequency dependent seismic response of
partially molten upper mantle rock is to be determined using viscoelastic finite
element computer simulations. Analytic solutions for the mechanical properties
of this two-phase material have been elusive because of the complexity of the
inclusion shapes. The finite element meshes are based on images produced from
analysis of laboratory produced partially molten peridotites. To investigate
S-waves, the mesh is strained with a step function in simple shear as a boundary
condition and time is stepped forward allowing stress to decay as the melt flows
and relaxes viscously. From this stress decay function the frequency dependent
complex elastic moduli are computed, yielding the frequency dependent seismic
velocity and attenuation. The method is benchmarked by comparing finite element
results to relatively simple cases with known analytic solution (e.g.,
ellipsoids and triple junction tubule-shaped inclusions). Permeability is
modeled by applying a pressure differential across the meshed sample, and
calculating the hydraulic conductivity of the network from the bulk fluid
transport.