* 9711665
* Towards Flexible Teamwork in Complex, Dynamic Environments  (FLEXTEAM)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Milind Tambe, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 05/31/2001
* USD 238,004.00

Teamwork is becoming increasingly critical in multi-agent domains ranging from
virtual environments for training and education, to information integration on
the Internet, to potential multi-robotic space missions. The overall goal of
this research is to develop a comprehensive model of teamwork, that explains the
complex phenomena in teamwork, such as commitments, coordination and
communication. To this end, this project investigates flexible communication in
service of coordination, to significantly enrich the communication in existing
teamwork models, and thus improve teamwork flexibility. In particular, it
examines the role of explicit communication to improve quality, accuracy or
efficiency of teamwork, as well as the role of implicit communication (via plan-
recognition) to maintain teamwork coherence. The approach is based on a model of
teamwork called STEAM. STEAM enables agents to explicitly represent and reason
with joint goals and plans, and their commitments in team activities. While
STEAM's underlying teamwork model is based on the joint intentions theory, it
also includes significant novel additions in the form of monitoring constraints,
team reorganization capabilities as well as decision theoretic communication
selectivity. STEAM has been implemented --- STEAM agents participate in teamwork
in three complex domains. The results of this research will enable significant
improvement in multi-agent teamwork flexibility, as well as reuse of teamwork
capabilities, with possible applications in the arenas such as education,
entertainment, training, and others mentioned above.