* 9711398
* Improving the Locality of Reference in Heap-Allocation      Intensive Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Benjamin Zorn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 08/31/2001
* USD 185,113.00

With the widespread use of object-oriented programming languages, including C++
and Java, programs that do a significant amount of heap storage allocation are
becoming increasingly widespread and important. This project investigates
aggressive implementation policies that can improve reference locality in
allocation-intensive programs, both in languages with and without garbage
collection. Specifically, the approach followed here uses profile-based
optimization and predicts the objects that are likely to be highly referenced at
the time they are allocated. It also investigates object splitting, in which the
representation of objects is split into multiple parts, and the more frequently
referenced parts are co-located. There are three primary contributions arising
from this research. First, it investigates the empirical properties of programs
in languages that use manual (e.g., C++) and automatic (e.g., Java) storage
reclamation. It shows that C programs exhibit exploitable behavior, and it
expands these results to other languages. Second, this project develops,
evaluates and compares alternative algorithms for identifying and exploiting
predictable reference behavior. Finally, it shows that prototype implementations
of the algorithms being investigated can significantly increase performance in
substantial programs.