* 9711723
* Extracellular Carbon and Sulfur Production by Arctic        Phytoplankton during the Spring Bloom
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2001
* USD 170,515.00

This study proposes to assess the importance of alternative pathways in the
carbon and sulfur budgets of Arctic phytoplankton and to determine whether
nutrient limitation and temperature control the size of the different organic
pools of the carbon and sulfur budgets as well as the production rate of these
different mineral pools. Phytoplankton may act as a sink for carbon dioxide and
act as a source of dimethylsulfide. Large phytoplankton biomass accumulates
during spring blooms in Arctic waters, where algal taxa such as diatoms and
other algae dominate. Previous work by the PIs indicated that polar
phytoplankton can be strong producers of dissolved organic carbon and sulfur
than previously thought. The widespread distribution of these species in highly
productive waters of the polar seas makes understanding the variability of this
system highly critical. The PIs propose to differentiate between the production
of algal mucilage and dissolved carbon pools and determine their relative
importance to the total excretion of photosynthetic fixed carbon, to determine
the role of Phaeocystis and diatomaceous algae in carbon and sulfur pathways, to
examine the changes in partitioning of carbon and sulfur during exponential and
stationary growth, and to study the role of nutrient limitation on organic
carbon and sulfur production.