* 9711623
* Hierarchical Modeling for Integrated Environmental          Assessments
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Raymond O'Connor, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/1999
* USD 130,000.00

9711623 O'Connor The distribution of biotic resources over large spatial extents
is often a function of climate, of land-use, and of the demographics of the
human population but these different classes of independent variables have
different spatial scales for their action. One approach to the integration of
these effects across scales is to use hierarchical models that incorporate
contingencies and constraints in effects. This project seeks to develop such a
modeling paradigm by use of classification and regression trees (CART). The
hexagonal grid of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment Program is used as the spatial grid, with about 12000
grid points within the conterminous U.S. To test the approach, national Breeding
Bird Survey data are used as dependent variables (species richness, abundance of
individual species). The independent variables are derived from climate models,
from remote sensing of land use from Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometry
(the Loveland prototype land cover classification), from National Agricultural
Statistics Service statistics, and from Bureau of the Census data. The CART
modeling then determines the best combination of predictors for each hexagon
with bird data (ca. 1200), and the resulting model is used to predict values for
all other hexagons. One can then map the regions with unique patterns of
environmental effects on birds, can determine the location and degree of species
losses associated with the local or regional action of particular stressors, and
assess the location and total impact of the overall stressor load on the system.
Specific questions that are addressed in the project include the value of
different datasets as predictors, the influence of spatial autocorrelation,
improvement of model fit and assessment of prediction accuracy, and methods of
visualization of the results. The effects of climate, land-use and human
demographics on environmental resources are particularly difficult to estimate
in an integrated manner because some effects are broad-scale while others are
very localized. If one could do so, a national environmental risk assessment
would be feasible in a cost-effective manner. Here a new approach to the problem
is tested, using a hierarchical model that first adjusts for broad- scale
effects and then assesses regional and local effects in turn. As a test, bird
data for the 48 conterminous states are modeled against national climate data,
remote sensing data on land use, and agricultural and Census data. The resulting
national map shows on a 12,000 point grid the extent to which species are lost
to particular or to all stressors at each point, in effect a national risk
assessment of environmental impacts as experienced by birds in relation to the
stressors tested. The approach can readily be extended to other environmental
response variables and to smaller or larger scales. This project systematically
investigates technical uncertainties that might limit the usefulness of the
approach.