* 9711427
* GLOBEC Northeast Pacific Retrospective Study: Long-Term     Variability in Salmon Abundance in the Gulf of Alaska and   California Current Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Bruce Finney, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2000
* USD 139,652.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The main goals of this project are to reconstruct trends in
salmon abundance in the California Current and Northern Gulf of Alaska systems
over the past 500 to 2000 years, to compare trends in abundance between the
systems, and to determine relationships between climate change and salmon
abundance. This project will use newly developed techniques to reconstruct
salmon abundance trends from stable isotopic analysis of lake sediment cores.
Several sites will be studied in each of the California Current and Northern
Gulf of Alaska systems to compare trends within and between regions. The records
of salmon abundance will be compared with paleoclimatic data determined from
studies of tree rings, glacial advances and other sources. Long-term records of
salmon abundance will be reconstructed by analyses of stable nitrogen isotopes
in sediment cores. This new application of N stable isotopes is based on the
observation that Pacific salmon supply measurable quantities of elements into
freshwater systems when they return to spawn. Nitrogen derived from adult salmon
is enriched in 15N relative to terrestrially-derived N. and thus past changes in
the number of returning adult salmon are reflected by downcore changes in
sedimentary delta15N. The stable isotopes of sulfur also have potential to trace
salmon-derived elements into freshwater ecosystems, because there is a large
difference between marine and terrestrial signatures of delta34S. Because N and
S have different geochemical controls and different geochemical cycling
processes, the use of both tracers should lead to a robust reconstruction of
salmon abundance.