* 9711986
* The Mechanisms of Crystallization of Copolymers at          Atmospheric and Elevated Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Paul Phillips, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2001
* USD 250,000.00

9711986 Philllips There are many variables which influence the physical and
mechanical properties of crystalline polymers through the processing and
fabrication stages of manufacture. Four of the most important are temperature,
pressure, molecular weight and chain microstructure. The long term objective of
the research is to understand the ways in which all four of these variables
interact in determining the details of the basic physics of the crystallization
process in polymers of commercial importance. The synergistic effects of these
variables will be investigated for several carefully chosen systems and in doing
so will contribute to the education of undergraduate and graduate students.
Whereas past work has concentrated on cis-polyisoprene, polyethylene,
polypropylene and PET, and their copolymers with comonomers that are rejected
from the crystals, recent research has added copolymers of nylon 6,6. This
latter group includes a copolymer in which the comonomer is incorporated into
the unit cell of the homopolymer. Preliminary results show the behavior of this
copolymer to be quite unexpected and different from all others. Research already
begun on the very important new copolymers of ethylene and octene made using
metallocene catalysts is definitive and shows them to be very different from
matched fractions of similar copolymers made using traditional Zeigler Natta
type catalysts. For the first time, this research has demonstrated the
importance of yet another variable on crystallization behavior, the comonomer
sequence length distribution. It is proposed to expand our studies of the random
ethylene-octene copolymers and to study them at elevated pressures. In addition
studies of the formation of the fascinating Y phase in polypropylene at elevated
pressures will be continued and extended to copolymers already studied at
atmospheric pressure. Copolymers show this phase at atmospheric pressure despite
the fact that it should not be there according to the phase diagram of the
homopolymer. It therefore appears that the energetics of its formation are
strongly perturbed by the presence of an excludable comonomer. %%% This research
will contribute to the understanding of the crystallization behavior of
different classes of commercially significant copolymers under conditions of
temperature and pressure normally encountered in the molding operations of the
plastics industry, whilst at the same time providing both undergraduate and
graduate students with valuable laboratory experience. ***