* 9711977
* RUI: Experimental Studies on Multi-Species Zooxanthella Communities and Coral Bleaching
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Robert Rowan, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2000
* USD 83,140.00

Reef-building corals are obligate associations of heterotrophic animals and
phototrophic dinoflagellate endosymbionts (zooxanthellae). Scientists have
become interested in a conspicuous stress response -- coral bleaching -- that
involves the `breakdown` of this symbiosis, occasionally followed by
ecologically devastating coral mortality. Interest in coral bleaching is
motivated by the belief that these events are increasing world-wide, and by
their potential value as a sensitive bioindicator of environmental change.
However, large gaps in our understanding of both the ecology and causes of coral
bleaching remain. These gaps frustrate attempts to relate coral bleaching to
environmental issues. Recently completed studies on the Caribbean's dominant and
most studied corals, Montastraea annularis and M. faveolata, revealed a
fundamental misunderstanding that relates directly to coral bleaching. Contrary
to the earlier, widely accepted belief that corals harbor only one symbiont,
these corals host dynamic communities of three taxa of zooxanthellae that are
primarily organized by gradients of ambient irradiance. This phenomenon
explained a longstanding issue in coral bleaching ecology -- an otherwise
bewildering variation, both among and within coral colonies -- in simple terms.
Because it upsets a basic premise on which corals have been studied for decades,
this discovery also opens up new and unexpected opportunities for experimental
research. This project will analyze the environmental biology of Montastraea
spp. in the explicit contexts of multi-species zooxanthella communities and
environmental stress. Previous studies of these communities imply parallels with
much better studied communities of terrestrial plants.