* 9711582
* MII: Infrastructure for Research and Training on High       -Performance Heterogeneous Distributed Database Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2003
* Frank Urban, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 07/31/2003
* USD 1,342,500.00

97-11582 Rishe, Naphtali Barton, David Florida International University (FIU)
CISE MII: Infrastructure for Research and Training on High-Performance
Heterogeneous Distributed Database Management. This award is to be used to
attract and retain minority students, encouraging high-performance database
research. Planned is a special mentoring program modeled after the "Affinity
Groups" of the University of Texas at El Paso. The groups, consisting of
undergraduate and graduate students, post-docs, and faculty members, provide the
framework that enables deepening knowledge of a field by procuring a physical
setting in a cooperative research-engaging environment. Structured activities
facilitate knowledge transfer and serve to ascertain progress. Summer
internships for undergraduates are budgeted to involve them in research
projects. The affinity groups, within the FIU High Performance Database Research
Center at FIU performs research towards the development of a heterogeneous
distributed database management system (HDBMS) providing fast integration of
disparate data sources and efficient interoperability through the application
and utilization of a semantic database management system to define a global
schema of the heterogeneous data. A semantic interpretation of SQL is used for
efficient interoperability of relational and object-oriented databases.
Dynamically-dispatched agent technology is used to interface the distributed
heterogeneous databases. Query optimization techniques in the presence of
heterogeneous networks are being evaluated and investigated.