* 9711015
* Deterministic Seismic Design Procedures for Building        Structures Based on Probabilistic Performance Criteria
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Kevin Collins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 02/28/2001
* USD 92,361.00

9711015 Collins The seismic Design provisions of most building codes existing
account for the uncertainty in the ground motion by defining a single "design"
earthquake based on probability of exceedance or return period. A more rational
approach to structural design would be to establish performance criteria for the
structure corresponding to two (or more) levels of earthquake excitation,
express these criteria in probabilistic terms, develop deterministic design-
checking equations based on the probabilistic criteria, and design the structure
using the deterministic design-checking equations. The objective of this
research project is to further develop and refine the performance-based design
procedure so that it will be applicable to more complex building configurations.
To this end, analytical studies will be performed to investigate several issues
including (1) investigating alternate choices of the lateral force distribution
used in the static push-over analyses, (2) developing simple techniques to
account for torsional effects and three- dimensional effects while preserving
the probabilistic bases of the deterministic design equations, (3) accounting
for the effects of nonstructural components on overall building performance, and
(4) considering alternate measures of structural response to be used in
formulating performance criteria. Although no experiments are planned, existing
experimental data will be used to supplement the analytical results obtained
during this investigation whenever possible.