* 9711762
* Inter-University Workshop on Next Generation Package Design
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Suresh Sitaraman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 11/30/2000
* USD 70,000.00

9711762 Swaminathan This award is for support for the Inter-University Workshop
on Next Generation Package Design. The workshop will result in the
identification of: 1) key technical barriers, 2) current university based
research status, and 3) major voids that need to be addressed. The results will
be published in proceedings and workshop notes. This knowledge gained from this
workshop will enable researchers to concentrate research on major technical
issues, leverage synergistic research, and identify collaborative activities.
The workshop will open to the electronics industry (users of design
methods/tools), software industry (developers of design tools), and government
organizations to facilitate an open exchange of ideas. The collaboration plan is
to use the workshop as a forum to leverage, establish synergy, and strategically
coordinate university based research activities. The workshop will help
establish partnerships among universities for research and industry for
commercialization. These partnerships will then approach key companies and
government organizations for support and assistance where needed. The second
year workshop will highlight collaboration progress. The result will be a more
comprehensive and coordinated plan to address key technical and competitiveness
issues associated with next generation package design. A total of five sessions
discussing key design issues is planned along with a panel discussion.
Engineering Research Centers normally involve studies in research that involves
proof-of- concept testbeds. This facility will be the first of its kind in an
Engineering Research Center and in a university where the students will have the
potential to go beyond proof-of-concept testbeds, to prototype production
through a systems-level engineering project. This extends their education from
study of concepts to include the effects of manufacturing constraints on their
results.