* 9711124
* Dry Habitat Chimpanzee Ecology: Implications for the        Evolution of Bipedalism
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Kevin Hunt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/1998
* USD 19,756.00

As our closest relatives in the primate order, chimpanzees are an important
source of insight into the behavior of our earliest ancestors, the
australopithecines. Chimpanzees are imperfect analogues, however, because
australopithecines lived in drier habitats than those in which extant
chimpanzees are typically found. All working chimpanzee research stations are in
relatively wet habitats. In this project I aim to start a new study site on
chimpanzees that live in an unusual grassland/riverine- forest habitat in the
Semliki Valley Wildlife Reserve, Uganda. The particular focus of this research
is the origin of bipedalism. There is little agreement among researchers about
the selective forces that resulted in bipedalism, or about the course of its
evolution. Earlier research suggested that bipedalism evolved as an adaptation
to feeding on small fruits found in diminutive trees, trees found mostly in dry
areas. Although not habitual bipeds, chimpanzees do engage in this form of
locomotion on occasion. As chimpanzees are habituated to human observation at
Semliki, I will observe the contexts of their bipedalism to understand better
why our ape-like ancestor first adopted this unusual locomotor behavior. Study
of these chimpanzees will assure their survival as well as helping us understand
the evolution of the australopithecines.