* 9711128
* Processing Development for Making High Power Microwave 4H-SiC Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Mulpuri Rao, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

9711128 Rao This project is aimed at developing processing technology for high-
power and microwave devices in semi-insulating (SI) and semi-conducting SiC. The
N and Al ion implantations in SI 4H-SiC and Al ion implantation in n-type 4H-SiC
epitaxial layers will be thoroughly pursued in order to develop planar selective
area doping technology in this material. Exploratory work on As-implantation to
obtain donor doping in SiC will be performed. Due to the complementary lattice
positions occupied by N and P (As) donors in SiC, N/P and N/As coimplantations
will be used to obtain highly conductive n( regions in SiC. Results of the
coimplantation work will be useful for minimizing contact and bulk series
resistances of microwave and high power devices, which is crucial for obtaining
optimal device performance. Microwave and pulsed induction rapid thermal heating
set-ups will be developed to anneal 2" diameter implanted SiC wafers at
temperatures as high as 1700 (C. The implanted/annealed material will be
thoroughly characterized by van der Pauw Hall, SIMS, Rutherford Backscattering,
TEM, and photoluminescence measurements. These measurements will be used to gain
information about dopant electrical activation, dopant thermal stability, doped
region lattice perfection, and ionization energy of the dopants, etc. A new
ohmic contact metal system (Si/Al/Si/Ti/Pt) with different Si and metal layer
thicknesses will be tried to achieve high performance ohmic contacts on p-type
SiC. Contacts will be alloyed at different temperatures using a halogen lamp
rapid thermal annealing station. The contacts will be characterized by TLM
pattern measurements, SEM, Auger electron spectrometry, and x-ray diffraction
measurements. The reliability of the contacts for high-temperature and high-
power operation will be studied. Schottky and planar p-n junction diodes will be
made by selective area implantation in SI and semi-conducting 4H-SiC and
thoroughly characterized for I-V and C-V performance at various temperatures up
to 500 (C. DLTS measurements will be performed on the diodes to detect deep
levels in the implanted region and at the interface of the implanted region and
the SI substrate. Using the optimum implantation and ohmic contact conditions
developed in this work, MESFETs and JFETs will be made in SI and n-type 4H-SiC
respectively, and thoroughly characterized for their DC, microwave, and high-
power performance at various operating temperatures and also for extended period
operation at high temperatures. The proposed work will be performed in
collaboration with the scientists at General Electric Research Center,
Shenectady, NY, Naval Research Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and
the National Institute of Standards and Technology. ***