* 9711216
* Dissertation Research: Determinants of Male Reproductive    Success in a Baboon Hybrid Zone: A Behavioral and Genetic   Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Jane Phillips-Conroy, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/1999
* USD 8,295.00

This project is the first to look at factors determining male reproductive
success in the Awash National Park (ANP) baboon hybrid zone. The project
integrates genetic and behavioral studies of a single group that has mixed
ancestry from two types of baboons, anubis and hamadryas. Hamadryas males herd
females into one male units which they continuously maintain, whereas anubis
males compete for and guard only estrous females. Hybrid males exhibit
intermediate behavior. The short term reproductive success of different male
reproductive strategies will be compared by examining the relationship of
reproductive behavior and number of offspring sired. Molecular genetic markers
found in the nuclear genome will be used to assess genetic hybridity and for
parental analysis. Mitochondrial DNA sequence data will be collected for
comparison with the nuclear markers. Differential success of male reproductive
strategies affects the dynamics of the hybrid zone, particularly since male
migration appears to mediate gene flow. In addition to male reproductive
strategies and success, the project will also evaluate the effects of female
ancestry and social structure on the success of one male units. The knowledge
gained by this study will elucidate the evolutionary forces acting in the ANP
hybrid zone and, consequently, contribute to an understanding of the importance
of social factors in the origin and maintenance of hybrid zones.