* 9711504
* AMP/ Bridges to Computer and Information Science Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Anthony Beckman, Houston Community College
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/1999
* USD 249,986.00

HRD-9711504 Beckman In recent years, through a variety of programs, the Houston
Community College System (HCCS) has established a number of efforts designed to
recruit and retain women, minorities, and students with disabilities. Despite
the successes of such programs, the number of minority students completing their
studies and transferring to senior colleges and universities falls far short of
the nation s growing need for minorities trained in computer technologies. The
faculty of the Houston Community College System Computer Science Department has
planned a broad, ambitious program to attract more students from
underrepresented groups to careers in computer science. Using successful models,
the plan focuses on building an infrastructure of faculty and student support
systems which will assure promising potential scholars an outstanding
educational program and secure their entry into senior colleges and
universities. Our proposed program will touch every sector of the college system
and reach into the community we serve. The primary goal of the program is to
increase the number of students from all underrepresented groups in the field of
computer science, assist them to successfully complete their studies at the
Houston Community College system, and facilitate their entry into a senior
college or university. Underlying this goal is the intent to foster a
fundamental change of philosophy throughout the Houston Community College System
and the entire community. The comprehensive plan we have developed provides for
the building of an infrastructure that will prepare faculty and students for the
speed of technological change. The plan will require an infusion of upgraded
hardware and software to help faculty prepare for these changes by revising and
updating the curriculum yearly to meet the program s needs, to train faculty in
current technical advances, and to meet the instructional needs of students
brought into the program. The full program provides for re cruiting and
retaining promising students from underrepresented groups who are interested in
pursuing careers in computer science. The plan includes pre-college training,
two-year training and education at the college level, and retention support
programs such as tutoring, mentoring, counseling, and appropriate financial
support.