* 9711596
* Survival of Proteins in Marine Systems:  Role of            Macromolecular Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Patrick Hatcher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 96,209.00

9711596 Hatcher The role of macromolecular organic matter will be examined with
respect to the long-term stabilization or sequestration of protein nitrogen in
marine systems using the combined application of geochemical and biochemical
tools. The study will focus upon samples already obtained from a natural
mineral-matter depleted marine sediment (Mangrove Lake, Bermuda), oceanic
organic-rich sediments from the Peru upwelling zone and the Santa Barbara Basin,
oceanic sediment trap material, and on samples obtained from laboratory
degradations of algae grown to enrich them in 13C and 15N. Electrophoretic
techniques and NMR will follow the fate of protein in laboratory incubations
during its incorporation into the macromolecular pool. Protein's role in forming
macromolecular organic matter which resists degradation in sediments over the
long term will be studied. To address this issue, a novel dual/selective
labeling experiment will be used to examine any cross-coupling of carbon and
nitrogen from each of two parallel but selectively labeled pools of algae during
degradation. Understanding the mechanisms and processes involved in the
formation of refractory nitrogen-containing organic material in sediments and
sediment-trap material will improve our understanding of nitrogen cycling in
marine systems and will also provide a conceptual framework for improved
predictive models of global nitrogen cycling.