* 9712347
* PEET: Monographic Research in the Moss Family Calymperaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 830,259.00

9712347 Mishler Bryophytes are a group of three distinct lineages (mosses,
liverworts, and hornworts) that are thought to constitute the remnants of the
earliest evolving groups of land plants. There are an estimated 23,000 species
of bryophytes, with new species continuing to be described from tropical regions
of the world. Because of the small and haploid (single set of chromosomes)
nature of the vegetative stage of growth, select species of bryophytes serve as
convenient laboratory models for basic studies in physiology, genetics, and
ecology. A major limitation in the use of bryophytes as study systems for
evolutionary and ecological processes has been the lack of basic taxonomic
knowledge of many groups, particularly in the tropics. With assistance from
colleagues in the U.S., Australia, Malaysia, and elsewhere, Prof. Brent Mishler
at the University of California-Berkeley has designed a multidisciplinary
program of study and training that focuses on the large tropical family of
mosses, Calymperaceae. Field collecting in Asia and Australasia will augment
existing herbarium collections, and provide materials for molecular (DNA)
sequencing to complement morphological and anatomical studies, as well as mating
tests in the laboratory. Laboratory studies include new technologies of electron
microscopy, DNA sequencing, and morphometrics, to add new characters for
taxonomic discrimination and phylogenetic resolution. A monographic or species-
intensive emphasis will focus on the genus Mitthyridium and parts of the larger
genera Calymperes and Syrrhopodon. Training at undergraduate, graduate, and
postgraduate levels is an aspect of the program, along with extensive field
work, mostly in southeast Asia and the South Pacific, areas of high species
diversity. Collaboration with specialists in Malaysia like Dr. Haji Mohamed and
in the U.S. like Drs. Daniel Norris and William Reese extend the field and
herbarium experiences for all the students involved. Training in modern DNA
sequencing for popu lation-genetic and phylogenetic studies provides students
with skills that are highly marketable. Products of the research will also be
made available in electronic formats over the Web, capitalizing on UC-Berkeley's
extensive resources in modern technologies of science dissemination.