* 9712377
* Conference on Restoring Wolves to the Adirondacks:  Civic   Democracy &amp; Obligations to Future Generations, October 1998
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Bryan Norton, Hastings Center
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 04/30/2000
* USD 80,995.00

This two and a half day conference will provide the occasion for a comprehensive
analysis and rich public discussion of the relationships between civic
democracy, obligations to future generations, and the particular topic of the
restoration of wolves to the Adirondacks. The conference will introduce these
issues to a large, diverse audience including biologists, ecologists,
philosophers, lawyers, activists, politicians, public policy analysts, and
members of the media. Particular attention will be paid to the restoration of
one species, the wolf, through three major realms of inquiry. First,
philosophers and other humanists will address the moral question by considering
what obligations current citizens have to future generations and how those
obligations should be identified and fulfilled. Furthermore, they will address
what values should guide public policy concerning the particular matter of the
project to restore wolves to the Adirondacks. Second, the conference will
involve political theorists, public policy specialists, and politicians, who
will consider the adequacy of our current political institutions and laws to
protect the interests of future generations. Particular attention will be given
to exploring what kind of legislation can best embody contemporary wisdom
concerning the conservation and restoration of various species. Third,
biologists, ecologists, and paleontologists will discuss the biological issues.
Given the radical difference between the time-scales of ecological and
evolutionary change and human cultural change, they will consider what, exactly,
is most important to save from a biological point of view. Furthermore, they
will also address the long-term biological implications of the wolf restoration
project. An important aspect of this event will be its inclusion of speakers
capable of addressing three distinct themes within the single conference format.
Participants from a range of disciplines will be carefully selected to explore
the major themes. These scholars will make public presentations during the
conference, and several of them will provide additional lectures at various
universities and public gatherings elsewhere in the state of New York. The
conference site is the American Museum of Natural History in New York City. The
anticipated date is October 21-23, 1998. Papers from the conference will be
collected in a scholarly book intended for academic faculty and students in a
range of disciplines as well as general citizens, legislators and policy
analysts with an interest in the issues of intergenerational obligations and
species restoration. The presentations will be video-taped, so that they can be
utilized in distance education and public education courses. Finally, the
material from the conference will be utilized in a university course offered
over the Internet. The conference should foster valuable public debate
concerning its principal themes and contribute to public understanding
concerning intergenerational obligations, wolf restoration projects, and the
importance of citizen participation in public policy debates with long-term
implications.