* 9712179
* Nonlinear Bubble Dynamics and Medical Ultrasound
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Andrew Szeri, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/2001
* USD 190,613.00

9712179 Szeri High frequency sound waves, known as ultrasound, are used in an
increasing number of diagnostic and therapeutic modes in medicine. The
beneficial effects of ultrasound can often be increased when microbubbles are
present; these may either be produced by the sound field itself or injected into
the patient. Hence, the nonlinear dynamics and control of volume oscillations of
microbubbles is of great importance in a variety of medical applications of
ultrasound. In medical imaging, microbubbles are valuable as contrast agents.
Owing to their compressibility relative to surrounding tissue, bubbles return a
stronger echo from an incident sound field that can be used to construct an
image useful to physicians. The echo from bubbles can be enhanced by exploiting
the nonlinear oscillations of bubbles which return an echo at a simple fraction
or multiple of the incident frequency, further differentiating the bubbles from
the surrounding tissue. In a second application known as sonodynamic therapy,
ultrasound interacting with microbubbles drives chemical reactions that release
radicals from injected reagents to destroy tumor tissue. The rate-limiting step
is the slow growth of microbubbles to useful size by uptake of dissolved gases
from the surrounding liquid. When the slowly growing bubbles become large
enough, violent collapses initiate the therapeutic effect. The importance of
nonlinear dynamics to these developing applications is clear, yet much is
unknown about the physics of bubbles undergoing nonlinear oscillations at
medically-relevant conditions. Therefore, research is proposed into nonlinear
dynamics of resonances, damping, ultrasound-induced bubble growth, effects of
encapsulation, and control of bubble oscillations. New control capabilities are
under development that involve a novel technique for optimizing bubble dynamics
by alteration of the driving acoustic waveform from a simple sine wave. The
optimization can be constructed so a s to increase the echo from microbubbles
used in imaging, or to increase the rate of ultrasound-induced growth of bubbles
used in sonodynamic therapy. These enhancements do not require more intense
ultrasound, but rather alterations in the acoustic waveform, and so can be
obtained without additional risk to the patient. ***