* 9712138
* Molecular Modelling of Fluid Mixtures in Nanoporous         Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1998
* USD 105,522.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9712138 K. Gubbin/Cornell Nanoporous solids find widespread use in
the chemical, oil, pharmaceutical and food industries as adsorbents and
membranes for separation processes and materials is largely empirical. The aim
of this project is to provide more powerful methods, based in molecular theory
and simulation, for prediction of adsorbed fluid behavior and for the design of
improved processes. Modern statistical mechanical methods, including molecular
simulation and kinetic theory, will b employed to carry our studies in three
areas: 1. Phase separation in porous media will be studied by novel molecular
simulation methods (including quench molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo with
histogram reweighting, etc.). Three separate investigations are planned. The
first will aim to model capillary condensation in well-characterized controlled
pore glasses (CPG), for which high quality experimental data have been recently
become available; a goal of this work will be to develop sophisticated models
that will be useful in other CPG studies. The second will be a study of freezing
and melting of fluids confined within nanoporous materials; systems studied will
include the adsorbates neopentane, carbon tetrachloride, water and water/methane
mixtures in carbons and oxides. The third project will be an examination of the
importance of interpore correlation effects in inducing phase separation in
small pore zeolites. 2. Selective adsorption of trace components in gas streams.
Calculations will be made to elucidate the role of pore and system variables on
the selective adsorption of trace contaminants in nitrogen and air streams for
materials with pores of various geometries. The effect of the presence of water
vapor on such selective adsorption on activated carbons will be studied to
elucidate the mechanism for the large effects of humidity in industrial
adsorption operations of this kind. The goal of this work is to develop methods
for designing improved adsorbents for removal of trac e contaminants. 3.
Diffusion in pores. Nonequilibrium molecular dynamics methods will be used to
study mutual diffusion in mixtures in pores. The goal of this work will be to
develop an understanding of the role of fluid-wall interactions, pore shape and
size, and pore entrance effects on diffusion in real nanoporous materials.