* 9712883
* Modeling Great Lakes Coastal Transport and Flux
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2003
* Henry Niebauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 322,171.00

9712883 Niebauer Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. The research is
being conducted under the auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP)
program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program. This collaborative,
interdisciplinary research program will entail an integrated program of field
and laboratory studies and mathematical modeling to quantify the role of coastal
currents and thermal fronts in mediating cross-margin transport in Lake Superior
and Lake Michigan. The objective of this project is to numerically model and
understand the basic oceanographic processes that affect and drive cross-margin
and vertical transport in the Great Lakes. This modeling study will consider
physical, biological, and chemical interactions with emphasis on episodic and
seasonal weather (wind and heat) forcing of vertical and horizontal lake
circulation, and effects on events such as primary production. The ultimate goal
is to gain understanding to the point of being able to predict transport of
momentum and mass, including natural and anthropogenic material. The transport
of natural and anthropogenic material includes primary production in nutrient-
phytoplankton-zooplankton loops with emphasis on aggregation of particles (both
natural and anthropogenic) and associated vertical flux and fate. This modeling
research will be applied to two contrasting Great Lakes coastal margins for
comparison and contrast: Lake Superior as an example of an oligotrophic Lake
that is seasonally impacted by ice cover, and Lake Michigan as an example of a
coastal region that is more impacted by anthropogenic input. While this research
is aimed at the Great Lakes coastal zone, it is directly applicable to the
coastal ocean. The work requires a multidisciplinary, collaborative research
approach and cooperative interaction to fit the various biological, physical,
chemical and met eorological model components together and to gather, apply and
interpret data for initial and boundary conditions as well as to verify the
resulting model results. This will be accomplished through interaction with
investigators and laboratories around the Great Lakes. The research will lead to
a better quantitative understanding of the processes that dominate the
transport, transformations, and fates of biologically, chemically, and
geologically important matter across the margins of the Great Lakes.