* 9712519
* Dissertation Research: Natal Dispersal and Reproductive in  the Monogamous Dusky Titi Monkey, Callicebus Moloch
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* William Mason, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2000
* USD 11,500.00

In most vertebrates, either sons or daughters typically disperse farther from
the birthplace than offspring of the other sex before breeding. Theory suggests
that which sex disperses depends on the mating system and the degree to which
males and females invest care in offspring. In polygynous mammals males usually
provide little care, and males disperse farther than females. In contrast, in
monogamous birds males often provide substantial care, and females disperse
farther than males. There is little understanding of dispersal in the few
monogamous mammals in which males care significantly for offspring. Through
genetic analyses and behavioral observations, this study will investigate
patterns of natal dispersal in the dusky titi monkey, a monogamous South
American primate characterized by paternal care. The study will also investigate
adult reproductive behavior. Despite pairing monogamously, female titi monkeys
mate with males other than their mates. Using genetic techniques and behavioral
observations, this study will establish whether these extra pair matings produce
offspring and will investigate the factors that guide female reproductive
decisions and whether they affect paternal behavior and social dynamics between
paired adults. The results will broaden understanding of factors that affect the
stability of the family group in monogamous primates.