* 9712069
* Automatic Identification of Significant Topics in Domain    Independent Full Text Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Judith Klavans, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,314.00

The goal of this research is to investigate the relationship between the
occurrence of significant topics in a document and the structure of the
document. The unique contribution of this research lies in the combination of
methods to be used for the production of a list of significant topics, built on
both statistical and rule-based techniques for the identification of term
variants as a function of their distribution in focus areas in documents.
Applications that can employ these methods include information retrieval,
passage retrieval, relevance feedback, information extraction, and
summarization. The results can be used directly in ongoing research projects on
automatic summarization of documents, using both statistical and information
extraction techniques, i.e., combining information retrieval (IR) and natural
language processing (NLP). To the extent that these techniques are based on
linguistically-motivated patterns and not on domain-dependent vocabularies,
these patterns should apply to general text. This approach will be applied to
several domains to test its generality and applicability across document types.
This will permit measuring the cost of porting across genres. Formative and
summative evaluation procedures will be developed and performed at each step of
the analysis. This research is undertaken in the context of the Digital Library
Research Program at Columbia University, in conjunction with the Center for
Research on Information Access. The resulting techniques grounded in the novel
combination and cross-fertilization of IR and NLP methods are expected to
improve information access based on significant topics across domains and
genres.