* 9712545
* A Symposium on 'Controls on Soil Resoration:  Implications  for Climate Change'; October 27-28, 1997; Anaheim, CA
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Lindsey Rustad, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 8,833.00

9712545 Rustad The potential disruption of global C cycles by human activity in
both developed and developing counties is one of the key environmental issues
facing human populations as we move into the 21st century. Deforestation of
tropical rainforests, changes in land-use, and continued burning of fossil fuels
have resulted in an unprecedented increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations
over the last half century. This has raised concerns about potential global
warming and climate change, and consequences for further disruptions of the
global C cycle. Soil respiration, which represents the combined respiration of
roots and soil micro- and macro- biota, represents one of the major pathways of
flux in the global C cycle. Thus, a slight increase in soil respiration could
significantly exacerbate atmospheric CO2 increases with consequent positive
feedback to global climate change, whereas a decrease could offset further
anthropogenic CO2 emissions. As such, it is imperative that a better
understanding of the factors that control soil respiration is gained and that
include consideration of soil carbon storage and flux in discussions of
emissions trading and greenhouse gas mitigation efforts is included. In order to
define the current state-or-knowledge on soil respiration, provide insight on
critical directions for future research, and enhance scientific input to
environmental decision-making, this project will assist in the implementation of
a Symposium entitled: "Controls on Soil Respiration: Implications for Climate
Change" which will be held at the annual meetings of the Soil Science Society of
America in Anaheim, CA, October 27-28, 1997.