* 9712076
* Displacement and Downsizing Effects on Older Workers
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* William Bridges, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 30,584.00

This is a study of the effects of corporate downsizing on older workers. This
research uses matched data from Current Population Surveys and from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics Mass Layoff Series to explore the relationships among
internal labor markets, mass layoffs, workers' ages, and the probabilities of
job displacement. Specific hypotheses that explain these relationships are
generated from two different institutional theories from sociology -- "symbolic
efficiency" and "internal dualism"-- and from one microeconomic theory --
Lazear's mandatory retirement theory. These hypotheses will be evaluated at the
individual level of analysis allowing statistically generalizable statements
about age group specific displacement probabilities under different contextual
circumstances. Worker displacements, especially those which result from
corporate downsizing, have become a lightening rod for criticism and concern
about U. S. economic performance. Although unemployment is relatively low by
contemporary standards, the number and type of recent displacements are
troubling insofar as they have been interpreted as signaling a change in the
basic fabric of our country's employment relations. In particular, many
observers have taken dismissals of long-term workers as convincing evidence that
durable and stable relationships between employers and workers have disappeared
in an era of contingent work. Empirical questions like those examined in this
study need to be addressed before this conclusion can be taken seriously. In
addition to this project's contribution to verifying different social science
propositions about employment relationships, it will also provide important
background information for policy analysts in this area of social life. For
example, it will be possible to examine age-group specific displacement
probabilities with and without controls for both other individual
characteristics (e.g. education) and for industry level characteristics (e.g.
pension coverage in the industry) .