* 9712089
* Dissertation Research:  Dynamics in Behavioral              Adaptation to a Transportation Innovation:  A Case Study of the Bay Area Rapid Transit District (BART)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Daniel Sperling, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1998
* USD 7,000.00

9712089 Sperling Using a case study of shared transit-based electric cars in
the San Francisco Bay Area, this dissertation project seeks to develop an
understanding of the processes by which travelers can and might accept or adapt
to transportation technologies, depending on the method and length of
introduction. Two types of innovation exposure will be examined in this study:
an informational video and brochure. To examine the dynamics of the household
response to the innovation, a panel survey of San Francisco Bay Area residents
exposed to the intelligent station car concept will be conducted. The
information gathered in this survey will be used to evaluate several dynamic
household hypotheses. For instance, a household's valuing response to an
innovation's mobility limitations (e.g., range) will be altered by exposure/time
with the new technology. Dynamics in the household's valuing response will be
revealed in attitudes, activities, and travel behavior of the household and
reflected in the travel diaries and surveys administered to study participants.
The insights gained from this study could be used by individuals in both the
public and private sectors to assess the demand for the intelligent station car
innovation and other related technologies e.g., smart taxis, smart paratransit,
and car-sharing organizations. A wide-range of transportation technologies could
benefit from the understanding gained from this study.



