* 9712523
* Heterogeneous Nucleation during Solidification of           Undercooled Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* John Perepezko, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 10/31/2001
* USD 328,475.00

9712523 Perpezko Under most conditions, metal alloy solidification is initiated
by a heterogeneous nucleation event. While the study of homogeneous nucleation
requires a sample free from all external nucleants, the study of heterogeneous
nucleation requires a sample which contains only well known and characterized
nucleants. To circumvent difficulties encountered in bulk systems, a droplet
sample technique is utilized to examine nucleation catalysts during
solidification. In this approach a bulk liquid is dispersed into many fine
droplets to limit the influence of extraneous nucleants. By using droplet
samples in peritectic or eutectic alloys that exhibit a high undercooling before
nucleation and equilibrating the alloys in the liquid-plus- solid two-phase
field, the catalytic effects of the different primary solids on subsequent
nucleation in the liquid are examined without the possible influence from a
foreign substrate. A new approach with droplet samples involving pure metals
with incorporated stable solid particles has been established which extends the
scope of nucleation catalysts that can examined. With this approach,
reproducible experimental studies of heterogeneous nucleation can be designed
under well-defined conditions for analysis of the nucleation kinetics. The
process is modeled using the spherical cap model which has a number of
deficiencies that are addressed in order to develop real understanding of
catalysis reactions. In past research nucleation kinetics measurements during
continuous cooling in a well defined system have been conducted. The results
indicate the importance of nucleation site dynamics, but also point out
limitations of continuous cooling approach to nucleation kinetics. As the
result, an alternate, more effective approach based on isothermal holding
treatments has been developed and will be applied in this renewal effort. A
suitable system based on Bi-Cd alloys, where single nucleation kinetics has been
isolate d, is examined and selected sample modification to include alloying of
both the substrate or the nucleus is pursued to provide quantitative evaluation
of the effect of disregistry on nucleation kinetics behavior. %%% Nucleation is
an important aspect in metal alloy solidification. This effort represents the
most comprehensive quantitative heterogeneous nucleation kinetics evaluation
during solidification that has been conducted to date. ***