* 9712988
* The Plasma Physics of Metal-Nitride Deposition of IntegratedCircuit Barrier Layers using Ionized Physical Vapor         Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Jeffrey Hopwood, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9712988 Hopwood This project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of
high-density plasmas composed of metal vapor and nitrogen, and investigates a
plasma deposition system through modeling, plasma diagnostics, and thin film
characterization. The modeling effort aims to provide both physical
understanding and analytical tools for improving the deposition of TiN and TaN
barrier layers utilized in ULSI circuits. Physical diagnostics of the density of
plasma species will parallel the modeling phase. Gas phase titration, energy and
mass spectroscopy, Langmuir probes and optical emission spectroscopy of the
metal-N2 plasma are planned. Analysis of deposited film quality will provide
correlation between plasma and film properties. %%% The project is
multidisciplinary combining fundamental plasma science research with surface
materials science synthesis and processing studies to address forefront issues
in a topical area of strong technological relevance and high potential payoff.
The research will contribute basic plasma and materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to several aspects of advanced electronic/photonic devices and
integrated circuitry. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The impact of the research on the
technological infrastructure is high since the project focuses at the crossroads
of three critical areas in plasma science and engineering: high-density plasma
sources, sputtering processes within a metal-nitride plasma chemistry
environment, and deposition of thin film barrier layers for advanced
microelectronics technology. To enhance an interest in fundamental research and
plasma science, an undergraduate co-op student will work in concert with the PI
and two graduate students. ***