* 9712336
* Privatization and Market Efficiency in the Emerging Equity  Markets of Post-Communist Central Europe
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Randall Filer, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2000
* USD 140,913.00

This project investigates the efficiency of capital markets in the transition
economies of Central Europe. Well functioning capital markets are of great
potential importance to this region. Public trust that these markets are fair
and not rigged in favor of insiders is important both in generating the capital
needed for economic restructuring and in building support for market mechanisms
and the sometimes painful steps involved in the transition. This research
focuses on both the extent of efficiency in these developing markets and on how
different choices with respect to privatization may have affected the working of
the eventual capital market. In addition, it analyzes the workings of the
artificial and self-contained capital market created by the Czech voucher
privatization scheme. A series of studies will be undertaken which apply market
techniques to emerging Central European capital markets. These techniques are
similar to the ones used in the study of other markets including the emerging
markets in Latin America and Asia. These studies will allow for a comparison of
market structure and efficiency in markets that emerged rapidly following
radical changes in economic structure with those that emerged more gradually or
have had a long history of development. Insights will be obtained into the
ability of various methods of privatization to promote or hinder well-
functioning capital markets.