* 9712253
* STTR PHASE I:  Novel Barrier Materials for Shelf-Life       Enhancement of Flexible Flat Panel Displays
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Patricia Wilson, Foster-Miller Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 99,986.00

9712253 Wilson *** This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer project seeks
to bring a technology fundamental to polymer light emitting diodes to the
commercial marketplace as flexible lightweight, robust displays in the near-
term. Before the full realization of this new technology can be felt by the
consumer, however, several important materials issues must be addressed,
including device efficiency, lifetime, failure mechanisms, and packaging.
Recently, tremendous excitement has been generated in the field of flat panel
displays by the introduction of small organic molecule (typically Alq - OLEDS)
and polymer light emitting diodes (pLEDs). These developments combine low cost
manufacturing normally associated with polymeric films with the opportunity to
produce robust, lightweight and flexible non planar displays hereto unknown in
the marketplace. Another significant advantage of organic based LED displays
over their well known liquid crystal cousins is the elimination of viewing angle
constraints. The immediate commercial application of this research is for near-
hermetic packaging of polymer or small organic molecule light emitting diode
based flexible displays. Other applications in the food packaging industry will
benefit from new, transparent ultra-high barrier films. These applications
include beer bottles, meal trays, food packaging for military uses, etc. ***