* 9712358
* Characterization of an Indian Ocean Hydrothermal Vent -- CIR 24 degrees S: Biogeography and Ecology Within a Geochemical and Geological Context
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2000,11/30/2002
* Cindy Van Dover, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2002
* USD 435,977.00

Over the past decade, biologists have learned that hydrothermal faunas are not
globally cosmopolitan and that biogeographic provinces of the known fauna may be
correlated with geographic and tectonic parameters. The result is a
biogeographic puzzle, from which several major pieces are still missing due to
their remote locations. Of these missing pieces, the Indian Ocean ridge systems
stand out as one of the most important, perhaps serving as the link between
Pacific and Atlantic faunas. This project will test this hypothesis by locating
and sampling a hydrothermal vent on the Central Indian Ridge for which there is
a full suite of existing preliminary data, including bathymetry and plume data.
The site is "mature", ready for detailed investigations according to standards
established by the RIDGE community. Six major approaches will be utilized in
this study: Plume Prospecting will relocate plumes observed by German and
Japanese scientists and trace these plumes to their source on the seafloor.
Biogeography and Evolutionary Biology will include taxonomic identifications of
invertebrates and molecular characterization of selected fauna. Ecological
Investigations will examine trophic interactions with an emphasis on clarifying
the role of symbiosis in the system and will include microbial diversity
studies, faunal distributions, biodiversity measures, and other descriptive
ecology. Studies in a Geological Context will identify proximal geological
controls on fluid flow and map the distribution of hydrothermal sites within the
vent field. Hydrothermal Fluid Chemistry will establish end-member fluid
chemistry and measure availability of reduced compounds in low-temperature
fluids for chemoautotrophic production. Sulfide and Basalt Characterization will
provide a mineralogical context for the hydrothermal setting. Each of these
program elements are critical for interpretation of biogeography of the fauna.
This study will provide a preliminary perspective of an Indian Ocean
hydrothermal system and the data required to place it within the spectrum of
global mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal processes.