* 9712481
* Which Firms are Likely to Join R&D Consortia:  The Success  of I/UCRC and ERC Recruitment
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Vida Scarpello, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* William S. Butcher
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,391.00

ABSTRACT EEC-9712481 SCARPELLO U.S. technology policy has traditionally relied
on tax incentives and subsidies to stimulate private R&D investment. In recent
years, in an effort to encourage cooperation and in response to foreign
technological rivalry, the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984 (NCRA) was
passed. Under this Act, firms that notify the Federal Trade Commission and the
U.S. Department of Justice and their intention to form a joint R&D agreement,
can reduce the risk of private antitrust litigation. The number of R&D consortia
has gradually increased over time since 1984 and by 1992, 325 R&D consortia had
filed with the Department of Justice. Most Industry/University Cooperative
Research Centers (I/UCRCs) and Engineering research Center (ERCs) arise through
sponsorship by the National Science Foundation (NSF). The NSF's goals are to
stimulate the rate of adoption of the results of engineering, scientific, and
technological research, and to increase the non-federal investment in research
and development. The NSF I/UCRC program now has 52 centers, spanning over 70
universities with over 700 participating companies and agencies. The success of
the I/UCRCs/ERCs hinge upon identifying, attracting, and retaining firms
interested in funding and participating in research. This project will attempt
to identify the factors that elicit a firm to join an R&D consortium and so will
help in targeting firms to be approached for membership. Securing membership in
an I/UCRC/ERC however depends on the recruitment strategies adopted and the
perceived effectiveness of the Center.