* 9712709
* Simulation of Chemical Processes in Condensed Phases Using  Hybrid Quantum and Molecular Mechanical Potentials
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Jiali Gao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2000
* USD 350,000.00

Jiali Gao is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his development of a hybrid quantum mechanical and
statistical mechanical technique to simulate chemical processes in solution and
in heterogeneous catalysis. The objective of the research is to obtain
reasonably quantitative agreement with experimental solvation energies. The
approach provides new insights on the nature of intermolecular interactions, in
particular, specific contributions from the polarization effects for processes
of biochemical and materials interest in condensed phases. Applications involve
the thermolysis of alpha-chloroethers and hydrolysis of model compounds for
glycosyl derivatives in organic and aqueous solutions. Another major thrust of
the research is the study of adsorption, binding, and chemical reactions
associated with methanol-to-gasoline conversion using zeolite catalysis. Most
chemical processes of commercial importance take place in solution. Computer
simulations of chemical reactions in solution provide important molecular level
insights into the factors that influence reaction rates. Many of the more
interesting bond breaking reactions, however, exhibit quantum effects that
cannot be modeled effectively using empirical potentials. Gao's approach
involves the use of a combined simulation approach which uses Monte Carlo and
molecular orbital theory to treat the quantum degrees of freedom undergoing
change during the chemical reaction.