* 9712502
* Planning Meetings for the Industry/University Cooperative   Research Center for Silicon Wafer Engineering and Defect    Science (Si WEDS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* George Rozgonyi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 03/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: Planning Grant for an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Si Wafer Defect Engineering at North Carolina State
University Principal Investigator: George A. Rozgonyi, NCSU Program Officer:
Cheryl Cathey Date: 10 March 1997 Silicon wafers are the foundation for building
integrated circuits. In order to be competitive in the integrated circuit
industry, silicon chip manufacturers must continually strive to decrease the
feature size of the components of the integrated circuits. A smaller feature
size enables the chip manufacturers to both make smaller chips, fulfilling the
market demand for ever smaller electronics, and to increase the yield of chips
per silicon wafer, decreasing the cost per chip. In order to ensure high quality
chips in high yields, the base material, the silicon wafer, must be as free from
bulk and surface defects and imperfections as possible. This proposed Center
would work with the silicon wafer manufacturers to: * provide a mechanism for
the research issues of the wafer manufacturing community to be identified and
addressed by the academic community, * educate graduate and post-graduate
students to become effective members of the wafer manufacturing research
community, and * provide a administrative infrastructure to enable funding of a
large scale wafer defect research center. The Center's research would be
organized into three thrusts: bulk defects and imperfections, surface defects
and imperfections, and cross-cutting areas such as metrology and simulation. The
bulk defects and imperfections thrust would involve research on control of the
nucleation, growth, motion and annihilation of silicon crystals. The surface
defect thrust would investigate methods to control and engineer the wafer
surface properties. The cross cutting areas thrust would focus on metrology
development and fundamental knowledge underlying metrology tools. The Center
would have Dr. George Rozgonyi of North Carolina State University and Ro bert
Helms of Stanford University as co-Directors, and would involve researchers from
the University of Arizona, Arizona State University, the University of South
Florida, MIT, and Berkeley. There are currently six wafer manufacturing
companies that are willing to pay $50,000 per year to be part of the Center.
With the research expertise resident at the seven universities, this Center
would aid the wafer suppliers in improving their silicon wafer quality, thus
enabling them to better meet the market requirements of their customers, the
silicon chip makers. The chip makers would then be able to product smaller,
cheaper devices, making them more competitive in the electronics marketplace.