* 9712556
* Organic Reactions and Syntheses in Water Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Ronald Breslow, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2000
* USD 555,000.00

Professor Ronald Breslow, of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University,
is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his studies of organic
reactions and synthesis in water solution. In addition to the environmental
advantages of carrying out chemical reactions in water instead of organic
solvents, water can also influence the effectiveness of organic reactions. Thus,
for example, the Diels Alder reaction is found to be both faster and more
selective when carried out in aqueous solution. Professor Breslow explores the
factors influencing such chemical reactions, focusing on hydrophobic effects and
on polarity issues. He also exploits the hydrophobic effect in designing
cyclodextrin-based catalysts and is developing additional non-cyclodextrin-based
synthetic binding agents which also rely on hydrophobic binding. His synthetic
bifunctional catalysts permit the determination of the preferred reaction
geometries for such reactions as the deprotonation of carbon during enolization.
With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Ronald Breslow, of
the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University, explores chemical reactions
in water in place of traditional organic solvents. While the use of water offers
clear and significant environmental advantages, it plays a central chemical role
as well. Thus, certain chemical reactions are found to be greatly accelerated
when carried out in aqueous solution, and they often lead more selectively to
specific products. These effects appear to be due, at least in part, to the
tendency of many organic molecules to aggregate in water so as to minimize their
interfaces with the water solvent. Professor Breslow exploits similar effects in
the design and construction of molecules which bind smaller molecules in
solution and then carry out desired chemical transformations of the bound
molecules, mimicking in many ways the function of enzymes. These studies are
leading to an understanding of the factors controlling certain chemical
reactions.