* 9712304
* STTR PHASE I:  Wire Grid Polarizer for Liquid Crystal       Displays
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Eric Gardner, MOXTEK Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9712304 Gardner *** This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer project will
use computer models developed by the proposers to simulate the effect of using
wire-grid polarizers in liquid crystal displays. Measured parameters from
prototype wire-grid polarizers will be used in the models to see if codes
predict the benefits expected. Wire grid polarizers (WGP) offer performance and
materials improvements for liquid crystal displays which can change the
industry. They are a reflective, inorganic, polarizer which will lead to
brighter, lower-power liquid crystal displays. The proposer has pioneered the
technology to produce these polarizers and will produce them within the next 2
years. The university partner had computer models of LC displays which can
quantify the performance of displays incorporating WGP. The new WGP data for the
model will come from 0.2 um and 0.16 um pitch polarizers prepared and measured
by the proposer. This data will be used, along with theory, to protect to the
0.1 um pitch (and smaller) WGP used in future LC displays. These projections
will then be folded in to existing computer models at the university to quantify
the performance improvements. The data generated in Phase I will be used to
approach display manufacturing for development funding and to justify a Phase II
program. The large ($15 billion) market ensures that this LC display technology
will be developed soon. The proposer has an opportunity to develop a key
technology for LC displays for the benefit of the United States. ***