* 9712373
* Computer Laboratory for Classroom and Research Experiments  in Economics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Charles Holt, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 50,656.00

With National Science support Dr. Charles Holt will purchase equipment necessary
to upgrade and expand the experimental economics laboratory at the University of
Virginia. Instrumentation includes 20 Compaq Presario 3060 Pcs with 200 Mhz
pentium MMX processors as well as etherlink adapters. These will be integrated
into the current system. Experimental economists create simplified market
situations in which variables can be manipulated and controlled and human
subjects can compete for real financial award. This allows economics to
introduce human factors including motivation and the need to act with imperfect
information into both theoretical formulations and to actual market design. Such
laboratory pretest, for example was employed in the design of the 1995 FCC
auctions for personal communications services bandwidth. Results from
experimental studies have shown that the behavior of financially motivated
subjects is often systematically biased away from the predictions of standard
game theory which assumes perfect rationality. Effective simulation requires the
ability of large numbers of players to interact quickly and the proposed system
will allow 20 participants to be experimentally linked. This will allow
increased complexity in the experiments performed. Dr. Holt is actively involved
in both undergraduate and graduate teaching and students will benefit
significantly from the upgrade.