* 9712345
* Resultants and Implicitization by Moving Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Ronald Goldman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1999
* USD 152,314.00

The method of moving surfaces is a fundamentally new and significantly better
method for implicitizing rational surfaces. This method has recently been
applied to address the problem of multivariate polynomial resultants. Initial
successes include finding determinental formulae for some sparse resultants. The
method of moving surfaces produces expressions that are more compact than
previous ones, and unlike previous determinental formulae do not contain
extraneous factors. Multivariate resultants provide a powerful computational
tool for solving problems involving polynomial equations in several variables.
While Groebner bases can also be used to solve systems of polynomial equations
(as well as answer additional questions about polynomial systems), multivariate
resultants are generally more efficient at eliminating variables than Groebner
bases. Preliminary examples suggest that the method of moving surfaces might be
even more efficient than current multivariate resultant techniques. The method
of moving surfaces can be used to attack a wide variety of problems in
elimination theory including: 1. constructing multivariate resultants without
extraneous factors 2. building sparse resultants 3. implicitizing rational
curves and surfaces 4. developing inversion formulas for rational curves and
surfaces 5. intersecting rational curves and surfaces 6. intersecting algebraic
curves and surfaces. The method of moving curves has already lead to a new
classification scheme for rational curves; a similar scheme for rational
surfaces will be investigated. While rigorous theoretical foundation for the
method of moving curves based on ideal theory has been developed, the method of
moving surfaces is currently substantiated only by several Mathematica examples
and a few preliminary theorems. Thus the theoretical foundation is far from
complete. For example, the method provides an algorithm for determining the rows
of a matrix whose determinant is a sparse resultant if it does not vanish. So
far, the method has never failed to produce a non-vanishing determinant, but no
proof exists that the method will never fail. A constructive proof will be
sought. The method has thus far been applied to eliminating one variable from
two polynomials, or two variables from three polynomials. The general problem of
eliminating n-1 variables from n polynomial equations will be studied.