* 9712607
* Using Option Pricing to Value Commitment Flexibility in     Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Katia Sycara, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 07/31/2000
* USD 254,073.00

This research aims to develop a domain-independent computational model to
support, in a uniform manner, many complex issues that arise in multi-agent
contracting, such as modeling commitment flexibility in a contract, valuing a
contract under assumptions of uncertainty, risk reduction, making decisions in
situations of asymmetric information, or situations of sequential subcontracting
where each agent must decide to subcontract part of its current contract to
others. The approach is based on financial option pricing theory. This research
will extend this theory to model contracts that have no analogs in financial
options, such as contract quality guarantees and multiple sequential
subcontracting. To evaluate the research, a multi-agent simulation testbed will
be developed and utilized to conduct empirical studies that can answer
significant theoretical questions. Questions to be studied for evaluation
include the effects on the overall multi-agent society of different model
assumptions such as stationary vs. non-stationary stochastic processes for
modeling environmental uncertainty, different contracting strategies, and
examinations of the value of information especially for asymmetrical information
scenarios. Real world domains of theoretical and practical significance such as
supply contracting and electronic commerce will be used to provide realistic
problem scenarios. It is expected that the proposed research will contribute to
the development of general computational models of multi-agent contracting that
can answer fundamental research questions and can serve as a basis for designing
efficient automated contracting systems.