* 9712840
* Workshops on Professional Master's Degree Programs in       Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Samuel Rankin, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 11/30/2001
* USD 146,232.00

Three organizations, the American Mathematical Society (AMS), the
Mathematicians and Education Reform (MER) Forum, and the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), propose to organize national workshops to
provide a venue for departments to become well-informed about recommendations
for graduate studies and existing professional master's degree programs, and
gain practical knowledge for planning and implementing their own professional
master's degree program. Approximately 60 representatives from 35 to 40
departments of mathematical sciences will participate in the workshops. The
mathematics community is being challenged to examine and revise graduate
education to meet the needs of a variety of constituencies for individuals with
strong foundations in the mathematics relating to their profession, and to
provide viable employment paths for graduates with advanced degrees in
mathematics. Promoting the development of professional master's degree programs
is an important way to begin to address these concerns. Through a multifaceted
program centered on two workshops, the project will enable mathematics
departments to make informed responses to the challenges to graduate studies by
focusing on helping mathematics departments in planning and implementing
professional master's degree programs, and by developing resources to help
departments in these efforts. Creating a forum in which departments can evaluate
the role of professional master's degree programs with respect to the general
issues in graduate education enables departments to strengthen their graduate
programs. The workshops offer a constructive approach to explore a broader role
for the mathematics community to support mathematics, and to form ties between
mathematics and disciplines and professions in which mathematics is a crucial
component. The workshop discussions on developing professional master's degree
programs will be given broad exposure in the mathematics community. Information
gathered for the workshop s, and the resources developed for the participating
departments will be made available to the mathematics community. The organizing
committee for the workshops includes representatives of the three cooperating
organizations.