* 9712606
* GOALI: The Structure Sensitivity of Photochemical           Reactions on Titanium Dioxide Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Patricia Morris, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 12/31/1998
* USD 66,192.00

9712606 Rohrer Systems based on solar activated titania photocatalysts have the
potential to effectively and economically remove or degrade toxic impurities in
air and water. Recent research conducted by the principal investigator of this
proposal has recently demonstrated that some surfaces of titania, TiO2, are
better at catalyzing the relevant reactions than others. If the anisotropy of
this catalytic property were understood more completely, it might be possible to
improve the reactivity of titania photocatalysts through structural or
microstructural modifications. Therefore, the objective of this project is to
define this orientation-reactivity relationship and to identify the mechanism
responsible for this phenomenon. The photocatalytic activity of surfaces with
known orientations will be determined using direct microscopic analysis.
Electron back scattered diffraction patterns will be used to determine the
surface orientations of many grains in a titania polycrystal and Auger electron
spectroscopy will be used to assess the surface chemical compositions of the
same grains. After using atomic force microscopy (AFM) to determine the
morphological structure of each surface, they will be used to photocatalyze the
reduction of Ag+ from aqueous solution. The amount of silver deposited on each
grain will be estimated on the basis of AFM images and taken as a measure of the
relative reactivity of each surface. Parallel experiments will be conducted on
low index, homogeneous, high purity titania epi-layers grown on sapphire. Based
on such measurements, we will determine the orientation dependence of the
relative photocatalytic activity. %%% The outcome from this GOALI project will
be a surface orientation-surface property relationship for the photocatalytic
activity of titania. Defining this relationship will not only advance our
inowledge of titania photochemistry, it will also demonstrate methods that can
be used to systematically determine the full orientation dependence of other
surface phenomena such as corrosion and wear. ***