* 9712489
* GOALI Program on Advanced Separation Systems for Adsorption and Filtration of Environmental Contaminants
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* James Economy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2000
* USD 335,000.00

9712489 Economy The broad based objectives of this GOALI project ( co-funded by
the Division of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of MPS) are primarily to pursue new and improved activated carbons
for removal of environmental contaminants and second to explore the design of
novel catalytic systems which are based on activated carbons. This will be a
collaborative effort between the University of Illinois and 3M Corporation with
the end goal being the scale-up and commercialization of these materials. It
will include a 3-month sabbatical stay by a 3M researcher in Professor Economy's
laboratory. Several other companies have also expressed interest and may
participate. The objectives are focused on the following three themes: 1)
continued research and development of the activated carbon on a glass fiber
substrate with emphasis on tailoring the pore size and shape and pore surface
chemistry for selective removal of impurities from both air and water, 2) use of
activated carbon fibers as catalysts and catalyst substrates based on some very
recent observations in our laboratory and 3) to provide developmental quantities
of these fibers for evaluation by our industrial partners. %%% This work is in
the area of polymer-based carbonaceous materials for activated catalytic systems
of applicability to environmental solutions. ***