* 9712241
* PEET:  The Euglenoid Project
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,09/30/2003
* Mark Farmer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/2003
* USD 700,000.00

9712241 Triemer In a multi-institutional project to study the systematics and
phylogeny of the commonly observed Euglena and its not-at-all-commonly seen
protistan relatives, Prof. Richard Triemer of Rutgers University and colleagues
Dr. Mark Farmer at University of Georgia and others have designed a
comprehensive program of morphological and molecular investigatons of these
unicellular flagellates. Morphological studies include traditional light-
microscope observations, with electron-microscope investigations of subcellular
features, on field-collected and laboratory-cultured material. Molecular studies
include nucleotide sequencing of ribosomal and other genes, to acquire DNA data
for assessing mutational differences between taxa, in turn for constructing
phylogenetic trees that group the organisms with their genealogical relatives.
Euglenoids include the commonly studied "green" or photosynthetic (autotrophic)
forms, but are more commonly found in nature as colorless, heterotrophic forms
that ingest other organisms as prey. Ultrastructural and new DNA data confirm
that they are closely related to parasitic flagellates or trypanosomes,
including forms that cause African sleeping sickness and Chagas disease. These
protistan groups may be among the earliest known lineages of eukaryotes with
mitochondria, and with a fascinating propensity to harbor other symbiotic or
partially symbiotic organelles. Research and training in a broad array of
theoretical and practical issues in modern systematics involve colleagues in
Australia and in Argentina, who also facilitate collecting of Southern
Hemisphere taxa. The scientific names and classification of the euglenoids have
been confused by a history of separate treatments under either the Botany Code
(when considered "green" algae) or the Zoology Code (when considered predatory
flagellates); one aspect of the project is to achieve concordance in the names
of all the species and higher-rank taxa. Web-based products include high-quality
images of the numerous forms, many of which are poorly known even to scientists,
along with identification keys and descriptive treatments of the biological
variation found among these organisms in nature.