* 9712999
* Dissertation Research: The Relation of Pastoral Production  and Exchange to Patterns of Regional Settlement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Richard Zettler, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 11,970.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Zettler, MS Jill Weber will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project is to understand how early
civilizations in the Near East managed, with relatively simple subsistence
technologies, to feed large numbers of individuals many of whom were removed
from direct daily contact with the land. In contrast with its southern
counterpart, Northern Mesopotamia, which forms the focus for this study, has low
rainfall which makes it marginally productive for rain fed agriculture and
societies were forced to develop strategies to deal with a highly unpredictable
environment and frequent droughts. Many anthropologists have postulated that
large and dense population aggregations could be achieved only through a
centrally controlled economy which de-emphasized production for local
consumption and instead focused on specialized intensive and spatially desecrate
production of agricultural produce and livestock in environmentally suitable
localities. For such a system to work, an effective redistribution system based
on independent markets or other alternatives is required to minimize risk and
move animal and plant products as necessary to create the necessary resiliency.
Through the analysis of fauna remains excavated from three Bronze Age sites MS
Weber will reconstruct the pastoral production system. The species of animals
raised, the age at which they are slaughtered and the relative numbers of males
and females removed from the population are dependent on a number of factors.
Archaeologists have shown that culling patterns of animals raised for sale and
non-local consumption differ in significant ways from that of animals locally
consumed. The three sites which MS Weber will examine were occupied for
substantial periods of time and excavation has shown that all were subject to
cycles of growth and decline, accompanied by increased and decreased political
centralization. Through a comparison of political and subsistence (as measured
through animal bone) change it will be possible to understand how early
civilizations managed the resources necessary for their survival. This research
is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed light on how an early civilization thrived in an
environmentally marginal situation and help to further the professional
development of a promising young scientist.