* 9712479
* Center for Documentation of Endangered Languages Sound      Laboratory Equipment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Douglas Parks, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2000
* USD 45,016.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Douglas Parks will purchase
computer related equipment which will permit a significant upgrade to his Center
for the Documentation of Endangered Languages Sound Laboratory (CDEL). The goal
of this unit is to record Native North American languages which are in imminent
danger of extinction and the approach taken permits incorporation of sound and
written information in a single format. Therefore researchers, students and
native speakers of a language can view a word in written form, hear it spoken at
the same time and also obtain supplementary information. This system is
currently in the beta testing stage and the NSF-provided equipment will provide
a valuable upgrade and addition. The components include a Iomega Jaz drive
archiving system which will provide a large storage capacity; a high performance
multimedia-equipped laptop computer, an indispensable tool for linguistic
fieldwork; a Marantz CD recorder which allows the creation of Cds for
distribution and storage; a DAT recorder system; and desktop PC sound machine
system. During the next ten years the languages of some of the most prominent
American Indian tribes - Arikara, Assiniboine, Comanche, Delaware, Mandan,
Osage, Pawnee - are going to die out when the last elderly speakers of those
languages pass away. For each of them there are fewer than a dozen fluent
speakers still living. For many other languages the decline in use of the native
language has reached a crisis stage. For young Native Americans who wish to
learn their natal languages, suitable examples and instructional materials are
not available. To meet both preservation and educational concerns the CDEL has
developed a multimedia dictionary format and has begun to enter data from a
series of languages. It is also designing teaching modules. Language not only
provides a source of identity for cultural groups, but they also offers valuable
insights into the functioning of the human mind. This award will help to provide
an invaluable data base for future generations.