* 9712857
* (SGER) Collaborative Research: Transport and Fate of        Mercury Within the Carson River Valley During the           January 1997 Flood
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* John Warwick, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/1998
* USD 8,200.00

9712857 Warwick Mining of the Comstock Lode (1860-1890) resulted in the release
of an estimated 7,500 tons of mercury to the Carson River system including
Lahontan Reservoir. Much of the polluted sediment is associated with filled
paleochannels which are thought to have been produced by the filling of
abandoned meanders previously cutoff from the main channel. Given that a
majority of the present day mercury load in the Carson River is derived from
bank erosion, it follows that during floods, much of the eroded sediment is
returned to storage by the deposition of sediment within the channels of the
abandoned meanders. Thus, there may be a cycling of contaminated debris between
the channel and the valley fill during flood events which inundated the valley
floor. In early January, 1997 flood flows, with a magnitude which has only been
exceeded once in the past 57 years of record, inundated large regions of the
Carson River valley. Field observations made during and following the event
revealed that numerous reaches along the channel suffered extensive erosion,
while thick sedimentary sequences were deposited over other regions of the
valley floor. Based on these field observations, we believe that this low
frequency, high magnitude event had a significant affect on the transport and
storage of mercury contaminated particles along the Carson River valley. The
primary objectives of this investigation are to (1) document the patterns of
erosion and deposition that occurred along the Carson River valley from Carson
City to Lahontan Reservoir during the January, 1997 flood, (2)determine the
spatial variations in mercury concentration that occur within the newly formed
flood deposits, and (3) assess the primary controls on both the deposition of
contaminated sediments and the distribution of mercury within those deposits. By
combining the conclusions reached in this investigation with previous studies of
the Carson River, we will be able to assess the transport and fate of mercury by
phy sical processes over time periods ranging from individual flood events to
decades. In addition, a comparison of the geographic trends measured prior to
and following the storm will lead to significant insights into the importance of
rare, high magnitude floods on the dispersal of heavy metals in alluvial
deposits.