* 9712277
* Structure and Strategy in Collective Action
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Michael Chwe, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2001
* USD 138,109.00

Project Abstract There are many situations in which a new social trend
`diffuses` throughout society, including buying a certain brand of computer,
using new planting and irrigation techniques, and participation in a political
interest group. In these situations, there are two crucial elements. One is the
element of individual choice: each person's decision is influenced by the
decisions of others (if all my friends buy Macintosh computers, I would rather
buy a Macintosh also), but it still comes down to my personal decision. The
other is social structure: my choice is influenced by who my friends are.
Although both elements are crucial, currently in the social sciences, there are
very few explanations which include both. This project develops mathematical
models of collective action which incorporate both individual rationality
(people try to further their goals) and social structure (the patterns in which
people know and interact with each other). Hence the project uses concepts from
both game theory and social network theory. The key assumption is that explicit
communication is the most basic mechanism for coordination, and hence people are
modeled as members of a communication network, in which each person talks to her
friends. The main preliminary result is that cliques, subgroups in which each
member knows every other member, are sufficient and in some sense necessary for
collective action. Cliques, a basic concept of social network theory, are
crucial for collective action because they generate common knowledge, a basic
concept of game theory. This result has implications for understanding the
importance of ``strong'' versus ``weak'' links, centrality, and dispersion, and
suggests an empirically verifiable distinction between ``strategic locality''
and ``information locality.'' Rather than seeing structural and strategic
perspectives as opposed, by combining them this project can find insights not
obtainable from either perspective alone.