* 9712440
* Wireless Laboratory for Interpersonal Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* John Orbell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 45,372.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Bertram Malle and John Orbell will
develop a wireless laboratory for the study of interpersonal cognition at the
Hill Center, University of Oregon. The instrumentation provided through this
award will be used to permit wireless communication among subjects and to record
and monitor the subjects' behavior. The communication system will be assembled
from commercially available material as off-the-shelf systems are considerably
more expensive and limited in range. An audio-visual system will also be
assembled and installed from commercial sources and includes four cameras, two
computer-controlled video recorders and three 20 inch color monitors. The
proposed facility will be used by 11 researchers from the psychology, economics,
political science, sociology and anthropology departments and the individual
research projects address a wide group of topics from social psychology
(intentionality and theory of mind, empathy and perspective-taking, personality,
stereotyping) and decision and game theory (prisoner's dilemma task, collective
decision making in juries, emergence of structure in groups.) The equipment will
primarily be used in a suite of rooms with built-in audio and video
capabilities, and with portable information devices to provide two-way
communication with the experimental subjects. The portable information devices
serve both for the subjects to enter responses or judgments during the
experimental sessions, and for the experimenters to provide feedback and
information to the subjects. The equipment will provide a significant advance
over the traditional pen and paper methods more typical of social psychology and
hopefully will provide a prototype for other laboratories.