* 9712211
* Dissertation Research:  Zooarchaeology of Bed II, Olduval   Gorge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1999
* USD 11,994.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, MS Amy Cushing will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct laboratory analysis in Arusha
Tanzania and examine the ca. 8,000 vertebrate fossils collected by Dr.
Blumenschine and his colleagues in their multi-year ongoing research project at
Olduvai Gorge. The team has focused on a single well defined stratigraphic
horizon in lower Bed II which dates to ca. 1.5 million years ago. It has been
sampled, and test excavations conducted across a 300 km .sq. area which includes
six distinct paleogeographic zones. Seventy one trenches have been excavated. MS
Cushing will first identify bones to taxon and, when possible, species. She will
conduct a taphonomic analysis to determine how natural factors such as water and
carnivore action have affected these materials. With these forces controlled,
she will then search for human caused actions which will shed light on early
hominid behavior. Preliminary study indicates that many of the specimens were
broken by human percussion and this indicates either hunting or scavenging for
food. Ms Cushing will: 1. test the representativeness of faunal data from
individual trenches which contain high densities of remains ( and which could be
called `sites`) as opposed to that of landscape samples. 2. determine in which
habitats on the paleo-Olduvai landscape hominids preferred to carry out carcass
processing activities; 3. identify where on the paleolandscape such animal
resources were clustered by determining which habitats would have been more
productive in terms of available carcass abundance; 4. understand how variation
in the nature of animal communities affected early hominid behavior. Most
archaeologists collect from and excavate `sites` where large concentrations of
bone and other cultural materials provide clear cut evidence of a human
presence. However such occurrences constitute one end of a continuum and a focus
on `sites` alone ignores less dense scatters and patches of remains which are
common on many landscapes. Such has been the case over several decades of
research at Olduvai Gorge and archaeologists do not know how representative
sites in fact are, or how site focused archaeology has biased our understanding
of early human behavior. The Blumenschine project is unique because it has
collected across the entire range of material densities and MS Cushing's
analysis will allow a comparison across the span. It will not only increase
understanding of prehistoric human behavior at Olduvai Gorge but also help
archaeologists improve the techniques they use to collect and analyze excavated
remains. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.