* 9712043
* Science and Technology of Ultrasonic Devulcanization of     Rubbers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Avraam Isayev, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/2000
* USD 312,504.00

The main objective of this research project is to develop basic knowledge and
to design high capacity equipment for the new technology of continuous
devulcanization of different kinds of reinforced and nonreinforced vulcanized
elastomers. Through the application of certain levels of ultrasonic amplitudes
in special devices, the three-dimensional network can be broken down within a
short period of time of the order of a second or even less. As the most
desirable consequence, ultrasonically treated rubber becomes soft thereby
enabling this material to be reprocessed, shaped, and revulcanized. Under
certain processing conditions, the tensile strength of revulcanized rubber is
much higher than that of original vulcanizates. This study outlines a series of
experiments to (1) identify the effect of the chemical structure of vulcanized
rubber on the devulcanization process; (2) evaluate the effect of the type and
amount of filler on the devulcanization process; (3) investigate the effect of
the ratio of bond energy of the main chain and that of crosslinks and rubber-
filler bonds on the break up of the three dimensional rubber network; (4)
establish optimal conditions for the devulcanization and revulcanization process
enabling one to obtain reclaimed rubbers with better mechanical properties; (5)
design new equipment for continuous devulcanization of vulcanized elastomers;
and, (6) develop the theory of ultrasonic devulcanization based not only on the
process of cavitation collapse but also accounting for the network degradation
owing to dynamic fatigue in the vicinity of stable pulsating cavities. Since the
dynamic fatigue processes are specific to polymer chemical structure as well as
to rubber network topology, the theory may be able to predict optimal conditions
of ultrasonic devulcanization for different types of crosslinked rubbers. The
development and application of this novel technique for reclaiming all
industrially important types of rubber, including tire rubber, will have a
signific ant impact on the further expansion of recycling technology.
Development of a theoretical model of the process of ultrasonic devulcanization,
allowing one to predict optimal conditions of recycling, will help to devise a
methodology to control the properties of reclaimed rubber products. The new
science-based technology can revolutionize the way rubber is recycled.