* 9712593
* Dissertation Research: The Functional Anatomy of Late       Pleistocene and Resent Human Carpometacarpal and            Metacarpophalangeal Articulations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Erik Trinkaus, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1999
* USD 5,396.00

This project examines the relationships between the shapes and orientations of
hand joints and the levels and directions of forces normally transmitted through
the hands of archaic and recent humans. The skeletal samples to be studied
consist of Neandertals, Near Eastern early modern humans, Upper Paleolithic
humans (90,000 to 20,000 years B.P.) and recent Holocene humans. Both
Neandertals and early modern humans used similar Middle Paleolithic stone tools,
whereas later Upper Paleolithic humans are associated with stone tool industries
having higher frequencies of smaller, standardized tool types which required an
increased range of both power and precision grips to manufacture and employ. The
three-dimensional shape and orientation of the wrist and finger articulations
are measured using stereo-photogrammetry. Correlation analysis is used to
determine the relative contribution of habitual force levels and hand muscle
mechanical advantages, to between-sample differences in joint shapes. The
existence of between-sample differences in hand joint anatomy indicative of
altered frequencies of manipulative behaviors that cannot be explained by force
transmission levels would confirm that significant behavioral differences in
tool manipulation existed between Late Pleistocene human groups. Ultimately,
between-group differences in tool usage could have contributed to the eventual
adaptive success of early anatomically modern humans.