* 9712493
* Workshop to Assess Needs for Manufacturing of Electronic    Systems in the 21st Century; College Park, Maryland,        November 3-4, 1997
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Yogendra Joshi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 12/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Worldwide electronic product revenues were $791 billion in 1995 and are
forecast to reach $1.2 trillion by the year 2000. A number of technological
breakthroughs must take place in order to sustain the rapid increase in the
functionality of electronic systems, while maintaining their reliable operation
and reducing size and cost. Manufacturing of electronic systems is a
hierarchical series of processes which can be grouped into semiconductor chip
manufacturing, electronic package assembly, and board and system assembly.
Although the chip-level manufacturing challenges are being adequately addressed,
the electronic package-level and board-level manufacturing remain relatively
unexplored. This workshop is for assessing the research needs in electronics
manufacturing in the twenty-first century. It will focus on identifying research
needs in the development of innovative manufacturing processes; the design of
next-generation; precision electromechanical systems; and, the development of
virtual manufacturing tools for package and board level manufacturing. The
workshop brings together experts from academia, industry and government to
discuss future research needs in electronics manufacturing and to identify the
electronics manufacturing barriers for the next decade that can be addressed by
universities in collaboration with industry and government laboratories. The
communications between the workshop participants are also helpful in building
partnerships and minimizing duplicative efforts.