* 9712820
* Local and Central Control Mechanisms in the Barorecptor     Vagal Reflex with Neuromorphic Engineering Applications to  Chemical Process Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Babatunde Ogunnaike, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Frederick Bowman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 254,288.00

9712820 Doyle The aim of this research is to perform reverse engineering of the
baroreceptor control mechanism to develop practical process control algorithms.
The primary role of the baroreceptor reflex mechanism is the modulation of blood
pressure by regulating heart rate on a short time frame. From a systems
perspective, the heart is a massively instrumented actuator with multiple
hierarchical effector signals from the central nervous system, complex local
circuitry, and has as a primary objective the regulation of blood pressure. In
particular, the investigators plan to study local control loops in the
baroreceptor reflex. They propose that these local loops, which function
independently of the central nervous system, can be emulated and applied to
real-world process control problems. The investigators will map out motor
cardiac fibers associated with the baroreceptor reflex by using fluorescent
labeling and confocal microscopy. The local control loops in the reflex would be
carefully analyzed in order to develop a theoretical formulation for locally
intelligent control algorithms. These algorithms would be applied to a difficult
polymerization reactor control problem and to local control valve actuation to
overcome performance degradation due to wear or mechanical failure. The reactor
control problem concerns a difficult polymerization grade transition problem,
where the temperature is periodically changed to alter the free radical
polymerization of ethylene in a reactor. This system is subject to an extinction
phenomena if the reactor temperature exceeds a lower limit. The intelligent
controller of this research would be used to obtain tight control while avoiding
extinction. ***