* 9712538
* RUI:  Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Cluster-Surface and Ion-Surface Interactions with High Performance Computers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Mark Shapiro, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2002
* USD 113,000.00

9712538 Shapiro This is an award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions
(RUI). The principal investigator will be utilizing high performance computers
to conduct molecular dynamics simulations of cluster-surface and ion-surface
interactions. Specific topics will include: the evolution of incident ion
trajectories in solid targets following the impact of very energetic clusters;
the consequences of intermediate to high energy cluster bombardment (damage,
electronic excitation, sputtering); cluster emission from targets following ion
and cluster bombardment, with emphasis on the relationship between the
statistics of sputtering events and cluster emission; the utility of cluster
beams to desorb material for mass spectograph studies; the charge state
properties of energetic cluster components traversing thin targets; the use of
both low and high energy cluster beams for micromachining. Research will be
carried out in collaboration with the Basic and Applied Physics Group at Caltech
and with the Le Beyec Group at Orsay. The goals of the research are to extend
the fundamental understanding of cluster-surface interactions; to guide future
experimental research; and, to involve promising undergraduate students in
research. %%% This grant will support research at a predominantly undergraduate
institution. The research involves computer simulations of clusters of atoms and
charged ions striking surfaces of materials. These type of interactions are
important for materials processing, materials wear and for understanding
fundamental aspects of surfaces. The research will involve undergraduate
students and involves collaborations with groups at Caltech and Orsay in France.
***