* 9712267
* Multi-Use "Plug-And-Play" Software Packages for Black Box   and Inexact Symbolic Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 11/30/2000
* USD 215,233.00

This project conducts research in the design of efficient algorithms, their
implementation in software packages, and in making the programs accessible to
non-specialist users of symbolic computation systems. Packages for the black box
representation of symbolic objects and for symbolic objects containing
imprecise, that is, floating point data will be constructed. The packages are
generically programmed as C++ template classes with abstract underlying
arithmetics; they can be compiled with a variety of fast libraries for the basic
field, floating point, and polynomial operations. A server/client interface
seamlessly attaches the packages to all widely-used general purpose symbolic
systems such as Maple and Mathetmatica. Parallel execution of the implemented
algorithms will be facilitated. Black box objects are stored as functions. For
instance: a black box polynomial is a procedure that takes values for the
variables as input and evaluates the polynomial at that given point; a black box
matrix is a procedure that takes an arbitrary vector as input and computes the
matrix times vector product. The FoxBox system is a package for computing
greatest common divisors and factoring black box polynomials. The aim is to
eliminate algorithmic bottlenecks in FoxBox and add black box linear algebra.
For sake of speed, the project focuses on algorithms over finite fields.
Efficient server/client bridge code to a variety of general purpose systems will
be developed. The project will also investigate how inexact (e.g., floating
point) data can be handled in the course of a symbolic computation. The
allowance of floating point coefficients in a symbolic, i.e., parameterized
model, is crucial for a symbolic approach to problems from the physical world.
Moreover, floating point arithmetic is faster than exact arithmetic, especially
for algebraic numbers. Several numerical models, such as a-posteriori iterative
improvement and sensitivity analysis for perturbed input data, will be
considered. The problems of Toeplitz matrix rank, polynomial complex root
location, and factoring complex polynomials in many variables will be
investigated. The design of a plug-and-play symbolic/numeric package will be
studied.