* 9712349
* Impacts of Cooperative R&D on Participating Firms
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Christopher Hill, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,949.00

During the past two decades, industrial firms have become increasingly engaged
in and dependent on R&D partnerships involving competitors, other firms,
academic institutions, government laboratories, and foreign sources. These
partnership, or cooperative, arrangements are entered into with the expectation
that they will help control the rising costs of R&D, avoid unnecessary
duplication of effort, take advantage of economies of scale in combined efforts,
or bring into the participating firms sets of capabilities that they don't have
and would be expensive or unfeasible to obtain. Despite the enormous commitment
of resources and strategic energy to these partnerships, relatively little is
known about how effective they are at accomplishing their goals. Even less is
known about what other impacts, positive or negative, these arrangements have on
the participants. The primary focus of this inquiry will be on firms, since
there is a large literature on the impacts of cooperation with industry on
academic institutions, and the impacts of federal laboratories on industry, as
well as a large but uncritical literature extolling the virtues of R&D
cooperation in general as well as in specific instances. This pilot project will
undertake literature reviews, interviews, case studies, and data source
identification to begin to identify, assess, and understand the nature of key
impacts of R&D cooperation between and on firms. The goal is to examine both
immediate and delayed effects. An essential feature of the proposed work is a
comparison between R&D partnerships among competitors and those that involve two
or more firms that have complementary strengths to contribute. The project will
interview ten to 20 industrial R&D leaders to refine initial hypotheses, and
test these with two to four case studies of firms or partnerships. A list of
consortia that can provide the basis for a detailed survey to be addressed to
several hundred firms known to be engaged in R&D partnerships will be compiled.
The comparisons will be made primarily between firms in vertical and horizontal
partnerships, rather than between firms that are and are not involved in R&D
partnerships. It is intended that results from this pilot and any follow-on
studies be useful both to industrial R&D managers considering R&D partnerships,
as well as to the many government policy makers and R&D program managers who
have become advocates for and supporters of R&D cooperation as a key tool in
ensuring the nation's future.