* 9712414
* Broadening Access: Research for Diverse Network Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Charlotte Linde, Institute for Research on Learning
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1999
* USD 199,911.00

The drive toward public and universal access to the National Information
Infrastructure (NII) has been a significant focus of national attention,
bringing together policy-makers and activists working in fields such as
education, community service, and disability rights. As computer networking
becomes increasingly important, it is crucial to examine whether and how diverse
social groups use this new technology. Computer networking technologies should
be useful for a broad spectrum of society, rather than creating yet another
social division on economic, educational, and generational lines. This project
addresses this concern through research on SeniorNet, a community of computer-
using seniors, proposing an in-depth case study of how a technologically
disenfranchised group has been able to make computers and computer networking
meaningful in daily life. The premise of this research is that access needs to
be understood not only in relation to technical and economic factors, but also
in relation to the social and historical context of computer use. The project
focuses, in particular, on a sense of online community as a key factor in
motivating and supporting access to new information technology. The analytic
framework for this study is based on broadening the definition of access to
include:1) initial entry, 2) ongoing participation in computer-networked
activity, and 3) change and development of the community over time. Rather than
focusing on just economic or technical preconditions for use of networking
technologies, this study looks also at how people learn how to use it, why they
find it compelling, and how it is integrated into their daily lives. This
project is a collaboration between computer and social scientists at the
Institute for Research on Learning (IRL) and the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
(PARC), involving ethnographic research and participation in a process of
technological innovation with SeniorNet. SeniorNet is a nonprofit organization,
founded in 1986, with approximately 20,000 current members, of whom
approximately 4,000 communicate over America Online (AOL), and with a new but
growing population on the World Wide Web (WWW). SeniorNet activities include
online bulletin boards and chat rooms, face-to-face gatherings at both a
national and local level, as well as classes in computer use at over 80 learning
centers across the county. SeniorNet provides a rare case of a successful online
community of a group that is generally considered technologically
disenfranchised. Further, its relatively long history provides a rich case for
looking at how a group is established and develops over time, in relation to
changing technical standards. The research will involve ethnographic study of
the existing practices of community organization, with particular attention to
ways of gaining (or failure to gain) access to the community, and various forms
of membership and participation. The project will address issues of access and
technological innovation for technologically disenfranchised groups by providing
a case study of a successful network community of seniors, informed by an
interdisciplinary research perspective. The project will produce an ethnography
of SeniorNet, focused around issues of access, membership, participation, and
community development, and consideration of its relationship to policy debate
around access to NII.