* 9712855
* Collaborative Research: The Nature and Predictability of The Madden and Julian Oscillation in the Coupled Ocean- Atmosphere System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Charles Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sumant Nigam
* 08/31/2001
* USD 105,627.00

9712855 Jones This grant represents one of the two awards that provide support
for a collaborative project between Dr. Charles Jones of UC - Santa Barbara and
Dr. Duane Waliser at SUNY - Stony Brook (under ATM-9712483). The principal
investigators seek to improve our understanding of, and ultimately our
capability to forecast, a tropical intraseasonal phenomenon known as the Madden-
Julian Oscillation (MJO). The Madden-Julian Oscillation is one of the most
important modes of tropical intraseasonal variability that may have important
influences on medium- to extended-range weather forecasting in the extratropics,
the Asian-Australian monsoon activity, and even the variability of the
equatorial Pacific Ocean thermocline structure via its close association with
westerly wind bursts. A growing body of evidence, including recent modeling
results obtained by the principal investigators, suggests that air-sea
interaction processes, particularly the influence of sea-surface temperature
(SST) variations on surface fluxes, may be important in the maintenance of the
MJO. The principal investigators will continue their investigation by (1)
further exploring the role of SST and surface processes in determining the
strength of and maintaining the MJO using coupled ocean-atmosphere models and
(2) assessing the impact of the representation/forecast of the MJO on the
overall extended range forecast skill in an operational medium-range weather
forecast model. The research will involve the use of diagnostic and statistical
analyses as well as numerical simulations. The PIs will employ several different
models in their study. This research has important implications for improving
dynamical extended range forecasting at both intraseasonal and seasonal time
scales. Therefore, both the Climate Dynamics and Large-scale Meteorology
Programs will share in the support of this collaborative project.