* 9712308
* PEET:  Monographic Studies of Hypocrealean Fungi:  Hypocrea and Hypomyces
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Gary Samuels, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 739,851.00

9712308 Stewart Fungi in the ascomycete order Hypocreales are extremely diverse
and range from species parasitic on plants and on other fungi as well as on
humans, to saprotrophic forms that decompose organic matter in soils and litter.
Hypocrealean fungi produce powerful mycotoxins, some of which have found
pharmaceutical application like cyclosporin and ergonovone. Most are inhabitants
of bark, wood, and herbaceous parts of angiosperms and are common in both
temperate and tropical regions. About 80 genera and 1500 species are currently
recognized in classifications of Hypocreales. In addition to their ascomycetous
(spores in a sac, or ascus) or sexual manifestation, many hypocrealean fungi
form conidia or asexual spore-forming structures, and may live many generations
as asexually reproducing entities. Many of these have been given scientific
names under the artificial order Moniliales, perhaps the most important being
the genus Trichoderma, a source of severe pathogens. Prof. Elwin Stewart at
Pennsylvania State University and Dr. Gary Samuels at the Beltsville USDA
laboratories are cooperating to supervise several students who will conduct
taxonomic monographic research on select groups of Hypocreales and Moniliales,
to define species limits, assess reliable characters for identification, test
mating barriers between closely related species, and reconstruct phylogenetic or
genealogical relationships based on DNA sequences obtained for targeted genes.
Two major goals of this PEET enterprise are to assess overall biodiversity in
the hypocrealean and monilialean fungi of the world, especially in the tropics
where new taxa can be expected, and to integrate the current classifications of
the sexual (teleomorphic) and asexual (anamorphic) forms of the fungi into a
general phylogenetic framework, based on a large data set of DNA sequences. Such
work will complement ongoing studies supported by NSF on other ascomycetes like
Clavicipitales toward the goal of a phylogenetic framework for all ascom ycetes.
Training of four new graduate students and of postdoctoral associates is
integrated with the research projects, and includes collaboration with
specialists throughout the U.S. and in Japan. Select products from the research
are to be available over Internet, taking advantage of the USDA's Web
operations.