* 9712875
* SGER:  Same-Age Unrelated Siblings:  A Unique Test Within-  Family Environmental Influences
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Nancy Segal, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/1998
* USD 5,630.00

A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER). Unrelated siblings of the same
age, reared together from early infancy, uniquely replicate the rearing
situations of dizygotic twins. These dyads offer a new behavioral-genetic
research design for examining genetic and environmental influences on behavior.
Early findings show a substantially smaller IQ correlation for unrelated
siblings reared together than for monozygotic twins, dizygotic twins and
siblings, respectively. This finding supports an explanatory model of
intelligence that includes genetic factors. The very modest IQ similarity
between unrelated siblings reared together, despite their common rearing since
infancy, suggests that the shared environment has a very small effect on
intellectual development, and supports the position that individuals respond to
environments in ways consistent with their genetic predispositions. The results
also challenge the views of some critics that the behavioral resemblance of
monozygotic twins is primarily a function of shared experience. An additional
ongoing analysis is examining the similarity of unrelated siblings reared
together on scales from the Child Behavior Checklist and comparing the magnitude
of similarity with published data for twins, siblings and adoptees. Outcomes
from this study can assist parents and educators concerned with the progress of
near-in-age siblings, both unrelated and related. Differences in intellectual
outcome, despite similarity of educational and social opportunities, should
increase sensitivity to the individual talents of each child, and encourage
informed appraisal of the educational aims and goals for each sibling.