* 9712853
* An Acoustic Position and Obstruction Monitoring System for  Neonatal Endotracheal Tubes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,07/31/1998
* George Wodicka, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 07/31/1998
* USD 32,936.00

9712853 Wodicka The object of this proposal is the development of a new acoustic
method to guide endotracheal tube (ETT) placement and monitor the ETT position
and patency over time. The method consists of measuring the reflections of an
audible sound pulse that is introduced into the ETT lumen and propagates into
the airways. Patency and position information is derived from the timing of the
reflections from the lumen and airways, respectively. This approach has proven
extremely reliable in preliminary studies performed using adult-size ETT's in
anesthetized canines. Thousands of patients including roughly 83,000 infants per
year in the United States require placement of an ETT for ventilatory support.
In every patient, insertion of the ETT is attended by the risk of life
threatening and costly complications due to improper placement in the esophagus
or a bronchus, or blockage due to secretions. The current standard of care that
attempts to avoid catastrophic complications is expensive and requires the
continuous monitoring of carbon dioxide in expired gas, in concert with regular
assessment of tube location via chest radiographs and regular auctioning of the
tube lumen to ensure patency. Despite the vigilance of health care providers, a
significant number of complications associated with ETT use occur each year with
the disproportionate number occurring in infants where the smaller tolerances by
geometry predicate higher risks.