* 9712630
* SGER: Measurments of Mesoscale Surface Currents in Support  of Space-Time Translocation Patterns of Reef Fish
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1997,09/30/1998
* Hans Graber, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Richard B. Lambert, Jr.
* 09/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

*** Graber 9721630 In this study we propose to augment the on-going biological
and physical sampling phase of Cowen, Lwiza and Schultz (NSF OCE:-9521104) on
the west coast of the oceanic island Barbados with surface current measurements
using HF remote sensing technology. The measurements would provide maps of the
evolution of the spatial and temporal variability in the regional circulation
and the interactions of local flow with eddies generated at the retroflection of
the North Brazil Current. The radar would operate in HF mode which would provide
a spatial resolution of 1 km and would coincide with the shipboard
biological/physical sampling scheme. The radar currents would provide crucial
information on the dominant flow components such as tides, wind-driven, mean and
residual circulation in this region. The HF radar measurements would be used to
characterize the time space scales of the hydrographic signatures associated
with eddies generated by the retroflection of the North Brazil Current. The
addition of the remotely sensed currents to the shipboard sampling will provide
direct measurements of the surface flow. Such information is crucial to
interpreting the distribution of late-stage larvae that occupy this upper layer
of the water column. Decomposing the current into components would be used to
examine how the flow is influenced by such forcing agents as the wind. This is
particularly valuable in the lee of the island where the wind stress will vary
both spatially and temporally. Combining the surface and subsurface current
measurements with the biological sampling would allow us to examine the linkages
between reef fish larval distributions and island flow patterns. Specifically
our study could assess the impact of offshore mesoscale events disturbing the
local now regime and the fate of larval retention. Such knowledge is essential
to understand the translocation patterns of coral reef fish larvae in an island
wake environment. ***