* 9712776
* GOALI:  Pulsed Terahertz Spectroscopy of Colossal           Magnetoresistance Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 39,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9712776 Drew This experimental GOALI research
project, supported in part by the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs (OMA) of
the MPS Directorate, is on the infrared and microwave magneto-optical properties
of Colossal Magnetoresistance (CMR) materials, with emphasis on manganese
perovskites, in the form of thin films grown on far-infrared transparent
substrates. The films will be characterized using dc transport and magnetic
susceptibility measurements, and will then be studied using THz spectroscopy.
The results will be used to help illuminate the mechanisms involved in CMR in
the manganese perovskites and address questions about the application of the
materials as microwave circuit elements, bolometric detectors, and magnetic
sensors. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature and will involve
collaboration between a leading academic laboratory and a government laboratory.
%%% This experimental GOALI research project, supported in part by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Affairs (OMA) of the MPS Directorate makes use of
sophisticated optical measurements to clarify the interaction of magnetic fields
with "Colossal Magnetoresistance Materials" (CMR) of the manganese perovskite
family. These CMR materials have extremely large sensitivity in their electrical
resistance to ambient magnetic field, and are therefore of great interest for
their potential application in magnetic field sensing elements as are used in
magnetic disk drives, as well as for their scientific interest. Results from
this research may include unusual new effects or structures which may find
application in technology. This research project is interdisciplinary in nature
and will involve collaboration between a leading academic laboratory and a
government laboratory. ***