* 9712570
* Transient Intermediates in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Frantisek Turecek, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 03/31/2001
* USD 296,500.00

Professor Frantisek Turecek, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Washington, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
his studies of the formation and properties of transient intermediates in
chemical reactions in the gas phase. Molecules and radicals of sulfur oxyacids
and nitroalkane radicals relevant to tropospheric oxidations, and intermediates
in the addition of hydrogen atoms and hydroxyl radicals to nucleic bases, are
generated by fast neutralization of cations and anions and studied by
neutralization-reionization mass spectrometry. These studies, combined with
complementary ab initio, density-functional theory, and RRKM calculations,
address the stabilities of these transient intermediates in their ground and
excited states and permit the analysis of their energetics and the kinetics of
their unimolecular dissociation. Chemical reactions often proceed by consecutive
elementary steps, each generating a transient and reactive intermediate.
Characterization of such intermediates represents a formidable experimental
challenge given their typically short lifetimes and low concentrations. An
especially challenging class of transient intermediates to study is comprised of
those formed by high-energy processes such as those that occur in the
stratosphere and troposphere, in combustion, and in radiolysis by ionizing
radiation. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
Professor Frantisek Turecek, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Washington, studies the formation and properties of transient intermediates in
chemical reactions in the gas phase. Professor Turecek uses neutralization-
reionization mass spectrometry, a `non-chemical` technique, for the production
of the desired intermediates from simple precursor ions, avoiding the structural
ambiguities which can result from their attempted production by other means.
These studies, complemented by computational analyses, address the stabilities
and reactivity of these transient intermediates, shedding light on the
fundamental events which occur during high-energy processes.