* 9712078
* Determining Pottery Provenience By a New High Precision Low Cost X-ray Fluorescence Method and Comparison with          Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Frank Asaro, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2000
* USD 123,000.00

This award will permit Dr. Frank Asaro and his colleagues to continue
development and testing of a x-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique for ceramic
analysis. XRF, in common with several other approaches, determines the abundance
of trace elements present in ceramics and such data is extremely important to
archaeological researchers. Trace element frequencies are set by both the clay
used to manufacture a vessel as well as the tempering material included and
through analysis of relative abundances it is often possible to establish the
presence of `wares` - groups of material which share a common fabric and thus
should be classed together. It is also sometimes possible to trace specific
wares back to their point of origin through comparison with geological
collections of clay raw material. Through sourcing studies and the analysis of
ceramics from large numbers of sites archaeologists can gain insight into the
organization of ceramic production and trade. The movement of ceramics also
sheds light on economic and political organization. Because ceramics played such
a crucial role in many prehistoric societies and because it is well preserved
and abundant in many archaeological sites, it provides a central focus of
archaeological attention. Although XRF is not widely used for trace element
studies its potential is great. Its cost is relatively low and relatively little
sample preparation time required. Were it developed to the level of accuracy of
other techniques it would greatly facilitate archaeologists' practical access to
trace element data. In this NSF award Dr. Asaro and his colleagues will pursue
three goals. First they will work to improve the technique itself. They will
develop new methods to accurately measure abundances of Th and the rare earths
La and Ce. They will also improve measurement precision of Ba, As, K and Ti.
Secondly they will compare the results of XRF and neutron activation through a
carefully controlled multi-laboratory study. Finally they will apply the
technique to a chemically complicated archaeological situation in Israel to gain
practical field insight into both potential advantages and pitfalls. If
successful this project will provide archaeologists with a valuable working
tool. ó ¬ñ«¬^Ñ¬½¼^+á(ñ +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«^¼▒&ñ^ó|úñ^|<ú +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«^½¼¼½^ó|úñ^|<ú +▒+¬ ó
¬ñ«^&¬|&^¬¼+ª^ó|úñ+▒+¬ ¬ñ«^&¬|&^¬¼+ª^ó|úñ^|<ú ó ¬ñ«^¬¼¬+^úá¼ñ^|<ú ▒▒+¬ ó
<á½¼^¡&ú¼^¡½ñ¬ +▒+¬ ó <á½¼^¡&ú¼^&ª( +▒+¬ ó <á½¼^¡&ú¼^¼(½& +▒+¬ ó Ñ|½^¼░¼ +▒+¬ ó
ªñ+ú^ó|úñ +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^|+ñ +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^¼»| +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^¼º¬ññ +▒+¬
ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^Ñ|¡¬ +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^Ñ¿«ñ +▒+¬ ó ¬ñ«¬^áúú¬^½¿░ +▒+¬