* 9712793
* Population Structure and Dynamics of the Lemon Shark,       Negaprion Brevirostris on a Local and Global Scale:         Microsatelite and Mitochondrial DNA Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Samuel Gruber, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 166,437.00

Comprehensive field and laboratory investigations will be undertaken to
determine the local mating system and geographic population structure of the
lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris, a large coastal shark and a tropical apex
predator. The research objectives are to: 1) genetically characterize, for the
first time, the mating system of a cartilaginous fish; 2) clarify the use of a
tropical nursery ground by juvenile sharks and females in paturition; and 3)
examine population structure at both a local and extensive geographic scale. The
study site at Bimini is unique in that nearly the entire juvenile population in
the lagoon can and will be sampled, and genetic analysis of these samples will
in large part provide the data for the first two objectives. Specifically, the
field component includes a five-year sampling program of which three years have
been completed. The data from juveniles will be supplemented by genotyping
adults sampled in and around Bimini. The genetic and field data together will
provide estimates of the total population size of pups, their growth, survival
and movements, the number of females using Bimini as a nursery ground, and the
relative reproductive success of males and females within and across years.
Finally, the data can document whether individual females are returning to the
Bimini nursery areas to give birth and if so, the interbirth intervals for
females and the number of males siring their young. The third objective of the
study will allow placement of the detailed local genetic structure documented at
Bimini within the framework of the species genetic structure as a whole.
Population structure at larger geographic scales will be accomplished through
sampling 20-30 lemon sharks at four other locations that represent multiple
spatial scales and potential barriers to dispersal. These sites include 1) a
second Bahamian site (Grand Bahama Island) approximately 100 km across the NW
providence channel from Bimini; 2) a second known lemon shark nursery west of
the Florida Keys (Marquesas) separated from Bimini by 350 km and the Florida
current; 3) a distant Atlantic site off the east coast of Brazil approximately
5000 km from Bimini; and 4) samples from the Pacific coast of Mexico completely
isolated from the Atlantic sites by the Isthmus of Panama. Two methods of
genetic analysis, microsatellites and mitochodrial DNA (mtDNA), will be employed
in this study. Microsatellites exhibit the levels of variability necessary for
inferring parent/offspring and sibship relationships at Bimini, especially when
supplemented by additional genetic information provided by the maternally
inherited mtDNA. The use of unlinked genetic markers having different
transmission genetics (mtDNA is maternally inherited and microsatellite loci
exhibit Mendelian inheritance) will provide separate but complementary estimates
of genetic variation within and among populations, provide estimates of
population differentiation and migration rates between the five sites in our
study, and distinguish putative differences in patterns of male and female
mediated gene flow.