* 9712010
* Evaluating Interdisciplinary, Multi-Agency, Integrated      Approaches to Civil Infrastructure Systems Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Claire Felbinger, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/1998
* USD 53,000.00

9712010 This proposal is for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research which
evaluates the nature of interdisciplinary efforts in Civil Infrastructure
Systems (CIS) research. It acts as a pre-test of the Principal Investigator's
work on the policy impacts of disciplinary models of decision making in the
context of infrastructure policy making. It is hypothesized that the impact of
self-selection into professions and the educational and professional
socialization into those professions shapes how infrastructure decisions are
made. Consequently, the potential for interdisciplinary understanding is
increased. The SGER will investigate this condition in attempting
multidisciplinary CIS research. The project will: 1) develop a clear
understanding of NSF's CIS-related programmatic research portfolio; 2) develop a
similar understanding for research and development at other federal and state
agencies; 3) identify interdisciplinary CIS-related centers or institutes in the
U.S. and throughout the world and describe their focus and expertise; 4)
evaluate the interdisciplinary nature of NSF-CIS awards; 5) identify stakeholder
organizations to be partners and initiate discussions of research and
development partnerships; 6) develop interdisciplinary framing of basic CIS
research needs; and 7) posit the impacts of the results on the future of
engineering education. ***