* 9712773
* Study on the Gelation, Consolidation, and Rheology of Sol-  Gel Coated Ceramic Suspensions
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Wei-Heng Shih, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2001
* USD 259,463.00

9712773 Shih The objective of the research is to obtain fundamental
understanding on the gelation, consolidation, and rheology of coated ceramic
suspensions and establish their structure-property relationships. The approach
that will be taken includes both experimental and theoretical work. The
experimental system that will be studied is aluminum oxide-coated silicon
carbide suspensions. There are several practical benefits of selecting this
system for study. The yielding properties of aluminum oxide- coated silicon
carbide gel network will be measured by dynamic and static rheological tests.
The same yielding properties will be calculated based on a recently developed
network yielding theory. The zeta potential needed for the calculation of
interparticle interaction will be measured, and will be compared to the
predictions of numerical simulation of ceramic coating on particle surface. The
consolidation behavior of the aluminum oxide-coated particle suspensions will be
investigated with sedimentation, centrifugation, and pressure filtration. The
structural information about the coated particulate network will be
characterized by light scattering. It is expected that by making the connection
between theory and experiment, a systematic picture of structure-property
relationship can be established for the coated ceramic suspensions. %%% Ceramic
powders coated with another ceramic material have been used in many applications
in colloidal ceramic processing. The ceramic coating can protect the core
particles from dissolution. The coating may modify the interaction between the
core particles, thereby improve the rheological properties of suspensions.
Although the applications of ceramic-coated particles are many, the
understanding of the suspension properties of coated particles is very limited.
Intuitively, one might think that the property of the coated powder would be
similar to that of the coating material. However, as shown by the results from
rec ent studies, the consolidation and rheological properties of coated-powder
suspensions can be quite complex. There is a need to perform a systematic study
on the colloidal properties of coated powders so that their full potential
benefits can be harvested. The research will have a significant impact on the
applications of silicon carbide and alumina ceramics. ***