* 9712337
* Impact of Strategic Alliances on Financial Performance      of Technology-based Ventures
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Claudia Schoonhoven, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ann H. Bostrom
* 11/30/2000
* USD 62,707.00

This research continues work done under SBR-9223818 examining the performance
obstacles new firms face as a consequence of their newness and small size. These
obstacles include lack of legitimacy in the industry and marketplace, the
challenge of raising sufficient capital, and the risks and uncertainties ofnew
technology development. Yet, some entrepreneurs transform these obstacles into
opportunities by using their newness, small size, and cutting edge technologies
to attract other firms in cooperative relationships, called strategic alliances.
The strategy of allying with other organizations has become increasingly
prevalent, and yet little is known about the objective value of such
relationships to new ventures. Using a longitudinal data base on a population of
102 new ventures in the U.S. semiconductor industry which have created 635
strategic alliances with other firms, this research tests a model of financial
performance and strategic alliances. Among the variables to be investigated in
the research as factors affecting financial performance are: (1) alliance
partner attributes such as relative power, cultural distance, and prominence;
(2) the number and type of strategic alliances formed; (3) technological
innovativeness; (4) strength of the founding top management team; (5)
organizational resources like investment capital raised; and (6) broader market
conditions.