* 9712884
* Theoretical and Computational Studies of Quantum Dynamical  Processes in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Gregory Voth, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 12/31/2003
* USD 629,000.00

Gregory Voth is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical development of the Centroid
Molecular Dynamics (CMD) technique, and to apply it to a number of important
problems in the area of condensed phase dynamics of systems with quantum degrees
of freedom. The CMD method is based on computing trajectories of Feynman path
integral centroids using classical molecular dynamics techniques. The
trajectories are then correlated and statistically weighted with the phase space
Feynman path integral centroid density. The resulting time correlation function
can be related by Fourier transform to the quantum time correlation function.
CMD therefore allows quantum time correlation functions to be approximately
calculated with a numerical effort similar to a classical MD calculation.
Several applications will be investigated. Proton translocation in water and the
diffusive transport of solvated and hydrated electrons will be treated. A second
area of research involves the development of an initial value semiclassical
dynamics approach for condensed phase systems. This approach would allow the
study of both nonequilibrium and nonadiabatic processes, and treatment of
nonlinear `system-bath` interactions. Finally, a formal treatment of activated
quantum dynamics will be undertaken to develop a new picture of the quantum
mechanical transition state. Gas phase chemical systems have been studied for a
number of years, and excellent theoretical and computational techniques have
been developed to model their behavior. More recently theoretical and
computational methods are being developed that make it possible to treat more
complex condensed phase systems. Most of the current theoretical models are
classical in nature and cannot deal with the additional complications imposed by
quantum effects. Voth's research addresses this additional degree of complexity
and proposes the development of computational approaches designed to permit the
treatment of condensed phase systems that include various quantum degrees of
freedom.