* 9712103
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Comparative Study of Numerical     Representations:  Human Infants and Nonhuman Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Susan Carey, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 08/31/2001
* USD 142,567.00

Language is what distinguishes adult human beings from both human infants and
other primates. The development of language in the species and in the child are
two of nature's most profound mysteries. The aim of this collaborative project
is to shed light on these mysteries by assessing similarities between natural
language and spontaneous non-linguistic knowledge in both human infants and
other primates (macaques and cotton-top tamarins). The project also aims to
determine how the non-linguistic knowledge differs from language, for this will
tell us what special features of language must be accounted for in analyses of
the evolution and acquisition of natural languages. The focus of the research is
one restricted arena of conceptual and linguistic knowledge: natural number.
Three aspects of nonlinguistic representation of number will be studied: (1) the
nature of infant and non-human primate representations of integers; (2) the
representations of quantifiers such as `an,` `another,` and `more`; and (3) the
criteria for individuating objects and assessing numerical identity (sameness in
number). The proposed studies have several specific goals. First, given that
human infants, macaques, and tamarins pass simple tests of `addition` and
`subtraction,` a series of experiments will be carried out to uncover the nature
of the underlying representations. Second, the upper numerical limit of the
addition/subtraction ability will be determined, for all three subject
populations. Third, experiments will be conducted to probe whether all three
populations are tracking number of objects in the addition/subtraction studies
or total mass/volume. Fourth, studies will be carried out to assess whether
nonhuman primates and human infants spontaneously represent which of two
numerical quantities is larger, and whether this ability is subject to the same
upper limit as the addition/subtraction ability. Finally, the relationship
between the acquisition of language and the conceptual representations
associated with basic object kinds (e.g., cup, apple) will be explored in all
three species. The findings will shed light on fundamental problems of
development and evolution. Specifically, the project will provide an explicit
account of how humans spontaneously develop numerical competence from birth to
the first year of life, and will also generate an evolutionary explanation for
why numerical competence evolved, and when during primate phylogeny it
originated.