* 9712863
* NSF Travel Grant to Support Student Authors to Attend the   29th North American Power Symposium, to be held on October  12-13, 1997 in Laramie, Wyoming
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1997
* Badrul Chowdhury, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 11/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

ECS-9712863 Chowdhury This proposal requests travel support for a number of
electrical engineering students (with a major in power engineering) across the
United States to attend the 29th annual North American Power Symposium (NAPS) to
be held on October 12-13, 1997 at the University of Wyoming campus (UW),
Laramie, Wyoming. Travel expenses could be a deterrent for graduate students
planning to attend this conference. NAPS is an annual conference, sponsored by
the Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and a university on
the North American Continent. At this conference, university professors and
students are encouraged to present the results of their research among
colleagues at an early stage in their work. NAPS participants are from the
electrical engineering departments of major universities in the country with
research interests in different areas of power engineering, some from
universities abroad, and some from industry. NAPS authors are required to attend
the conference and present their papers. This proposal discusses the
justification for travel support, requested from the National Science
Foundation, for student authors attending the symposium. It also discusses
coverage and criteria for selection of student authors, activities planned for
the symposium, and the impact of the proposed travel grant.