* 9712585
* Dissertation Research: Pattern of Sexual Dimorphism in Limb Joint Surfaces of Catarrhine Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* William Jungers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1999
* USD 11,206.00

One of the most fundamental issues in the analysis of primate fossil samples is
the determination of how many species they contain. Samples that contain
differently-sized individuals of similar (but not identical) shape often incite
debate among paleoanthropologists as to whether the sample is made up of two
related species (one large, one small), or two sexes of a single species (large
males, small females.) Theoretically, when two sexes differ significantly in
size (as in baboons and gorillas), their limb joints may also differ slightly in
shape. This is due to the fact that larger males will encounter relatively
greater joint stress levels than females, thereby inducing differences in the
surface area of the joints. Using video imaging and recent advances in computer
analysis, this study will examine sex-related shape differences in the limb
joint surfaces of a number of recent Old World primates, including monkeys and
apes. This research will reveal exactly how the bones of males and females
differ, as well as determine whether or not patterns of sex-related shape
differences are similar across species, or depend upon factors such as how the
animals move around. This examination of sex-based differences within modern
primate taxa will provide a crucial background with which to evaluate current
fossil assemblages.