* 9712581
* Purchase of Transcription Software, Server Upgrade, and     Computer Workstations for Advanced Video Analysis of        Discourse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Joel Kuipers, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2001
* USD 49,648.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joel Kuipers will purchase a
computer based system to facilitate the analysis of discourse. The system
integrates audio and visual data and therefore allows researchers to examine not
only spoken language per se but also the crucial role that gestures and facial
expressions play in human communication. The instrumentation includes 8 Power
Mac 8500 AV computer workstations, vPrism software which permits full-screen,
real time digital video to be linked with transcriptions and annotations of that
data on the same computer screen and permits key word searches on transcribed
words. An Apple Macintosh Power 8500 AV will also be purchased to run the vPrism
software. This system will be employed by multiple departments, including
Anthropology and Linguistics to pursue a number of projects. These include study
of topic changes in Indonesian meetings, the comparative analysis of discursive
changes over time, interaction of Zairian pygmies with villages and foreigners
and the analysis of referential communication in aphasia. The enhanced retrieval
and analysis capabilities will permit new standards of ethnographic and
linguistic documentation and reveal the richly interactional and communicative
aspects of human behavior. The instrumentation will be extensively used for
instructional purposes and have a significant impact on both undergraduate and
graduate education.