* 9712688
* Development of Polymer Bonded Magnets with Enhanced Magnetic Properties for High Temperature and Aggressive Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Joshua Otaigbe, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 07/31/2001
* USD 361,374.00

9712688 Otaigbe This GOALI research program investigates the role of magnetic
particle morphology, concentration and distribution on the processing, and
magnetization behavior of bonded magnets. The heat resistance of bonded magnets
can be improved by selecting heat resistant binders and high temperature
polymers. However, the use of high temperature engineering polymers is limited
by the oxidizing behavior of the magnetic alloy powders at the polymer
processing temperatures. Thermal stability of the rare earth magnetic powders at
the desired temperature ranges can be improved by suitable surface treatments.
The energy product can be improved by optimizing the fraction of magnetic
powders and careful control of the particle morphology and particle size
distribution. A fundamental understanding of the interaction between the polymer
matrix and magnetic powders is essential in developing suitable powder coatings
to improve the thermal stability of the powders. Surface coatings which are
chemically compatible with the polymer binder are investigated. The study
focuses on evaluating various types of polymer binders, such as polyphenylene
sulphide (PPS) and liquid crystal polymers (LCP). In addition the rheological
behavior of the polymer binder/powder mixtures is studied for improving
processability. Based on the experimental data obtained, theoretical models are
developed to predict the optimal concentrations and distributions of magnetic
powders. The project involves a collaboration between Iowa State University and
Arnold Engineering Company, a leading manufacturer of magnetic materials in the
United States. The graduate student will spend three summer months at Arnold
Engineering assisting in elevated temperature testing of the samples. This
project is jointly funded by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and
the Division of Materials Research. %%% Polymer bonded magnets are widely being
used in many automotive and nonautomotive appli cations. A need exists to
develop bonded magnets with higher energy products that can withstand operating
temperatures of at least 180 C and higher. A key issue is the identification of
suitable magnetic powders and polymer matrices which can perform satisfactorily
at the desired higher temperatures. ***