* 9712608
* PPD:  SPECIAL PROJECT:  Interactive Scientific Graph        Analysis Project (ISGAP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ronald Morford, Automated Functions, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 08/31/2000
* USD 397,427.00

HRD-9712608 MORFORD Many middle and high schools encourage students to use
graphing scientific calculators to assist in mathematics and science courses.
They are used widely in higher mathematics (Algebra I and above) and in the
physical sciences. These calculators perform scientific functions and have
built-in screens to display graphs of analyzed data. They are valuable tools
both for students and teachers. Unfortunately, graphing scientific calculators
are not accessible to visually impaired students. The Interactive Scientific
Graph Analysis Project (ISGAP) will investigate strategies for the design,
development, and evaluation of technology that will provide better access for
visually impaired students to graphs and scientific expressions. Investigations
will be conducted for the purpose of identifying and testing economical
materials and procedures that will provide real time interactive independent
comprehension of two dimensional graphs by visually impaired students. The
project should increase the knowledge base regarding interactive graph analysis
and interactive scientific calculation for visually impaired people. The project
will involve visually impaired students, teachers, and parents in all phases of
the research project. Training will be required so students and teachers
understand how to operate this new technology. Online help assistance will be
designed into the system from the beginning. The project will begin with the
development of customized software that will run on a PC. Off-the-shelf
peripherals will be used to keep final product costs low. Specific project
objectives are: (1) Determine ISGAP requirements and design user interfaces, (2)
Interface peripherals and design and develop software, (3) Design, develop, and
test functions for interpreting graphs, and (4) Field test and evaluate product.
This project should significantly impact the ability of visually impaired
students to succeed in math and science courses. A su ccessful conclusion to
this project will lead to production of an economical hand-held device enabling
visually impaired students to have increased equity with their peers.