* 9712868
* TQO:  Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management      Practices for Improving Business Processes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Donald Fedor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2002
* USD 387,749.00

Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management Practices for Improving
Business Processes Abstract The focus of this research is to study factors that
enhance organizational learning. Specifically, the broad objectives are to
investigate the following: What are the key drivers of learning? What are the
mechanisms that organizations use to acquire, process, create, and disseminate
knowledge? How do organizations monitor and manage the learning process, and how
do they measure the effectiveness of the learning process? What impact does a
well functioning learning and knowledge management process have on business
process capabilities and business performance? These research objectives are an
outcome of extensive interactions and discussions over the past 12 months among
the five partnering organizations and the research team. The interdisciplinary
research team consists of four faculty members from the School of Psychology and
the School of Management from the Georgia Institute of Technology. This research
will focus on the study of organizational learning within the context of the
integrated product development process. Qualitative information about the
different mechanisms that organizations use to learn and share knowledge, and
the impact these mechanism have on business process capabilities and business
performance will be gathered. The methods use to gather information will include
in-depth case studies at various sites of the partner organizations, panel
discussion, and focus groups. Analyses of this information will result in
preliminary findings on the type of mechanism used, and their impact on
performance. These findings will be used to create a standardized,
psychometrically sound research instrument to quantify the degree to which
various learning mechanisms are used. The instrument will measure such things as
the existence of a specific learning mechanism at different levels of the
organization, the perceived impact of the mechanism on learning at each level,
and the perceived ease of use of the mechanism. Statistical methodologies will
be used to analyze the survey responses received from the partnering
organizations and linked to performance. The significance of this research is
that it will provide new insights on how to effectively manage the learning and
knowledge creation processes in organizations.