* 9712201
* Asymmetric Synthesis Based on Chiral                        Heterobicyclo{2.2.1}heptanes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Xumu Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Xumu Zhang, of the
Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University, explores the use
of chiral heterobicyclo(2.2.1) heptanes as catalysts and auxiliaries for
enantioselective organic transformations. Phosphine-catalyzed (3+2)
cycloaddition reactions afford chiral cyclopentenes with a high degree of regio-
and enantioselectivity when mediated by chiral phosphabicyclo(2.2.1)heptanes.
Related asymmetric catalysts are explored for their applicability in
nucleophilic gamma addition reactions with alkynes bearing electron withdrawing
groups, the Baylis-Hillman reaction, and thioether-mediated epoxidation and
aziridination of aldehydes. Chiral azabicyclo(2.2.1)heptanes are employed as
chiral auxiliaries for asymmetric deprotonation, enamine alkylation, and
cycloaddition reactions. It has become increasingly important to develop
synthetic methods which allow precise control over the three-dimensional form of
organic molecules, since even the seemingly minor difference in structure
displayed by two molecules related to one another as mirror images not
infrequently leads to a dramatic difference in chemical properties. Professor
Xumu Zhang, of the Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University,
with the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, explores methods to effect
such highly controlled syntheses of organic molecules. By exploring and
developing reactions which are mediated by specifically designed and tailored
phosphorus- or nitrogen-containing molecules, Professor Zhang is able to impart
specific three-dimensional forms to the products of these reactions. In addition
to developing practical synthetic methods, Professor Zhang explores the
mechanisms by which these molecular transformations take place and targets
important drugs and pharmaceutical intermediates to demonstrate their synthetic
utility.