* 9712564
* GOALI:  Implementation of Seat Support Forces and Posture   Measures into a Kinetic Model
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Tamara Reid-Bush, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 24,999.00

9712564 Hubbard The aim of this research is to integrate posture measurements
with the measurement of postural support forces into a kinetic computer model of
seated people. This kinetic model would include the biomechanics of human
posture and movement with the support forces. The support forces and postural
changes would be measured on a group of subjects and be used to develop the
model. Inputs to the kinetic model are posture, weight distribution, and support
forces. Outputs from the model will be computations of forces and moments at the
joints between the human body segments. This kinetic model will include the
kinematic linkage of the human, based on anatomical structure, which has been
validated based on past and current studies by the investigator. This kinematic
linkage simulation can be scaled to fit size and movements of individual human
subjects. The weight distribution will be estimated from anthropometric
measurements for each of the body segments. This research is in collaboration
with an industrial partner, Johnson Controls, Inc., a designer and manufacturer
of automotive seats. However, this research also has potential application for
any seating industry that must provide appropriate support for task function,
e.g., military, office, medical, etc. This funding would provide support for an
engineering graduate student to perform part of her Ph.D. research in
collaboration with the industrial partner. ***