* 9712258
* SBIR PHASE II:  A Compact, Intense Positron Beam Source for Materials Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Ruth Shefer, Newton Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 12/31/2001
* USD 299,986.00

9712258 Shefer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop the first turn-key, self-shielded accelerator-based intense positron
beam source for use in research and industrial laboratories. Positron beams are
powerful diagnostic probes for the nondestructive evaluation of metals,
semiconductors, and polymers as well as for fundamental investigations of
materials structure. A major impediment to the further development and use of
positron-based diagnostics is the lack of suitable sources of intense slow
positron beams. Presently-available radioisotope or electron LINAC sources are
much too large and expensive for use in a laboratory or industrial environment.
The positron source is based on the production of the short-lived (+-emitter 13N
via the light ion reaction 12C(d,n)13N. The Phase I study showed that a low
energy deuteron accelerator with a specially-designed carbon target and positron
moderator will be able to provide slow positron fluxes equal to or greater than
107 e+/sec. The source, to be constructed in Phase II, will utilize a compact,
high current accelerator. In addition to providing a relatively intense beam,
the accelerator-based source will be easy to operate, and will contain little
residual radioactivity when not in use. The initial market for the 13N-based
intense slow positron source developed in this program will be university and
industrial laboratories in the U.S. and abroad which are already using positron
beams. The availability of the proposed source will facilitate the more
widespread use of positron-based diagnostic techniques for semiconductors and
metals. If these techniques come into routine use, the customer base for a
diagnostic instrument based on this source may include the majority of
semiconductor manufacturing facilities. ***