* 9712889
* Examining Sediment Transport and Dynamics as Part of the    Lake Superior KITES Project in collaboration with           Cross-Margin Transport... Solids in Lake Superior
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2005
* James Churchill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 02/28/2005
* USD 1,003,135.00

9712889 Churchill Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This is a
collaborative research project involving investigators from several academic
research institutions. The research is being conducted under the auspices of the
NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program.
This collaborative, interdisciplinary 5-year research program will entail an
integrated program of field and laboratory studies and mathematical modeling to
quantify the role of coastal currents and thermal fronts in mediating cross-
margin transport in Lake Superior. The western shore of Lake Superior's Keweenaw
Peninsula exhibits a dramatic coastal jet known as the Keweenaw Current. A
strong, shore-parallel density front, the thermal bar, also is characteristic of
this region and persists long into the summer. The goal of the proposed work is
to determine the physical, chemical, and biological effects that arise from the
intense physical forcing on this system, and specifically, to elucidate how
these effects interact temporally and spatially to define distinct nearshore and
offshore environments in Lake Superior. This project represents the first effort
to model coupled physical, chemical, and biological processes in the coastal
zone of Lake Superior where both vertical and horizontal thermal structure and
transport processes are important. The research team is divided into three
subgroups: Physical Processes, Chemical Gradients, and Biological Communities.
The Physical Processes group will examine the relative importance of all forcing
factors (e.g., wind-driven variability, baroclinic instability) that govern
cross margin transport using in situ observations, numerical modeling, and
satellite observations. The Chemical Gradients group will characterize
nearshore-offshore differences in distributions of chemical species, eval uate
chemical tracers of water and sediment movement, and investigate differences
(inshore vs. offshore) in chemical cycles induced by the current. The Biological
Communities group will determine how gradients in primary production, trophic
structure, and rates of material transformation develop. All three groups will
interact closely throughout the project to obtain and share complementary data
sets and to derive a coupled physical/chemical/biological model of the system.
The detailed, process-level understanding achieved by this project will advance
our quantitative understanding of the processes that regulate the transport,
transformation and fate of biologically, chemically and geologically important
matter in coastal regions and provide a firm basis for future management
decisions on how best to preserve the pristine nature of Lake Superior. The
basic objective of this component of the Project is to better understand and
model the dynamics of sediments off the Keweenaw Peninsula. The field program
will focus on factors controlling the movement of solids along the Peninsula as
well as processes which carry solids from shallower to deeper waters of the
lake. Processes to be examined include storm-induced currents, surface and
internal wave motions, variations in the strength of the Keweenaw current and
instabilities of the Keweenaw current. Special attention will be given to the
influence of thermal bar circulation. The study will also include an
investigation of small-scale processes influencing sediment resuspension and
motion in the bottom boundary layer. A modeling effort will build on the
findings of the field observations in developing a 3-D model of fine sediment
transport. Also to be addressed as part of our modeling program are issues of
how settling particles become incorporated into the bottom, and how sediment
movement influence the long-term fluxes and distribution of constituents within
the lake.