* 9712340
* Support for Paleobotanical Collection at the University of  Kansas Natural History Museum and Biodiversity Research     Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Thomas Taylor, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/2000
* USD 179,944.00

9712340 Taylor The objective of this project is to curate, compactorize and
computerize the large and important collection of fossil plants that became part
of the University of Kansas Natural History Museum and Biodiversity Research
Center (KUNHM) in 1995. The collection has previously lacked both adequate space
and curatorial support, as specimen data will be entered into a computer
database at the same time that the specimens are curated. The collection
consists of approximately 200,000 specimens, including ancillary material, and
contains fossils of all plant groups from unicellular algae to flowering plants,
ranging in age from Precambrian to Pleistocene. The largest and most important
part of this collection consists of Permian and Triassic plants from Antarctica,
including several thousand silica permineralizations (in which internal anatomy
is preserved), the rarest form plant fossil preservation. This is the largest
colletion of permineralized Antarctic plants in the world and includes a variety
of permineralized wood with preserved growth rings, which can be used to
reconstruct high-latitude paleoclimates during these time periods. The
collection will be organized stratigraphically, curated, computerized, and
become accessible to other scholars in the field. Since it will be databased,
scholars will be able to search the collection either stratigraphically or
systematically.