* 9712592
* Dissertation Research:  Political Economy and Household     Organization at Jachakala Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 6,360.00

Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Christine Beaule will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct excavations at the site of
Jachakala as well as two nearby archaeological occurrences located in the La
Joya region of the Bolivian Andean highlands. The sites extend in time from ca.
800 to 1,200 AD and thus cover a period which predates, is contemporary with and
postdates the nearby Tiwanakian empire. Through a series of both test pits and
more extensive lateral excavations she will recover information from a sample of
domestic structures which will allow her to determine the degree of synchronous
economic and status variability among households and how this changed over time.
She is interested in both the degree of craft specialization which is present
and the extent to which this correlates with elite status within a community. MS
Beaule will also collect datable ceramics from an extensive series of irrigation
canals associated with these sites to determine when they were constructed and
how large scale cooperative agriculture related to social and political changes
which form the core of her study. While archaeologists have focused on the
development of social complexity at major Andean sites, relatively little is
known about the processes that led to smaller scale social changes which took
place in more rural hinterland areas. Thus extensive excavations have been
conducted at Tiwanaku which served as empire capital. La Joya lies just beyond
the boundary of this empire and MS Beaule wishes to understand whether the rise
of a stratified culture there was essentially independent or was stimulated by
Tiwanakian influence. The project has a second theoretical component.
Archaeologists have come to realize that family groups play an important role in
cultural change and have speculated about the relative significance of different
aspects of family economic production on this process. In particular they have
considered the potential relationships between craft specialization within a
family context and emergence of an elite class. The data collected by MS Beaule
will allow her to address this question. This research is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on the rise of social complexity. It will
provide basic archaeological data for a poorly known and potentially important
region and it will contribute to the professional development of a promising
young scientist.