* 9712360
* The NATO Advanced Study Institute (ASI) on Nanostructured   Materials:  Science and Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Frank Huband, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 04/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9712360 Frank L. Huband and Gan-Moog Chow ASEE Partial travel
support will be provided to a group of about eight young academic researchers to
participate at the NATO-Advanced Study Institute (ASI) on science and technology
of nanoparticle synthesis, processing and nanostructured materials to be held on
August 11-21, 1977, at St. Petersburg, Russia. The Institute is aimed at
providing advanced lectures on recent developments by invited speakers to
selected advanced Ph.D. students, postdoctoral fellows and junior scientists;
exchanges of scientific opinions among all participants from different
countries; and networking and fostering collaborations particularly among young
scientists. Tutorial topics include synthesis and processing of particles and
thin layers, particle consolidation and assembly of structures, chemistry and
physics of surfaces and interfaces, and related manufacturing processes and
applications. Besides plenary lectures, poster sessions, small group
discussions, and informal interactions will be encouraged. A book will be
published in the NATO-ASI Series shortly after the meeting. The NSF funds will
be used for selected scientists and engineers to attend the Institute. Travel
funds from this grant will be used only for U.S. citizens, nationals, and
permanent residents. Young scientists and engineers, advanced Ph.D. students or
within five years after completion of their Ph.D., will receive priority. By
considering the emerging topic of research to be discussed at the Institute, the
quality of the lectures, the exposure of young U.S. scientists and engineers to
the international environment, this activity will contribute to the formation of
young specialists in U.S. and to development of long-term ollaborations with top
researchers in the world.