* 9712995
* Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution Workshop, Hobart, Tasmania,  Australia, July 6-11, 1997
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Ross Powell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 14,000.00

Powell OPP 9712995 Abstract The Antarctic sedimentary record has already yielded
high- resolution information on paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic changes,
particularly on ice marginal and outlet glacier fluctuations and in lacustrine
and marine ecology and biogeochemistry. A coordinated SCAR-GLOCHANT (Global
Change and the Antarctic) and PAGES (Past Global Changes) initiative on
circumpolar paleoenvironmental research detailing the last 250 thousand years,
will provide a solid basis for the understanding of present and future
variability in the Antarctic. The coordinated SCAR-PAGES initiative, termed
ANTIME (Antarctic Ice Margin Evolution), will be focused in two streams: Stream
1 (last 20 thousand years) focuses on the last deglaciation and interglacial
environmental, climatic, and ice-sheet variability. Stream 2 (last 250 thousand
years) will focus on the environmental, climatic, and ice-sheet response to
glacial- interglacial cycles. A workshop will be held in Hobart, Tasmania,
Australia during 6- 11 July, 1997, to commence the ANTIME initiative. This award
supports travel for U.S. scientists to participate in the ANTIME workshop. The
principal result of the workshop will be a draft science and implementation plan
for future research priorities. It will include information about potential
opportunities for collaboration and cooperation among individual and national
Antarctic programs.