* 9712984
* Dissertation Research: Archaeological Survey of the NW      Jezireh, Syria
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Richard Zettler, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 11,883.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Zettler, Mr. Richard Dante will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Following preliminary field research in the area
carried out over the last several years, Mr. Dante will conduct an
archaeological survey of a region located in northern Syria along the east bank
of the Euphrates river, ca. 65 km from the Turkish border. This upland
hinterland is associated with the site of Tell se-Sweyhat which was occupied
during the Early Bronze Age in the 3rd millennium BC. The site itself consists
of a 14 meter high oval mound situated amid a rectangular lower tell. It covers
ca. 45 hectares and documents the rise of an urban way of life in the Near East.
At a nearby satellite community situated at a lower elevation near the Euphrates
river Mr. Dante has discovered numerous storage silos and botanical analysis
suggests that they contained winter feed for livestock. These results, together
with ethnographic counterparts, suggest a system of seasonal pastoral
transhumance with livestock moved to the uplands to graze during summer and then
down to riverine locations to feed on stored silage during winter months of the
year. To test this model, Mr. Dante needs to search for upland sites and this
forms the focus of the proposed research. Mr. Dante and his colleagues will rely
on detailed analysis of satellite photographs to locate promising archaeological
areas. These will then be surveyed and sites located will be plotted and mapped
in detail. Surface materials will be collected to allow ceramic dating. With
this information it should then be possible to combine upland and lowland data
to reconstruct a year round settlement pattern. In both prehistoric as well as
modern times marginal rainfall conditions has made dry water farming in northern
Syria extremely risky and archaeologists wish to understand how complex urban
societies developed in a seemingly unlikely area. Mr. Dante believes that
pastoralism which is adapted to environmental uncertainly played a crucial role
and that civilization developed on this base. This project will provide data
needed to evaluate this hypothesis. It will also assist in training a promising
young scientist.