* 9712410
* Automated Perturbation Theory for Hamiltonian Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Katherine Yelick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2000
* USD 97,230.00

Many non-linear problems in dynamics fall under the general theory of
perturbations. Important examples include the attitude and orbital stability of
satellites, the identification of molecules by spectroscopy, and the stability
of beams in accelerators. These multidimensional systems are not integrable, but
perturbation methods can be applied to transform them to approximations with
fewer degrees of freedom. Most of the time, such approximations are performed by
elementary procedures with no mathematical sophistication, with the result that
the calculations become enormous. The goal of this project is to build a toolbox
for solving dynamical systems, specifically targeted to perturbation methods for
Hamiltonian systems. The toolbox will be flexible enough to treat efficiently
different classes of systems will allow researchers to explore new problems,
experiment with new transformations, and verify published results. As a
demonstration of usefulness, flexibility and efficiency, an analytical theory
will be developed for lunar satellites at low altitude. Planners for lunar
survey missions, such as the Clementine mission in 1994, seek orbits appropriate
for reconnaissance. They need to predict the long-term behavior of a satellite
in order to select an orbit with low eccentricity (for constant sensor altitude)
and fixed pericenter (to economize fuel in maneuvers). At present, orbit
selection is largely a matter of guesswork. Using crude approximations, planners
choose possible orbits which are then checked by numerical integration. Without
a global view of the long-term dynamics, mission planners can only hope they
sampled wisely. Generating ``maps'' of long-term phase space from an analytical
model will remove the guesswork. Such maps have already proved useful in mission
planning for earth satellites.