* 9712447
* PEET: Monography, Phylogentics, and Developing Expertise    in New World Pleurostict Scarab Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Brett Ratcliffe, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 784,912.00

9712447 RATCLIFFE The beetle family Scarabaeidae has approximately 27,800
species. The pleurostict scarabs form a clade within the family and include the
subfamilies Melolonthinae, Rutelinae, Dynastinae, Cetoniinae, Euchirinae, and
Phaenomeridinae. The clade constitutes about 75% of the family (or 69% of the
Scarabaeoidea). The pleurostict scarabs remain poorly known taxonomically, and
only about 50% of the genera in the New World can be identified to genus with
reliability. Moreover, the current classification of the pleurostict scarabs is
based on taxonomic constructs from the last century that do not reflect
relationships of taxa. This project, by Brett Ratcliffe and coworkers, will
result in phylogenetic analyses of all tribes of the pleurostict clade in order
to provide a stable classification of the pleurostict scarabs. This phylogeny-
based classification will provide the scientific context for understanding
origins of groups, character trait evolution, and implications for species
concepts and modes of speciation. The new classification will form the
foundation for a taxonomic key to the 320 genera of New World pleurosticts that
will be produced in both print and electronic format. In addition, four poorly
known, monophyletic groups of New World pleurostict scarabs will be monographed:
Gymnetini (Cetoniinae), Pelidnota and related genera, Trizogeniates, and
Platycoelia (all Rutelinae). This research will create electronic databases of
specimen-level information, character data, geographic and temporal
distributions, catalogs, and images. Monographs of the four groups, in addition
to the key, will be produced in electronic and print formats. The research will
contribute to the development of computer infrastructure for organizing and
accessing knowledge about scarab beetles, and it will establish the foundation
for future work in scarab systematics. To accomplish all of these goals, the PI
and post-doctoral associate will train two Ph.D.-level students who will becom e
proficient in modern monographic, taxonomic, and phylogenetic methods and
electronic dissemination of information.