* 9712355
* PEET: Classical and Molecular-Based Monographic Revision of the Cephalobina: Integrating Databases and Training in      Microbivore, Plant and Animal Nematology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2003
* Steven Nadler, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 761,584.00

9712355 NADLER Nematodes, the most abundant multicellular organisms on earth,
are important components of global biodiversity, play key roles in aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystems, and impact agriculture, veterinary science, and
medicine. Certain species are important Omodel systemsO for the study of animal
genetics and development. Correct identifications of named species, correct
descriptions of species not yet named, and accurate assessments of the
historical (phylogenetic) relationships among species, are critically important
for the future development of nematode research. However, nematode species
diversity is poorly known, and presently there are few taxonomists trained to
work with these animals. In this work, Steven Nadler and James Baldwin will
conduct a comprehensive monographic study of cephalobine nematodes (suborder
Cephalobina), a group of nematodes found everywhere in the soil, training a new
generation of nematode taxonomists in the process. Although most Cephalobina
feed on bacteria, there is evidence that they are related to certain
economically important plant and animal parasitic nematodes. This study will
find out whether such relationships can be substantiated. Cephalobina also play
an important role in regulating available nutrients in healthy ecosystems, and
their distribution may prove useful as indicators of environmental disturbances
by humans. This study will provide some of the accurate species identifications
needed to evaluate these ecosystem effects more efficiently. These organisms may
also be of utility as simple models to understand basic biological processes
such as development and aging. The work should provide new experts in nematode
taxonomy, new tools applicable to the study of all nematode groups, and
information on cephalobine nematodes that is widely and conveniently accessible
through Internet access to identification aids and databases.