* 9712950
* TQO:  A Study of the Adoption and Implementation of Quality Programs at the Work Unit Level
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Joseph Pignatiello, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mariann Jelinek
* 08/31/2000
* USD 204,345.00

Poole A Study of the Adoption and Implementation of Quality Programs at the Work
Unit Level Abstract No matter how well-designed an organization-wide quality
program might be, it will fail to have an effect if it is not adopted by the
organization's work units. The willingness of work units to adopt and fully
implement quality programs determines the ultimate impact and effectiveness of
these programs. There is a dearth of knowledge concerning the adoption and
implementation of quality programs by work units. Hackman and Wageman's (1995)
review of total quality management research indicated that of 99 studies they
reviewed, only 4 assessed degree of implementation of quality programs. Given
the high rate of discontinuation of quality initiatives, knowledge of the
factors that promote adoption and effective implementation of quality programs
would be useful from both a theoretical and practical standpoint. This project
investigates three interrelated explanations of the adoption and implementation
of quality programs: structural, process and institutional explanations.
Dependent variables are decision to adopt, degree of implementation of quality
program, and degree of effectiveness of quality program. The study will
investigate the ability of the three models to predict adoption and degree of
implementation of quality programs within a large health care organization.
+f/ªÛ=+ ± ╝- ¼- + + + n ¸ P u c j k t u ± ╝ ª - ª + + -! -! -! -! -! -! -! -! -!
-! -! -! -! -! -! -!ª K @¹+ Normal a ` A@ +- ` Default Paragraph Font + + ++++
++ + n + ` + ª dean A:\Poole.doc+@HP DeskJet 520 Printer LPT1: DESKJETC HP
DeskJet 520 Printer HP DeskJet 520 Printer ` ( -Ð , , A ^ ª | » Ó a ░ a Ó HP
DeskJet 520 Printer ` ( -Ð , , A ^ ª | » Ó a ░ a Ó s 5 s s 1 + Times New Roman +
Symbol &amp;+ Arial ` q ª f h ▀ &amp; ▀ &amp; T + ª $