* 9712526
* RPG: Quantitative Assessment of Performance in Complex      Multisensory Human-Interface Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Corinna Lathan, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 07/31/1998
* USD 18,430.00

The objectives of this planning grant are to identify important human-interface
design issues associated with complex multisensory interface, to identify
quantitative measures to assess performance in environments that use these
interfaces, and to develop projects using advanced interfaces in the
rehabilitation community. Possible applications include virtual reality therapy,
web-based quantitative assessment, and the interfacing of medical devices with
telecommunications to provide care in the home (tele-care). The methodology will
be to explore potential advanced interfaces from a human computer interface
design perspective and also to explore methods for quantifying performance in
such environments. Two tasks will be accomplished during the time frame of the
planning grant, assessing interface hardware and designing evaluation tasks.
Theoretical models of the human as an information processor can help to approach
the evaluation of input and output devices for 2D and 3D tasks. A conceptual
model will be developed to identify and assess the important parameters of these
devices. In particular, the human control loop will be focused on to optimize
human performance. Advanced interface devices may include 3D mice, hand/finger
trackers, head and eye trackers, and haptic interfaces. Haptic interfaces are of
particular interest such as the interaction of force and visual feedback on
human performance. Classic human performance methods will be used to test the
interface devices. A test battery will be developed to evaluate the
appropriateness of using simple tasks for assessment of performance. Measures of
motor control will be tested using a movement time task based on Fitts law and
classic teleoperator tasks such as "peg in the hole" will be used to test
manipulation capabilities of the interface devices.