* 9712026
* Trends in Intergroup Contact and Racial Attitudes Among     U.S. Youths, 1975-1994
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Steven Tuch, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/1999
* USD 75,935.00

This is a study of trends in racial attitudes among American youth. Despite
decades of progress in black-white relations, including a narrowing of the
racial gap in socioeconomic status and a steady decline in white Americans'
overt expressions of racial animosity, widespread racial inequalities and
prejudices persist, and there is some evidence that racial hostility among
adolescents is on the rise. This research examines the current status and recent
history of intergroup relations among American youth, with a particular focus on
the factors that promote positive interracial attitudes and experiences. Drawing
on data from a two-decade-long series of nationally representative annual
surveys of high school seniors ("Monitoring the Future: A Continuing Study of
the Lifestyles and Values of Youth"), this project will examine trends in the
racial attitudes and interracial experiences of young black and white Americans
from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s and test a multivariate explanatory model
that links the racial attitudes of youths to their opportunities for interracial
contact in a variety of formal and informal settings. The model distinguishes
among three key dimensions of interracial contact: opportunities for contact,
frequency of contact, and closeness of contact; and among four outcomes:
adolescents' perceptions of the relations between blacks and whites, their
degree of concern about racial issues, their evaluation of their own personal
experiences with members of other races, and their endorsement of interracial
ties. By examining the nature, extent, and consequences of interracial contact
among young people, this research will provide new insight into the future of
American race relations. It will provide needed information about issues of
concern to school administrators, community leaders, and others concerned with
implementing effective interventions to improve the racial attitudes of
adolescents and the racial climate in this country.