* 9712765
* Quasi-One-Dimensional Correlated Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 225,000.00

9712765 Campbell Quasi-one-dimensional correlated electronic materials offer a
unique opportunity for progress in quantum many-body physics. The theoretical
problems are tractable, better than in higher dimensions. The numerical and
theoretical techniques can be developed and compared with experiments and often
against available exact solutions. This grant to a senior theorist supports work
on two related classes of physically relevant 1D models, spin -Peierls and
Peierls- Hubbard models. Both classes involve strong interplay between electron-
electron interactions and electron- phonon interactions, including the quantum
phonons. The research makes use of many of the state-of-the-art techniques, two
of the recently developed variants of quantum Monte Carlo, the Stochastic Series
Expansion and Constrained Path Monte Carlo. In addition, use will be made of the
exact diagonalization techniques, exploiting Maximum-Entropy techniques for
analytic continuation and also boundary condition averaging for extrapolations
to the thermodynamic limit. The calculations will be carried out for the
physical observables such as, spin susceptibility, dynamic structure factors,
NMR relaxation rates which will also be compared to the experiments. %%% With
the advent of technological interest in conducting polymers, the community of
condensed matter theorists has found a wonderful opportunity. Here we have
complex systems with subtle electronic and mechanical properties in one
dimension. The latter is mathematically the simplest configuration to look for
complex solutions. It also proves to be a remarkable touchstone, one where the
complex theoretical techniques can be tested for their applicability and
accuracy. This grant is to consider some of the newly discovered materials with
novel properties and to search for ways one can calculate them theoretically
using cutting edge techniques. ***