* 9712870
* Impact of the Keweenaw Current on Cross Margin Transport in Lake Superior: Physical Processes, Chemical Gradients, and  Biological Distributions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Anthony Vodacek, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/1998
* USD 18,578.00

9712870 Vodacek Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This is a
collaborative research project involving eleven investigators from five academic
research institutions. The research is being conducted under the auspices of the
NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program.
This collaborative, interdisciplinary 5-year research program will entail an
integrated program of field and laboratory studies and mathematical modeling to
quantify the role of coastal currents and thermal fronts in mediating cross-
margin transport in Lake Superior. The western shore of Lake Superior's Keweenaw
Peninsula exhibits a dramatic coastal jet known as the Keweenaw Current. A
strong, shore-parallel density front, the thermal bar, also is characteristic of
this region and persists long into the summer. The goal of the proposed work is
to determine the physical, chemical, and biological effects that arise from the
intense physical forcing on this system, and specifically, to elucidate how
these effects interact temporally and spatially to define distinct nearshore and
offshore environments in Lake Superior. This project represents the first effort
to model coupled physical, chemical, and biological processes in the coastal
zone of Lake Superior where both vertical and horizontal thermal structure and
transport processes are important. The research team is divided into three
subgroups: Physical Processes, Chemical Gradients, and Biological Communities.
The Physical Processes group will examine the relative importance of all forcing
factors (e.g., wind-driven variability, baroclinic instability) that govern
cross margin transport using in situ observations, numerical modeling, and
satellite observations. The Chemical Gradients group will characterize
nearshore-offshore differences in distributions of chemical species, evaluate
chemical tracers of water and sediment movement, and investigate differences
(inshore vs. offshore) in chemical cycles induced by the current. The Biological
Communities group will determine how gradients in primary production, trophic
structure, and rates of material transformation develop. All three groups will
interact closely throughout the project to obtain and share complementary data
sets and to derive a coupled physical/chemical/biological model of the system.
The detailed, process-level understanding achieved by this project will advance
our quantitative understanding of the processes that regulate the transport,
transformation and fate of biologically, chemically and geologically important
matter in coastal regions and provide a firm basis for future management
decisions on how best to preserve the pristine nature of Lake Superior. This
particular project will contribute to the activities of the Physical Processes
subgroup that will measure currents, thermal, and density structure in order to
define the spatial and temporal extent of the Keweenaw Current and thermal bar.
After suitable algorithm development, satellite imagery will be used to track
the transport of organic matter. .