* 9712388
* Equality Reasoning: Word and Unification Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Christopher Lynch, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 142,602.00

This project concerns equational reasoning, with emphasis on word and
unification problems. The investigation comprises graphs, congruence closure and
equational unification, along with further development of these topics, and
combinations of these topics. The objective is to develop new decidability and
complexity results, and to design and implement efficient algorithms. The
approach to word problems will use the rewriting paradigm, concentrating on
procedures and data structures for computing complete/canonical sets of rewrite
rules. In particular, the method using SOUR graphs for completing rewrite
systems will be investigated, particularly the way in which SOUR Graphs can be
used to develop procedures for solving the word problem in certain classes of
theories. The first part of the research will be to examine the procedure in its
simplest form, on string rewriting systems. Once methods are developed to solve
the word problem in its simplest form, those methods will be moved back into
pure equational logic, and finally into full first order equational logic. For
ground equational theories, the plan is to investigate techniques for computing
congruence closures based on the rewriting paradigm developed in studying
Shostak's congruence closure method. Applications to combinations of decision
procedures will be investigated. The relationship between the congruence closure
method and SOUR graphs will be investigated and exploited. In unification, the
concentration is on semantic unification, where some of the function symbols
have semantics associated with them, usually specified in the form of an
equational theory. The main focus of the applications is automated reasoning and
symbolic computation. E-unification problems arising in process algebra.
Knowledge representation and constraint solvers will also be investigated. Both
theoretical and practical issues will be studied: (1) on the theoretical side,
decidability and complexity issues on variou s equational unification and
disunification problems will be investigated---this is a continuation of work
done over the past several years; (2) on the practical side, the goal is to come
up with efficient algorithms along with fast implementations, making use of
heuristics. Implementations will be incorporated into the Unification Workbench,
a library of unification algorithms.