* 9712572
* A Diet of Snow: Energetics and Nutrition of Leptocephalus   Larvae
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Joseph Torres, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 299,987.00

Leptocephali are the unusually large, transparent larvae of five orders of bony
fishes. They are found at warm temperate and tropical latitudes throughout the
world ocean and during peak periods of reproduction form an important component
of the blue water micronekton/macrozooplankton community. However, their
importance is not one of numbers and biomass, it is in the fact that they are
(polar oceans excepted) a globally distributed group of unique trophic
specialists. For the 230 years between their discovery and 1993, a phase I
leptocephalus was never observed with food in its gut. However, recent
histological evidence suggests that phase I leptocephali may ingest larvacean
houses and zooplankton fecal pellets. Further evidence suggests that particulate
organic material (POM) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) provide an important
source of nutrition. Both particulate and dissolved organic material comprise
the major carbon reservoir in the world ocean, yet their significance to pelagic
metazoan life remains a cipher. To describe the leptocephalus trophic niche,
larvacean houses and the larvae will be examined and the proteoglycan structure
of both will be determined; gut morphology will be examined (including gut
contents, if present) in four different species. Sites of nutrient uptake will
be determined via radiolabelled amino acids and autoradiography. Daily metabolic
demands will be quantified by determining diel consumption rates of individual
larvae. Growth of the larvae will be determined by microincremental analysis of
otoliths and compared to growth indices determined by RNA DNA analysis.
Proximate and elemental composition will provide values for the calories and
carbon stored in the living populations and their daily production. The
leptocephalus larval form may be the only example of a vertebrate that obtains
its nutrition from DOM and POM. If this is the case, leptocephali would comprise
a unique trophic link in the pelagic food web. Our research will answer the
riddle of how leptocephali acquire and utilize energy and describe the
leptocephalus larva's position in the trophic hierarchy of the pelagial.