* 9712439
* Interdisciplinary Social Sciences Research Facility:  Linked Data Archive and Statistical Servers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Robert Kaufman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Political Science and Sociology
Departments at Ohio State University will create a linked Data Archive Unit and
a Statistical and Data Manipulation Unit as the first phase of a longer term
plan designed to enhance the research productivity of a large number of senior
researchers and graduate students in both departments. The system will be built
around a Gateway G6-200 Windows NT and a HP Netserver LH2 Pro 6/200 for
statistical and data manipulation, and a PC w/CD-Writer, second CD-Writer and
600 recordable CD as well as HP Netserver LH5/166 for data storage. Both the
Political Science and Sociology Departments at Ohio State University are well-
ranked nationally with respect to their research and graduate training. The
research conducted in these departments encompasses a wide array of substantive
topics as well as research methodologies. Yet a large core of researchers in
both disciplines employ a common quantitative methodology centered on the
collection and analysis of large scale social surveys and other large data bases
which will clearly benefit from the instrumentation. A sampling of topics to be
examined include: structural determinants of race-sex labor market segregation
and earnings; racial residential segregation, social isolation and homicide;
aging, status and sense of control; strategic position taking and the timing of
voting decisions in Congress; democratization and war; a study of Black voting
in the 1996 election; and general voting patterns in the same year. The
instrumentation will be used extensively by students and thus serve a major
training function.