* 9712263
* Dynamic Chemical Processes of Radicals and Carbenes at      Carbonaceous Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,10/31/2000
* John Miller, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 10/31/2000
* USD 266,000.00

9712263&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, focuses on the
study of the chemistry of modifying and controlling the surface properties of
amorphous and diamond forms of carbon. Professor Miller and his students at
Western Michigan University will use a broad range of ultrahigh vacuum surface
tools to characterize these surfaces. The chemical modification of these
surfaces will involve photochemically initiating reactions of these carbon
surfaces with a variety of radical species. This thrust offers promise in
developing ways to chemically modify the highly unreactive surfaces of carbon,
particularly in the form of diamond. In addition to these fundamental
experimental activities molecular dynamics calculations will be applied to
better understand the chemistry that occurs at these surfaces involving carbenes
and radicals and to develop simulations of these reactions that can be used in
undergraduate and graduate teaching settings. The use of carbon materials in the
semiconductor field is limited by the unreactive nature of their surfaces. In
this work photochemically initiated reactions that have been shown to be
feasible on both amorphous carbon and diamond surfaces will be further studied
to optimize the control of these chemical reactions. Successful chemical
modification of these carbon surfaces offers the potential to use carbon,
especially diamond, in a number of practical applications that require the
availability of particular surface functionalities including microelectronic
devices, materials requiring robust adhesion, and
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;