* 9712484
* PEET: Monographic Studies in the Cladoniaceae (Lichen-Forming Ascomycetes)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2004
* Rytas Vilgalys, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 866,485.00

9712484 DePriest Lichens, the fungi that form symbiotic associations with
photosynthetic algae or cyanobacteria, are geographically widespread in
occurrence, ecologically important, but understudied taxonomically and
phylogenetically despite their representing one-fifth or more of known fungal
species diversity. This is true in microcosm for the species-rich and highly
conspicuous lichens such as Cladina and Cladonia, which carpet wide expanses of
northern forests and arctic tundra as well as isolated patches on exposed rocky
coasts and tropical sand beaches. These lichens are critical components of their
ecosystems, especially in northern latitudes where they provide food for
reindeer and caribou. Various groups within the lichen family Cladoniaceae have
been the subject of national or regional taxonomic treatments, but the family
remains unsynthesized on a worldwide basis. The absence of a robust taxonomic
framework limits the further use of Cladonia as a model system for the study of
chemical evolution (in "lichen substances"), morphogenesis, and artificial
lichenization. These taxonomic and phylogenetic matters are being addressed by a
team of lichenologists headed by Dr. Paula DePriest at the Smithsonian
Institution, site of one of the world's major collections of lichens, with her
colleague Prof. Samuel Hammer of Boston University, along with colleagues at
Duke University and elsewhere in the U.S. and in Finland, home to a strong
tradition of lichen research. The team will focus on the c. 11 genera and
estimated 500 species in the family Cladoniaceae, using existing collections in
natural history museums and augmenting these with new field collections. A major
emphasis in the research is the acquisition of new sets of characters for
taxonomic discrimination and phylogenetic comparison, including molecular DNA
sequence data and morphological features of hyphal growth of the fungus, the so-
called podetia. The integration of these various kinds of evidence to improve
classification and phylogenetic inference constitutes a pioneering model for the
modernization of lichen systematics. Products of the team's activities will
include traditional publications as well as Web-based outputs.