* 9712927
* Analysis of Two Genes Expressed in Prepatterns in the       Shoot Apex of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Patricia Springer, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/1999
* USD 38,475.00

Springer 9712927 A transposon tagging system has been established using Ds
transposable elements containing reporter genes. A collection of lines, each
containing a Ds element inserted randomly in the Arabidopsis genome, has been
generated. The Ds element carries a reporter gene, allowing the expression
pattern of nearby genes to be monitored via the reporter gene. These lines have
been screened for reporter gene expression in the shoot apex of Arabidopsis
seedlings. Several genes have been identified that are specifically expressed in
discrete domains within the shoot apex. These include genes expressed
specifically in the shoot apical meristem, and genes expressed in domains at the
base of each leaf primordium. Two lines (GT185 and GT522) have been chosen for
further characterization. These lines both exhibit expression of the reporter
gene in a group of cells subtending each organ (rosette leaf, cauline leaf,
flower) and organ primordium. The expression pattern suggests that the genes
controlling the reporter gene may be involved in the establishment of a boundary
between the shoot apical meristem and organ primordia. As a first step in the
characterization of the genes controlling reporter gene expression in these two
lines, the reporter gene expression pattern will be carefully analyzed at
different developmental stages. The genes controlling reporter gene expression
will be cloned by amplification of DNA flanking the Ds insertion. The genes will
be molecularly characterized by sequencing and in-situ hybridization. The
relationship between GT185, GT522 and two genes that have previously been shown
to play a role in meristem function will be examined.