* 9712448
* Eye Movements and Language Representation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Gary Raney, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 27,483.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Gary Raney will purchase a Dual-
Purjkinje-Image eyetracker with autostaging and video upgrades. It has a rated
accuracy of 3 minutes of arc and a response time of less than 1 ms which allows
fixation position to be sampled at a high rate. The enhanced video upgrade
provides the experimenter with alignment feedback so the system may be
continually monitored without disturbing the subject. Three minutes of arc
represents 1/4 the width of a character in a typical reading study and this will
allow Dr. Raney to determine a subject's letter focus with a high degree of
accuracy. The proposed research will explore how passages of text are stored and
retrieved from memory. In each of several studies, individuals will read a
passage once and then read the passage a second time. A common finding is that
people read a text faster during a second reading and this is known as a
repetition effect. The size of the repetition effect will be used as a measure
of how much the first reading facilitates processing during the second. Two
contrasting theoretical models of text repetition effects have been proposed.
One argues that the effect is based on a word's abstract meaning - that `grass`
will have a priming effect if, in a second passage the word `lawn` is
substituted. The other argues that priming is more word and less meaning
specific. To discriminate between these models, individual features of texts
will be systematically manipulated between first and second readings. How these
changes influence reading behavior and repetition effects will be measured by
examining readers' eye movements. The eye tracker will also serve a more general
function and be employed for specific experiments conducted by other faculty
members. It will also be available to undergraduates for specific research
projects.