* 9712596
* SGER: A DSP Based Active Power Filter to Cancel Harmonic    Currents in Low Voltage Electric Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Wajiha Shireen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 07/31/1999
* USD 47,494.00

ECS-9712596 Shireen Typical low voltage electric power distribution systems are
increasingly being contaminated with excessive amounts of harmonic currents due
to the growing use of nonlinear loads. The resulting electrical "pollution",
often propagates for miles along the distribution feeders. More publicized
problem cases have been caused by large single source offenders such as arc
furnaces and megawatt-sized adjustable speed drive systems. These situations
have been handled by electric utilities on a case by case basis. However,
cumulative problems because of the aggregation of thousands of small
residential, commercial and industrial nonlinear loads are much more difficult
to deal with. Thus, there exists the need for new and innovative circuits that
can be placed at end user facilities and on distribution feeders to reduce
harmonic distortions. This research project proposes a Digital Signal
Processor(DSP) based active power filter to cancel harmonic currents in low
voltage electric power distribution systems. In recent years, DSPs have become
an attractive means for the implementation of measurement and control
algorithms, mainly because of their computing speed and low cost compared to
conventional microprocessors used in control applications. The objectives of the
proposed research are: To develop a DSP based control algorithm for a single
phase active power filter to cancel harmonic currents in low voltage electric
power distribution systems. To experimentally evaluate the algorithm on a
laboratory prototype. To verify that the DSP-based active power filter is
capable of providing localized low cost solution to the harmonic problem in
power distribution systems. In view of the proliferation of power electronics
equipment connected to the utility system, various national and international
agencies have been considering limits on harmonic current injection to maintain
a good power quality. The revised IEEE-519-1992 sta ndard, specifies
requirements for the users as well as for the utility companies. Therefore, the
proposed research will make significant contributions that serve the interests
of the utility companies as well as the consumers. DSP-based single phase active
power filters as proposed in this project can have significant contribution in
isolating and neutralizing harmonics generated by a group of single phase
nonlinear loads (such as computers and other electronic office equipment) and
thereby protecting the upstream distribution system. This would provide a
localized low cost solution, that will also be light in weight and occupy
minimum space. The use of a DSP based controller will improve the system
performance significantly compared to existing methods. Digital control by a DSP
will provide fast transient response, high performance and increased
reliability, in addition to the inherent advantages like computational power and
immunity to noise and drift. Also, being programmable the DSP-based controller
can easily be upgraded or modified to meet specific system requirements.