* 9712170
* Nonlinear Control of Underactuated Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Mark Spong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 09/30/2000
* USD 195,700.00

This research project investigates fundamental issues in the design, analysis,
and real-time implementation of nonlinear control laws for underactuated
mechanical systems. This class of systems is quite broad and encompasses
balancing, brachiating, and walking robots, flexible structures of all kinds
including flexible link robots, and flexible joint robots, airplanes and
helicopters, underwater and space vehicles, electric motors, redundant robots,
as well as mechanical system models that include actuator dynamics, and many of
the classical control problems like the ball and beam and cart-pole systems.
Global and semi-global stability and tracking results for classes of
underactuated mechanical systems are investigated in this project. The tools
used are Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods of nonlinear dynamics, geometric
nonlinear control theory, hybrid control, and saturation. The results also apply
to a larger class of systems than have heretofore been investigated using these
techniques. The unifying theme of this research is to exploit the underlying
structure of the nonlinear dynamics to generate `natural closed loop motions`
that make efficient use of passivity and energy. This work complements and
extends existing energy and passivity methods and more recent backstepping
methods, all of which attempt to exploit more fully the inherent nonlinearities
of the system, by `shaping` rather than by `canceling` all of the nonlinearities
in the system. On the experimental side, a number of testbed systems are used to
test analytical research results. The laboratory includes several `gymnastic
robots,` (Acrobots, Pendubots), a three degree-of-freedom air hockey playing
robot, two direct drive robots, and a flexible joint robot. The experimental
component of the research project is of vital importance both to the present
project and to the ultimate goal of creating dextrous machines.