* 9712431
* The Application of Archaeometric Ceramic Data to Questions  of State-Level Organization:  A Case Study from Messenia,   Greece
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 9,025.00

Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Mr. Michael Galaty will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He work has both substantive and
methodological goals. On a substantive level he wishes to determine the degree
to which centralized economic control played a role in the rise of early Greek
state level societies. Methodologically, Mr. Galaty will compare the usefulness
of petrographic vs. weak acid analysis of ceramics to determine ceramic
groupings. Anthropologists wish to know how state level societies arise and are
maintained. What forces in technologically simple societies allow elites to
establish and maintain control? Many have argued that control over crucial
economic resources plays a significant role and early Greek texts suggest that,
in this region of the world at least, this factor comes into strong play. Based
on the results of preliminary research however Mr Galaty believes that the
situation is more complicated. In a chemical analysis of ceramic `course wares`
- non-ritual ceramics which served every day functions such as cooking and
storage - individual regions produced their own pots according to their own
formulas from clays collected at a number of sources. This implies lack of
centralized control over a vital resource. In the current project Mr. Galaty
will increase his sample size to determine whether this conclusion is, in fact,
statistically significant. He will also analyze a class of fineware which served
as wine drinking cups and likely had a ritual function. He postulates that
centralized control, if exercised, occurred in this more formal realm. Chemical
analysis will permit him to determine if clay sources and production methods are
more standardized as theory would predict. In this research both trace element
analysis via weak acid extraction and more standard and widely accepted
petrographic analysis will be conducted. Comparison of the results will serve to
evaluate the validity of a weak acid extraction approach. If its validity is
confirmed it will provide a rapid and low cost tool for trace element studies.
In addition to its methodological and substantive contributions, this research
will assist the professional development of a promising young scientist.