* 9712305
* STTR PHASE I:  Field Emission Displays Based Upon           Diamond-Like Nanocomposite Films
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Craig Outten, Advanced Refractory Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 99,998.00

9712305 Outten **** This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer project, the
proposers will seek to optimize the electronic properties of a revolutionary new
family of thin-@ coating materials, "Diamond-like Nanocomposites (DLN) for use
as a cathode material in field emission displays. This will be accomplished by
doping the DLN films with low work function metals. The performance of the @s
will be evaluated by the magnitude of threshold electric field, total emission
current, emission current density, emission stability, uniformity of emission
sites, and device lifetime. The optimal DLN deposition parameter space will be
mapped and investigated. Device performance will be correlated with film
structure, composition, and electronic properties. The technological/ economic
hurdles to prototype and product development will be analyzed, and based on this
a roadmap developed for eventual large scale integration of DLN technology into
field emission display production.. DLN films represent a novel structure of
matter, and offer significant advantages over many current diamond and diamond-
like carbon thin film coating technologies. The films exhibit a unique and
highly tailorable suite of properties. A low cost approach to large area FED
manufacturing will result from the successful use of DLN thin film technology.
Replacement of conventional materials could result in considerable savings in
materials and production costs. ***