* 9712775
* Transition-Metal Nitrido Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Nancy Doherty, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2000
* USD 320,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
with a contribution for instrumentation from the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities supports reseach on bridged nitrido compounds by Dr. Nancy M.
Doherty, Chemistry Department, University of California at Irvine. New
polynuclear, oligomeric, and polymeric compounds in which nitrido ligands link
transition metals will be synthesized. A variety of metals would be used,
including vanadium, tungsten, ruthenium, and osmium. Although a simple ligand,
nitride engages in pi-bonding that can result in large metal-containing
structures with a variety of electronic, magnetic, and optical properties.
Spectroscopic and physical methods will be used to characterize the compounds so
that composition and structure can be correlated with reactivity and electronic
properties. The goal of the investigation is to achieve a molecular level
understanding of polymetallonitrides by building a series of compounds ranging
from small, soluble polynuclear species that are amenable to characterization in
solution to large polymeric materials. In this way, more systematic approaches
to synthesis and control of bulk properties might be achieved. Metal compounds
containing nitride have potential for development as electronic materials, but a
controlled route to their synthesis has not been found. By examining the steps
in the formation of crystalline metal-nitride chain compounds, understanding of
the details of formation and of the relationship of structure and properties may
result. The findings are relevant to the rational design of metal nitrides and
the mechanism of forming polymeric inorganic materials in general.