* 9712153
* Modeling Heat and Mass Transport in the TAG Active          Hydrothermal Mound Using a Combined Theoretical/            Observational Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 02/28/2001
* USD 202,413.00

Abstract P.I.: Tivey Proposal Number: 97-12153 Institution: WHOI Title: Modeling
heat and mass transport in the TAG active hydrothermal mound using a combined
theoretical/observational approach Ridge-crest hydrothermal systems play a
fundamental role in transferring energy and mass fluxes from the Earth's
interior to its surface. In the fall of 1994, 17 holes were drilled in the 200
meter diameter TAG active hydrothermal mound on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge during
Leg 158 of the Ocean Drilling Program to investigate the fluid flow, geochemical
fluxes, and the subsurface nature of an active hydrothermal mound. This mound is
perhaps the closest mid-ocean ridge analog to Cyprus ore bodies and has an
estimated convective heat flux from the black smokers of 225 MW, and from the
entire mound area of 500-1000 MW. Theoretical calculations will be carried out
to examine the relationships among the different fluids exiting the mound, and
to examine the role of seawater entrainment at TAG, including the amount of
seawater entrained, and what imprint such entrainment leaves in the deposits,
and in fluids exiting the mound. Calculations of transport and reaction will
also be done, allowing establishment of links between fluid chemistry and
observed mineralogy and texture of drillcore samples. The emphasis will be on
modeling processes occurring during the most recent phase of hydrothermal
activity, i.e., related to (i) formation of anhydrite (CaSO4) veins, (ii)
alteration and mineralization associated with veining, (iii) deposition of
chimneys and sulfide crusts at the mound surface, and (iv) formation of fluids
currently exiting the mound. These studies will allow quantification of mass
fluxes and examination of processes involved in mineral deposition, zoning, and
zone refinement in one of the largest known active hydrothermal mounds along the
mid-ocean ridge sys tem.