* 9712598
* Object Recognition in Cluttered Scenes Using                Appearance-Based Parts and Relationships
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Octavia Camps, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir J. Lumelsky
* 08/31/2001
* USD 257,606.00

The recognition of general three-dimensional objects in cluttered scenes remains
a challenging problem. In particular, the design of a good representation
suitable to model large numbers of generic objects that is also robust to
occlusion and segmentation problems, has been an stumbling block in achieving
success. In this research, a new representation using appearance-based parts
(ABPs) and relationships (ABRs) is proposed to overcome these problems. ABPs and
ABRs are defined in terms of closed regions, segmented using the Minimum
Description Length principle, whose appearance is obtained from collections of
images and compactly stored in a hierarchical structure of parametric
eigenspaces. This new representation allows the representation of free form
objects and has several appealing features, namely (1) robustness to
segmentation problems, since it is learned from segmented images; (2) robustness
to occlusion steming from the fact that it is based on parts rather than on
global properties; and (3) ability to handle large object databases, due to its
hierarchical nature. As part of this research a probabilistic model of the
discriminatory power of the proposed representation will be also developed. This
model will be used in a Bayesian framework, based on the PI's previous work, to
design a recognition system. The new representation and the associated
probabilistic model, coupled with a Bayesian reasoning engine, will enable the
system to automatically recognize and locate generic objects in cluttered
scenes. The main contributions of this research are: (1) a new object
representation capable of representing large databases of generic objects that
is also robust to segmentation problems and occlusion; (2) a probabilistic model
of the discriminatory power of the proposed representation and a recognition
system based on a Bayesian framework that does not require the use o f ad hoc
heuristics; and (3) a rigorous experimental protocol to characterize the
performance of the system in the presence of occlusion.