* 9712291
* Experimental and Analytical Investigation of Dynamic Fiber  Pull-Out in Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* John Lambros, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2001
* USD 252,136.00

*** 9712291 Geubelle An experimental and analytical research project will
investigate the fiber debond and pull-out processes in fiber reinforced
polymeric and ceramic matrix composites subjected to dynamic loading conditions.
While extensive work has been performed regarding these two failure mechanisms
under quasi- static loading conditions, and while all preliminary investigations
on that topic indicate a strong dependence on the loading rate, very little is
currently known on how these processes take place under dynamic loading
conditions. The joint experimental and analytical research project aims at
shedding some light on the dynamic debonding and pull-out processes and
constitutes a mandatory preliminary step for the design of impact-tolerant
composite structures. The experimental part of the project consists of dynamic
push-out and pull-out tests performed on various model composites with the aid
of a specially adapted Split Hopkinson Bar apparatus. In addition to macroscopic
load/displacement curves obtained from the elastodynamic response of the bars,
in situ optical observations of the debonding and pull-out processes will be
performed using a photoelastic set-up and a high speed camera, providing
independent measurements of the debonding length and speed. In situ
thermographical measurements on the model composite and post mortem microscopic
analyses of the fracture surfaces will also be performed to capture the possible
occurrence of localized frictional heating which has been shown in some
preliminary investigations to drastically affect the pull-out process.*** The
analytical part of the project has two basic objectives: firstly, detailed
finite element simulations of the experimental set-up will be performed to
characterize with precision the dynamic loading of the composite specimen during
the tests. Secondly, two distinct and complementary numerical schemes (a special
volumetric/cohesive dynamic finite elemen t scheme and a spectral form of the
boundary integral method) will be used to investigate the adequacy of existing
cohesive and friction models to capture the observed fiber debond and pull-out
processes.***