* 9713749
* MOTI: Innovative Service Delivery Strategies and Customer   Segmentation: Integrating Investments in Technology,        Work Process Design, and Human Capital
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Brent Keltner, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 09/30/1999
* USD 260,000.00

9713749 Keltner The goal of this project is to help service companies design and
implement service delivery strategies tailored to the needs of different
customer segments. Information technology, work process design, and human
capital investment are the three key enablers of innovative service delivery.
While these three enablers play a role in all market segments, the relative
importance of each varies with customer product need and company product
offerings. Some market segments will be more conducive to service delivery using
high levels of technology and automation, others to investments in work process
design and human capital which support greater customization. Drawing on both
quantitative and qualitative data analysis, the project will produce evidence on
appropriate combinations of resource investments by customer segment. Three
partner companies in the commercial banking, commercial insurance and
telecommunications industries will collaborate in collecting organizational,
technical, operational, and economic data. Data collection will focus on the
"mid-range" customer segments for high-end retail, small business and medium-
sized business customers. Factor analysis and standard regression techniques
will be used to produce empirical findings on how service companies can most
effectively combine resource investments in different customer segments. The
results of this analysis will be used to produce a decision-support tool which
service managers can use in planning their resource investments and will enable
service based companies, who are challenged by competitive pressures, to develop
innovative service delivery strategies that both improve operational
effectiveness and strengthen customer relationships.