* 9713762
* Failure Mechanisms in Artifically Layered Nanocomposites:   An Analytical, Computational, and Experimental Investigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Jagannadham Kasichainula, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2002
* USD 224,138.00

9713762 Zikry Greater understanding of and accurate predictive capabilities of
nanomicrostructurally induced inelastic failure modes in artificially layered
materials is obtained by: (i) synthesis and processing of layered nanostructures
by laser physical vapor deposition and magnetron sputtering to ascertain the
effects of processing defects on material failure; (ii) development of a three
dimensional multiple- slip crystal plasticity constitutive formulation that
accounts for the evolution of immobile and mobile dislocation densities in the
crack-tip region along film interfaces and grain-boundaries in each layer; (iii)
large- scale three dimensional computational and experimental investigation of
dislocation pile-ups and slip- incompatibilities for a detailed investigation of
interfacial and transgranular crack growth as a function of film interfaces,
high angle grain-boundaries, lattice mismatch strains, and nano grain-sizes; and
(iv) novel in- situ TEM and SEM measurements and computational analyses of crack
growth and void coalescence in layered nanocomposites, and development of
scaling methodologies for mechanical testing. The realization of these advances
significantly contributes towards improved capabilities for developing
innovative processing and material synthesis techniques for a new generation of
epitaxially layered nanostructures for optoelectronic and semiconductor devices.
***