* 9713320
* Workshops at ASEE Summer School for Chemical Engineering    Faculty; Snowbird, Utah; August 9-14, 1997
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Bruce Finlayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9713320 Many chemical engineering educators work hard developing
course materials and improving their teaching skills. Once effective techniques
are developed, they should be made available to a wider audience than just one
university. Indeed, since the field of chemical engineering has been changing,
with distillation towers being augmented by membrane separation units, and
packed bed reactors being augmented by CVD reactors, for example, the diffusion
of new techniques and materials is even more important. The Summer School for
Chemical Engineering Faculty is organized by the Chemical Engineering Division
of the American Society for Engineering Education and is held every five years.
The 1997 Summer School will be the twelfth in the series begun in 1931. The
objective of the Summer School is primarily to share course materials already
developed. The method to achieve the objectives will be to meet in a conference
center, with activities planned from morning to night. Workshops in specific
subject areas will enable faculty to share, and demonstrate, their contributions
while interacting with many participants. Special workshops will be oriented
towards Assistant Professors, while plenary lectures will be given that are
applicable to all participants. Workshops are planned in areas that NSF
supports, including biotech, electronic materials, fluid-particle systems,
environmental areas, and the use of computers. In many schools undergraduate
research projects are undertaken in these areas, so that the knowledge and
experience gained in research can be transmitted to undergraduates. It is hoped
that one faculty member will attend from every school in the United States that
awards chemical engineering B.S. degrees. The home institution will supply
travel funds, and the proposal is to pay for on-site expenses for some of the
participants. It is entirely possible that the Summer School will have an impact
on every single B.S. graduate in Chemical Engineering in the Sp ring, 1998, plus
of course all those that come after.