* 9713545
* An Investigation of Carbon Isotope Abundances in ALH84001
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Greg Rau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 07/31/2000
* USD 50,000.00

This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity supports study
of carbon-14 abundances in martian meteorites by Dr. Greg H. Rau of the
Institute of Marine Sciences, University of California, Santa Cruz. The project
is funded by the Office of Polar Programs, the Chemistry Division, and the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Carbon isotopic measurements (C-13/C-12
ratio and C-14 concentration) will be conducted on carbon collected from the
ALH84001 meteorite using discrete inorganic and organic carbon extraction
techniques. The goal of the project is to gain a better understanding of the
sources and possible martian biogenicity of carbon contained in the meteorite.
The work will be conducted as part of a collaborative research project based at
NASA-Ames Research Center where individual acid, UV-laser ablation, and stepped
heating extractions will be performed on AHL84001 samples and terrestrial
analogs. Isotopic analysis will be performed on the carbon dioxide released from
these extraction fractions. The mass and isotopic abundances within the organic
and inorganic fractions will be determined, as well as the degree of terrestrial
contamination of each fraction, and the isotopic carbon ratio of both the
meteorite organic and inorganic carbon. The results will be interpreted in the
context of Martian geology and climate. It is likely that terrestrial carbon
contamination may have influenced the meteorite's organic carbon concentration,
and this will be considered in order to accurately infer Martian
organic/inorganic carbon isotope abundances, fractionations, and organic carbon
formation process. Carbon in planetary samples may be present in inorganic forms
or may have been modified by biological activity. As a result of either physical
or biological forces, the isotopic composition of carbon in the sample may have
been altered to provide a distinctive `signature.` This research brings together
a unique combination of carbon isotope extertise from NASA-Ames, the University
of California, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to investigate
both terrestrial and meteorite samples. The results will aid in determining
whether or not the evidence from martian meteorite ALH84001 is consistent with
biological activity.