* 9713241
* Structured Turbulence Collisionless Dynamics and Magnetic   Field Generation in Astrophysical Plasmas
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Steven Cowley, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 09/30/2001
* USD 265,619.00

ABSTRACT - J. C. McWilliams and S. Cowley Structured Turbulence, Collisionless
Dynamics, and Magnetic Field Generation in Anisotropic Astrophysical Plasmas
This research project is an investigation of some basic problems of plasma
turbulence which are particularly relevant to astrophysical dynamos. The study
will use the galactic dynamo as the primary astrophysical example, but the
results will be relevant also to protogalactic and accretion-disk dynamos. In
particular, the early stages of magnetic amplification at very small scales in
large-Prandtl-number plasmas and the late stages of magnetic energy buildup at
large scale by inverse cascade will be studied with the following objectives:
(1) To determine mechanisms for magnetic energy scale growth at scales within
the viscous dissipation range of fluid turbulence, by ambipolar diffusion,
anisotropic viscosity, or self-consistent nonlinear dynamics. (2) To explore the
physics of plasmas on scales short compared to the collisional mean free path,
but when the evolution is slow compared to the collision frequency, and to
derive fluid-like equations that describe this physics. (3) To study the inverse
cascade in a rotating disk with small-scale forcing, such that the anisotropic
environment provides a physical mechanism for helicity generation. These
problems have not been thoroughly studied in the past, yet they address key
processes which must occur in actual physical dynamos. Analytical theory,
turbulent closure model calculations, and direct numerical solutions of high
Reynolds number fluid equations will be used to attack these problems.
Asymptotic analysis of kinetic equations will be used to describe low
collisionality behavior. Dissipation-range magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) will be
explored by closure calculations and direct numerical solutions at high Prandtl
number, including non-MHD effects such as partial ionization and low
collisionality. Direct numerical solutions of turbulent MHD in an anisotropic
environment w ill be also be calculated, making use where possible of asymptotic
reductions to decrease computational complexity and increase the range of
resolvable scales while retaining the ingredients necessary for self-consistent
dynamo action. This theoretical study will address often overlooked questions of
small- and large-scale dynamos and provide basic understanding of high Prandtl-
number and anisotropic plasma turbulence. ***