* 9713206
* (SGER) Analysis of the Effects of the 1997 Floods in        Western Nevada: Immediate Data Collection Needs for         Characterizing the Physical Signature of Extreme Events
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Saxon Sharpe, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9713206 House Extreme flooding in western Nevada in early January 1997 has
provided a scientifically important opportunity to collect ephemeral field data
that can serve to characterize the physical signature of large flood events in
both fluvial and lacustrine environments in this region. Historical weather and
streamflow records from affected river basins in western Nevada indicate that
previous, comparably extreme events have resulted from analogous
hydroclimatological and hydrometeorological phenomena. Thus, it is likely that
the largest paleoflood events preserved in fluvial and lacustrine settings in
the region resulted from generally similar circumstances. The proposed data
collection effort will focus on high-water mark distribution and flood deposit
characteristics in selected river reaches to evaluate both the fidelity of
persistent flood features to peak flood stages and the sedimentological
characteristics of extreme flood deposits in a variety of depositional settings.
In selected lacustrine environments, water, ostracode, and mollusk samples are
being collected at regular intervals to document time-dependent changes in
geochemical characteristics of both biotic and abiotic lacustrine phenomena. The
ultimate goal of the project is to develop robust geomorphic, sedimentologic,
and geochemical analogs that can be used to discern similarly extreme events in
the stratigraphic record in fluvial and lacustrine environments typical of this
region. It is important to collect the field data as soon as possible because
much of the flood evidence is either ephemeral, time-dependent, or subject to
modification through ongoing mitigation efforts. Impending spring runoff
provides an additional unique opportunity to compare and contrast the effects
from distinctly different types of hydrologic events.