* 9713521
* Nonlinear Control of Liquid Molding of Advanced Composites  with Simulations and Sensor/Actuator Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Jian-Qiao Sun, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2001
* USD 277,634.00

Liquid Composite Molding (LCM) is a versatile and attractive process for high
volume, high performance, and low cost manufacturing of polymer composites that
is gaining prominence in almost all areas of the manufacturing industry. At
present, the processing costs are staggering as every new application or
prototype requires many trial and correction cycles before one can manufacture a
successful part within specifications. The objectives of this project are: (1)
developing a realistic simulation of the LCM process and using the simulation
tool to develop control strategies and to optimize the sensor locations for the
real time controller; (2) formulating non-linear control strategies that can
account for part-to part variation and other sensitive model parameters and lead
to optimal finishing of the molding process; and (3) Verifying the nonlinear
controls for advanced composite manufacturing with experiments. The research has
a balance between theory and experimentation. The outcome of this research may
lead to: (1) numerical simulation of the manufacturing process and an
intelligent computational tool that will help to optimize the sensor and
actuator locations and develop nonlinear control strategies for a given mold
geometry; (2) a nonlinear control theory for advanced composite manufacturing;
and (3) a liquid molding facility that can demonstrate the control of the
composite manufacturing of a realistic part.