* 9713926
* Analytical and Experimental Investigation of Force          Controlled Off-Road Wheeled Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* S. Sreenivasan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2001
* USD 152,452.00

This research project deals with an active control of offroad wheeled vehicles.
An effective control of the force distribution in these systems, particularly
the control of all the wheel-terrain contact forces, is central to achieving
acceptable control of the motion and suspension degrees of freedom of these
vehicles. On uneven terrain, wheeled vehicles possess kinematic and quasi-static
force distribution characteristics that are fundamentally different from those
that vehicles possess on even terrain. If the vehicle-terrain combination are
instantaneously treated as a spatial linkage with closed kinematic loops, an
even terrain leads to an inherent symmetry in these virtual spatial linkeage.
This symmetry leads to singularities in kinematic and static force distribution
behavior of these vehicles. The literature on conventional vehicles for even
surface operation does not address these singularities since these vehicles are
nominally studied as planar motion machines with small perturbations in their
suspension degrees of freedom. Motion and suspension are generally treated as
decoupled problems. On uneven terrain, the symmetry and hence the singularities
are not always present. Using a kinematic-geometric framework based on screw
system theory, an understanding of the mobility (number of degrees of freedom)
and the motion potential (available motion) of wheeled vehicles on uneven
terrain is developed. This framework can also be used to study the force
distribution characteristics of these vehicles by extending the rate
kinematics/static force analysis duality that has been observed in classical
problems in robotics to these kinds of spatial mechanisms. The kinematic-
geometric framework is particularly suited for studying active off-road vehicles
since their system designs typically do not include intentional passive
compliances (lumped or distributed). An extension of the kinematic-geometric
approach to rigid body dynamics of complex systems, known as spatial vector
mechanics is used to study the dynamic behavior of these offroad vehicles. The
project includes both the `analytical/numerical' and `experimental' aspects. The
analytical/ numerical objectives include the development of a Spatial Vector
Mechanics (SVM) framework that combines Screw System Theory and Newrton-Euler
Dynamics using Spatial Vector Notation. The SVM framework allows the
investigation in an integrated manner; to develop general kinematic synthesis
techniques for active off-road wheeled vehicles; to develop a modular dynamic
simulator for performing numerical studies of two classes of wheeled vehicles;
and to develop system-level force control strategies for active off road
vehicles. The experimental task include off-road experiments with an
experimental prototype known as the Force controlled Tricycle (FCT). The FCT is
representative of a class of active vehicles that include two-wheel axles that
can actively vary their axle lengths.