* 9713566
* Analysis and Design of Energy Absorbing Flexurally Loaded   Pultruded Tubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Lawrence Bank, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 02/28/2002
* USD 189,200.00

9713566 Bank This project will study the energy-absorption capacity of composite
material tubes when loaded in bending. The ability to absorb energy in flexural
deformation is required in framed structural systems. This flexural energy
absorption capacity is a central tenant of the design philosophy of steel and
reinforced concrete structures, since it allows these structures to develop
"plastic-hinge" mechanisms prior to failure. Such "hinges" provide reserve
capacity, overall ductility, and an all-important safeguard against catastrophic
failure. It is the objective of this project to demonstrate that pseudo-plastic
hinges can develop in composite material tubular beams, thus, imparting to
composite structural frames an energy- absorption capacity analogous to that
found in conventional steel or reinforced concrete frames. The mechanism by
which a composite material tubular beam develops "stable" energy absorption is,
however, very different from that of a steel or reinforced concrete beam. In
these conventional beams, the energy absorption is obtained due to irreversible
plastic strain in the elasto-plastic materials. It is the purpose of this study
to show that in a composite material tubular beam, energy is absorbed in a
stable manner by progressive "tearing failure" at the tube corners, and that
this provides the beam with a behavior analogous to that of an elasto-plastic
beam. Such a phenomenon has recently been reported but an in-depth study has not
been conducted. This research will investigate the phenomenon in-depth, by use
of experimentation and numerical modeling, and provide recommendations for
design. ***