* 9713617
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Environmental and Industrial Biotechnology and Product Transfer
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Douglas Munnecke, Environmental Biotechnologies Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1999
* USD 15,425.00

9713617 Munnecke Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
project by Dr. Douglas M. Munnecke, Founder and President, Environmental
BioTechnologies, Inc. in San Carlos, CA, and Dr. A.M. Azzam, Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology Research Institute (GEBRI) in Mubarak City for Scientific
Research in Alexandria, Egypt. The objective of this joint project is to
investigate the applications of advanced biotechnology discoveries in various
industries, including food, agricultural and environmental monitoring and
control industries, and the potential for US-Egypt industrial production
cooperation. The two sides intend to: define the market needs and size for
selected industrial bioproducts and bioprocess; identify available American
products and technology for importing into Egypt; and finally initiate contacts
between American and Egyptian biotechnology companies for possible joint
activities. Scope: This project will involve a US scientist with extensive
experience in developing applications for discoveries and advanced research
results in the area of biotechnology, in various fields in the United States. On
the Egyptian side, the cooperating scientist is an experienced chemical
engineering researcher who is now in charge of a major government research
laboratory (GEBRI) with a mission to make possible the utilization of the rapid
advances and discoveries in the field of biotechnology. The work in this project
will seek to utilize the scientific advances made in Egypt and in the US in
biotechnology for economic development in Egypt and in other Middle East
countries. The results can have a major impact on the economic development and
also on the environmental quality, and general health services in these
countries and on their technical cooperation with the United States. Most of the
work will be done in Egypt with support from the US scientist, with the rest to
be done in the United States. This proposal meets INT objective of supporting
US- foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities. ***