* 9713602
* US-India Cooperative Reserach: Laser and Plasma Deposition  and Study of Thin Films of Diamond and Diamond Like Carbon, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* S Agarwal, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2000
* USD 16,935.00

9713602 Agarwal Description: This award is for the US-India Cooperative
Research: Laser and Plasma Deposition and Adhesion of Diamond and Diamond Like
Films. The collaboration in materials science is under the direction of Jagdish
Narayan, North Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh and S.C. Agrawal,
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur. The investigators will examine the
structural and electronic characteristics of diamond and diamond like films
using laser and plasma processing techniques. Complimentary research will be
conducted by researchers at the IIT, Kanpur. Additional research will be done to
improve the adhesion of the films by employing electron donating elements to
stabilize SP3 bonding. Scope: Diamond and diamond like films constitute a very
useful class of advanced materials with applications ranging from corrosion and
erosion resistant protective coatings to advanced microelectronics and display
devices. This research contributes to fundamental knowledge about the basic
physics of these films. The NCSU group headed by Narayan is a world-leader in
this area; the IIT group has complimentary expertise in the electronic
properties of thin films. The scientific results will be published in the public
domain. This research will provide training for graduate students in advanced
materials, nonequilibrium phenomena, and advanced materials characterization.
This new collaboration supports INT objectives. ***