* 9713322
* Experimental and Modeling Studies of the TIPS Membrane      Formation Process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Leonard Bond, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 12/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9713322 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigator: William B. Krantz Affiliation: University of Colorado at Boulder
This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-
element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical
and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. William Krantz
of the University of Colorado. The research involves fundamental studies of the
thermally induced phase separation process (TIPS) for membrane formation. The
process involves cooling a polymer solution to effect phase separation and the
formation of a dense polymer phase which is then recovered and becomes the
membrane. The investigators propose to conduct their studies on fluorinated
polymers due to the potentially wide applicability of these membranes and the
lack of fundamental knowledge on optimal membrane fabrication. A novel aspect of
the research is the use of acoustic time-domain reflectometry (ATDR) to
characterize the thermally induced phase transitions and obtain polymer phase
thickness as a function of time. ATDR can also provide information on membrane
microstructure and is complementary to information obtained through electron
micrography. Finally, the investigators seek to use analogies to alloy
solidification theories to model the TIPS process. The research will provide a
better understanding of membranes formed through thermally induced phase
separation processes. This should have a direct impact on membrane design and
casting procedures to fine-tune pore distributions and membrane thickness.
Application lie in a variety of membrane separation technologies adapted to the
chemical, petroleum and pharmaceutical industries.