* 9713730
* Computational Probability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Bruce Schmeiser, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 253,778.00

9713730 O'Cinneide This grant provides funding for the development of
computational methodologies for analyzing and predicting the performance of
complex systems, such as manufacturing facilities and computer and
telecommunication networks. The methodologies to be developed are based on
theoretical models of the randomness in such systems and a theoretical
understanding of the impact of randomness on performance. The principal
methodologies to be considered are (a) methods based on Fourier or Laplace
transform inversion; (b) heavy-traffic Brownian approximations; (c) Markovian
methods (Neuts method of phases); (d) Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods; and (e)
decomposition and other approximate methods. The research builds on a
substantial body of literature in each of these areas. This research will
enhance the ability of engineers and managers to assess the capabilities of
award new systems and to predict the impact of modifications on existing
systems. The computational methodologies to be developed are very different from
the standard approach to these problems, namely, simulation, in which system
performance is predicted based on a detailed and time-consuming process of
mimicking the actual operations of the system on a computer. By bringing
theoretical knowledge to bear on predicting performance, computational
methodologies make possible very rapid computer analyses which may be sufficient
for a given situation or which may be used as a preliminary step in preparation
for a detailed simulation study. One specific goal will be to develop a
methodology for the performance analysis of manufacturing systems that can take
account of the key features already handled by existing software, such as
variability in processing times and machine breakdowns, but with extensions to
deal with some additional specific features: (a) Constant-Work-in-Process
(CONWIP) conditions; (b) simple dispatching rules such as Easiest Due Date
(EDD); and (c) multiple job types.