* 9713974
* Sojourn Time Control for Assembly Type Queueing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Hayriye Ayhan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/2000
* USD 109,954.00

9713974 Ayhan The focus of this research is on the real time control of job
sojourn time in assembly-type queueing networks. The purpose of this control is
to ensure that complete jobs are produced in a timely and predictable manner.
The real time control strategy will be executed based on the observation of the
state of the queueing network. These observations will give complete information
about the location and the time in location of all jobs currently in the
network. The research will involve the following tasks. Assembly type queueing
networks will be represented as Single Input Free Choice Nets which can be
characterized by a set of stochastic difference equations. These difference
equation will capture the dynamics of assembly type queueing networks and will
serve as the mathematical model underlying real time control. The control
procedure will be formulated as an optimization problem and efficient solution
procedures will be developed. Finally, the performance of this new control
strategy will be tested against the existing WIP (Work in Process) limiting
control strategies. If successful, this research will lead to improvements in
the performance of assembly operations. The research real time control strategy
will decrease the resource contention which will result in an increase in
throughput and decrease in job sojourn time. A major contribution anticipated
from this research is the development of analytical models of complicated
assembly operations. Since these models will be the main tool in the formulation
of real time control paradigm, they will lead to the development of the
fundamental science base required to establish real time control in assembly-
type queueing networks.