* 9713185
* 1997 Gordon Conference on Supramolecules and Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Laurence Romsted, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,450.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9713185 This proposal requests funds for partial support of the
Gordon Research Conference on the Chemistry of Supramolecules and Assemblies to
be held on August 10- 15, 1997, at Salve Regina University in Newport Rhode
Island. The funds request will be used primarily to cover the fixed fee expenses
for attendees, i.e. speakers, discussion leaders and graduate and postdoctoral
students who work in engineering and applied research. The purpose of this
conference is to encourage the transfer of ideas and information in the
community of scientists who work in the fields of colloidal assemblies and
supramolecular aggregates. The conference has met biennially since 1979 and the
areas covered and the speakers who attend consistently represent the most active
areas of research from industrial applications of thin films and engineered
crystals to basic research in molecular recognition and association colloid
chemistry. A broad range of speakers and participants in a variety of research
areas are participating in the conference this year. Topics include, nanosized
materials, structure and dynamics, clean chemistry in structured systems,
photochemistry in organized systems, chemistry in aggregates, macromolecular
architecture, and biomolecular assemblies. Approximately one half of the
speakers and discussion leaders are either engineers or working in applied
chemistry. One session is devoted to short talks by new participants in the
field. The schedule for the week is that of a traditional Gordon Conference,
sessions in the morning and evenings with plenty of time for discussion. The
afternoons are free for informal discussion and meetings and two poster sessions
are planned for attendees, including graduate students and post doctoral fellows
as well as faculty members, to present their recent work.