* 9713388
* Time-resolved Spectroscopy of Anharmonic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1997,05/31/2002
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 05/31/2002
* USD 486,400.00

Keith Nelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his continuing investigations of
large amplitude lattice vibrations using time- and space-resolved femtosecond
optical pulse-shaping techniques. Initially, he will focus on crystals that
undergo structural phase transitions, in particular the switching among
different ferroelectric phases. In addition, he will look at semiconducting
materials whose bandgaps may be influenced and perhaps closed by optically
induced large-amplitude coherent lattice vibrations. Nelson also plans to
examine the behavior of molecular crystals in which the optical pulses induce
motion along reaction coordinates to affect crystalline chemical reactions. He
will investigate both bulk and thin film perovskites to study structural phase
transitions and phonon-polariton cavities; diacetylene, perylene and pyrene to
study molecular crystals; and Ti2O3 and GeTe as semiconductors. Prof. Nelson has
demonstrated that significant nuclear displacements can be induced in molecular
crystals using high energy pulses. In addition, if the wavelength is long
enough, damage to the crystal is minimized. In these studies Nelson will
investigate alternative strategies for achieving large nuclear displacements and
what types of effects the molecular properties have on the optimum strategy.
Prof. Nelson will apply techniques developed in his laboratory that exploit
femtosecond optical pulses to a wide variety of materials such as ferroelectric
crystals and small gap semiconductors, in order to determine if it is possible
to effect a chemical change. In addition to the direct advances this work will
likely offer to the fields of lattice spectroscopy and optical control of
molecular processes, it can be anticipated that the planned research will be of
technological interest and utility to designers of prototype devices for optical
switching and information transmittal.