* 9713778
* Airbonre Studies of Clouds and Precipitation with a         Millimeter Wavelength Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Robert McIntosh, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 01/31/2001
* USD 370,725.00

PROJECT SUMMARY/Vali, 9712859/McIntosh, 9713778 Airborne Studies of Clouds and
Precipitation with a Millimeter Wavelength Radar Since 1989, with support by the
Physical Meteorology Program, the Microwave Remote Sensing Laboratory, at the
University of Massachusetts and the Department of Atmospheric Science, at the
University of Wyoming have collaborated in the design, development,
installation, and application of a 95GHz, airborne, Doppler, polarimetric radar.
This award provides further support for development and application of the
airborne millimeter-wavelength radar, in combination with in-situ measurements
from the King Air Hardware and software improvements to be implemented include
addition of selectable filters to match a variety of pulse lengths, use of a new
calibration technique to improve the minimum detectable Linear Depolarization
Ratio, development of the capability to measure reflectivity at closer range (to
improve comparisons with the in-situ probes), and development of a new device to
allow switching the beam between fore and aft directions on a pulse-by-pulse
basis. Cloud and precipitation research will focus on 1) continued study of
Florida cumulus clouds, including contrasting clouds of maritime and continental
origins, retrieval of x-z wind cross-sections with a pseudo-dual Doppler merging
of the millimeter radar and CP-2 radar data, 2) extension of the Airborne
Velocity Azimuth Display method to study wave-like features in Oregon stratus, 3
exploration of polarimetric capabilities, including comparisons of measured and
modeled co-polarized and cross- polarized backscafler for different ice-crystal
populations, and 4) quantifying the uncertainties associated with measured and
predicted reflectivities. In addition, we propose to mount the millimeter-
wavelength radar on the French F-27 research aircraft, for pseudo-dual Doppler
studies of boundary layer cumulus dynamics in a field observational program in
France known as TRAC98. This is n ot only a good international collaboration,
but also very cost-effective for the NSF-funded research.