* 9713968
* The Isotopic Composition of Iron: A Chemical Fingerprint forBiologic Activity
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/2000
* USD 63,000.00

9713968 Beard, Johnson Abstract This award supports a project to develop a
chemical method for fingerprinting biological activity in meteorites using the
isotopic composition of iron (Fe). It is supported by the Office of Polar
Programs, the Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. Development of a biological chemical fingerprint will be useful in:
1) evaluating the recent interpretations that meteorite ALH84001 contains
evidence of ancient biological activity on Mars, partly in the form of ultra-
fine-grained magnetite and sulfide iron minerals that are inferred to have been
formed by iron-reducing bacteria; 2) screening extraterrestrial material for
biological activity (meteorites or samples returned from future missions to
other planets); and 3) establishing the time limits for the earliest life on
Earth. Biologically produced iron-bearing minerals are ubiquitous, and many iron
biominerals are produced by bacteria that reduce ferric iron to ferrous iron,
resulting in formation of iron-oxides, - sulfides, or -carbonates. The metabolic
pathway for iron reduction is the same as that used by bacteria which reduce
sulfate to sulfide. Bacteria reduction of sulfate can produce large
fractionations in sulfur-34 to sulfur-32 ratios. By analogy to sulfate-reducing
bacteria, iron reducing bacteria are expected to be capable of producing Fe
isotope fractionations that are on the order of those observed for sulfate
reducing bacteria, based on the relative mass spread of Fe and S isotopes. This
magnitude of fractionation is suggested by preliminary studies of Fe isotopes by
Dixon et al., who interpret the Fe isotope ratio variations they measured in
terrestrial samples to reflect biologically-induced Fe isotope fractionation.
The scope of this research will be to establish a baseline for the isotopic
composition of inorganic iron by analysis of inorganically produced Fe-bearing
minerals from a variety of physical settings . Evaluating the Fe isotope
fractionation produced by biological processes will be conducted by analyzing
iron biominerals that were grown from isolated bacteria strains in a controlled
laboratory environment. With these limits established, it will be possible to
use the isotopic composition of Fe to evaluate if inferred iron biominerals in
Martian meteorite ALH84001 were produced inorganically or by biological
activity.