* 9713961
* Dissertation Research:  Cancer at Point Hope, Alaska:       Science and the Politics of Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Stephen Kulis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 7,000.00

In August of 1962 the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) authorized a secret
radioactive tracer experiment near a small creek on the northwest coast of
Alaska. The experiment contaminated the surrounding area with radioactive
materials, a fact that the AEC kept from the people in the local communities.
The nearby community of Point Hope experienced an alarming increase in the rate
of cancer beginning approximately 20 years after the contamination. Public
health agencies, in response to concerns from community members, conducted three
epidemiological studies in the 1980's. Although the studies did not find the
local cancer rates significant, Point Hopers doubted these conclusions. Local
`tales` had long focused on the possible relationship between cancer in the
village and buried poisons left by scientists. While the `discovery` of the
contamination in 1992 seemed to vindicate the claims of Point Hopers, official
scientific explanations dismissed the possible link between the contamination
and cancer. The proposed dissertation study investigates the scientific claims
made about health risks in Point Hope. It does this by focusing on what
scientists said and how they said it. The analysis will proceed by ironically
juxtaposing realist and anti-realist deconstructive strategies to investigate 1)
how well the scientific claims made about the contamination in Point Hope meet
with standard practices of scientific inquiry, and 2) the rhetorical strategies
scientists used in claims-makings about the contamination in Point Hope.