* 9713442
* The Importance of Osmosis in the Volumetric Behavior of     Undisturbed and Expansive Earth Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Denwood Griffiths, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2001
* USD 280,822.00

The geotechnical significance of osmotic mechanisms as influencing hazards such
as expansive ground and landslides has yet to be clarified. The major obstacle
has been the lack of appropriate quantitative methods for either predicting or
measuring the magnitudes of these mechanisms in situ. This research will be an
essential step towards establishing a quantitative basis for comprehensive
evaluation of the significance of osmotic mechanisms for geotechnical problems
in natural geologic systems such as: 1) damaging differential displacements in
expansive ground, 2) the role of weathering mechanisms, such as oxidation of
pyrite, in destabilizing ground and triggering landslides 3) geochemical causes
of groundwater movement and abnormal pore-fluid pressures in low-permeability
environments, and 4) the remediation of contaminated ground. The current
understanding of osmotic mechanisms is based primarily on controversial field
studies concerning anomalous groundwater pressures and compositions in
sedimentary geologic basins, and also on laboratory and theoretical studies of
monominerallic clays with uni-electrolyte pore fluids. Laboratory studies of
osmotic mechanisms on natural earth materials and unambiguous field studies of
these mechanisms ion geotechnical systems are in their infancy. The goals of
this research are: 1) to develop an integrated experimental and theoretical
approach for quantifying osmotic mechanisms on undisturbed samples of natural
earth materials, and 2) to use this approach to quantify the importance of
osmotic mechanisms that influence the expansive behavior of the Pierre Shale,
namely osmotically-driven pore fluid flux and osmotically-induced volumetric
repulsion among clay particles. The objectives for accomplishing these goals
include: 1) mobilizing a triaxial system for measuring the coupled fluxes of
pore fluid constituents, 2) selecting, sampling, and characterizing a test site
in steeply dipping strata of Pierre shale, using both conventional methods and
the new experimental system, 3) expanding existing coupled-flow theory to
include swelling pressures and volume changes in expansive clay shales from
osmotic mechanisms, and 4) analyzing the new experimental data with the new
theoretical framework to quantify the geologic, physical, and chemical controls
on the efficiencies of osmotically-driven pore fluid flux and osmotically-
induced volumetric repulsion among clay particles.