* 9713110
* Investigation of the Adhesion of Enteromorpha clathrata and the Consequent Impact on Cavitation, Dynamic Response, and Performance Characteristics of Lifting Surfaces of Marine ...
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Sathya Gangadharan, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 03/31/2002
* USD 318,179.00

9713110 Gangadharan The two previous research grants awarded by the National
Science Foundation led to: (i) understanding of the adhesion characteristics of
Enteropmorpha clathrata and their consequent effects on the hydrodynamic drag of
flat plates; (ii) the design, construction and operation of a cost- effective
water tunnel at Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, and (iii) experimental
and theoretical investigation of the flow characteristics (lift, drag and
pitching moment) over fouled and unfouled bydrofoils. The current research is an
extension of some of this work with the intention of first, continuing the
investigation of the adhesion of Enteropmorpha clathrata on hydrofoils,
subsequent impact on flow field cavitation, and hydrodynamic response
characteristics on hydrofoils and marine propellers; secondly to develop a
detailed theoretical model of Enteromprpha clathrata fouling on hydrofoil
surfaces, perform extensive experimental testing on hydrofoils in the water
tunnel using the Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV) system, develop a model from
experimental results using response surface methodology and correlate the
results obtained from theory and experiments and thirdly to theoretically
investigate the impact of fouling of the hull on propeller vibrations and noise.
This 3-year research project will be separated into three phases: Phase I (Year
1): Involves the study of the flow characteristics around the fouled hydrofoil
surface using the Laser Doppler Velocimeter (LDV) available at the water tunnel
facility at Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution. Phase II (Year 2): Involves
the investigation of the impact of fouling on cavitation. The hydrofoil model
will be treated as a single blade of a propeller and allowed to cavitate with
fouling. The LDV system will be used to characterize the flow patters at Harbor
Branch Oceanographic Institution. Phase III (Year 3): Efforts will be primarily
concentrated in arriving at a relationship between the biological material
properties and cavitation by inducing biological growth or to remove/minimize
the biological growth on marine surfaces by inducing cavitation. ***