* 9713701
* Modeling, Design &amp; Control of Electromagnetic Systems with  Permanent-Electro-Magnet Combinations and its Application   to the Development of a High Performance Magnetic Suspen
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 09/30/2001
* USD 150,000.00

This research project deals with the development of an integrated methodology
for modeling, design and control of electromagnetic systems. An approach to
developing this integrated methodology consist of two basic components:
Development of a modeling and design strategy for the electromagnet actuation
scheme using Permanent-ElectroMagnet (PEM) combinations that support the large
travel and the high stiffness performance requirements, and the formulation of a
discrete time, robust nonlinear control architecture that guarantees ultra
precision tracking performance under external disturbances and plant variations.
This tight coupling between the design of the electromagnetic actuation scheme
and that of the control architecture ensures that the entire system responds at
the stringent performance levels demanded of it. Results from this project
provide a clear methodology for designing electromagnetic actuation schemes
given a set of performance requirements; improve the understanding of nonlinear,
discrete time control in the context of high performance electromechanical
systems; and enable technology that is essential for the development of magnetic
suspension actuators. By adding PEM combination, the research project enhances
the capabilities of the large travel Magnetic Suspension Actuator currently
under development at the Coordinate Metrology and Measurement Laboratory at Ohio
State University. It leads to a system that addresses the high performance
actuation requirements of the precision engineering industry for a range of
applications such as photolithography, semiconductor wafer inspection, free-form
precision machining and non-circular turning.