* 9713610
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: New Reclaimable Sizes for    Improved High Speed Weaving and Reduced Pollution
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Mansour Mohamed, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2001
* USD 23,705.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Mansour
Mohamed, Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry, and Science at North
Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Ali Hebeish, at the National
Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this joint research is
to study ways to improve sizing agents and procedures for cotton and PES/cotton
fiber materials. The NRC staff will work with modifications of locally available
starches. Acrylic acid, alone or admixture with other vinyl monomers will be
used as the polymerizable components of the composite. The properties of the
composites will be investigated, including film-forming, rheology, solubility,
as well as its amenability to sizing, weaving, desizing, and reclamation. By
controlling the composite components and molecular size and substituents of
starch, composites with pre-determined properties will be developed. The NCSU
team will test the NRC-produced sizing agents, as well as the resulting yarn
quality. They will also test these size formulations for their use in
conventional and high speed weaving machines. Scope: This research project will
involve two experienced researchers from well respected institutes for textile
research, and with complementary expertise and facilities. Finding optimum
sizing materials that can be reclaimed and reused will address a major problem
for a large industry in both countries, and would have special environmental
impact on countries where textile industries are a major polluters. Egypt and
several other developing countries rely extensively on their textile industries,
and yet these are some of the most polluting industries for the water available
for human use. The collaborating scientists plan to conduct chemical synthesis
of new polymeric sizes in the laboratory, and to test them in the laboratory for
their effectiveness and ability to be recycled. They plan to scale the studies
to actual manufacturing conditions. This proposal meets INT objective of
supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.