* 9713720
* Operational Methods in Semiconductor Manufacturing:         Operational Methods Integrating Product Dynamics &amp; Process  Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Michael Fu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Janet M. Twomey
* 09/30/2001
* USD 801,000.00

Motivated by the belief that the next major advances in increased operational
efficiency in semiconductor manufacturing will require operational methods that
integrate product level market dynamics and process level models, the research
will proceed along two thrusts: the integration of product and market dynamics
into operational decision making, and the incorporation of process level models
into optimization algorithms at the operational level. The first thrust will
develop finite-horizon transient models that are directed towards total life
cycle decision support. Such models will handle the complex dynamics of the
product market, and support the technologies that enable efficient manufacturing
for the right products at the right time. The second thrust will develop models
that integrate operational level models and process level models for the purpose
of qualitatively and quantitatively assessing how process level improvements and
changes benefit factory level production objectives. Such models will
incorporate process response surface models into the operational modeling
framework. Just as the principles of concurrent engineering brought together
design and manufacturing engineers, the research integrating operational methods
with product dynamics and process models will serve to bring together engineers
from the process level up through the product level to enhance factory level
operational efficiency. Successful implementation of the research will lead to
specific insights into the structure of optimal operational policies and into
the sensitivity of operational decisions to underlying process parameters. These
insights can then be used by operational and factory integration personnel to
support discussions of suggested changes in policies at the product level and
parameter settings at the process level.