* 9713158
* An Integrated Quantitative and Qualitative Life Cycle Cost  Assessment Technology for Cost Benefit Evaluation of Bridge Deterioration, Renewal, and Rehabilitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Rita Gregory, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/2001
* USD 159,953.00

9713158 Gregory The database of bridge assessment is essential in determining
which structures are most critical for limited monies. However, an evaluation
which would assess the various costs associated with the various repair
procedures is unavailable. Such an evaluation is highly needed to assist in the
immense task of selecting economically smart repair/strengthen options available
for these structurally deficient bridges. This research will assist in the
development of such an evaluation. The life cycle cost assessment technology for
cost benefit evaluation of bridge infrastructure rehabilitation/strengthening or
renewal is based on technical acquisition and assessment of bridge design and
repair options. This research is a joint, integrated effort between Georgia Tech
and University of Arizona. For the construction industry, the life cycle cost
benefit evaluation will provide a thorough and consistent assessment technology
for handling the complex decisions and estimating in infrastructure renewal. The
life cycle cost benefit evaluation will allow construction and policy makers to
potentially save millions of taxpayers' and industrial capital dollars. The
impact of the life cycle cost benefit evaluation will provide, for the first
time, an assessment technology to evaluate various repair alternatives and
emerging technologies on infrastructure renewal and the bridge construction
industry. To the academic and scientific community, the life cycle research will
push the bounds of knowledge-based systems. ***