* 9713599
* Synthesis of Optimal Plantwide Control Systems for Integrated Chemical Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* James Douglas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2001
* USD 259,894.00

Abstract - Zheng - 9713599 Plantwide control refers to control of an entire
(continuous chemical) plant consisting of many interconnected unit operations.
Before the 1950's, it was commonly assumed that the objectives of plantwide
control were the same as those of servomechanisms (i.e. good control means fast
control). This strategy of forcing variables to their steady-state values as
fast as possible may fail in plantwide control because of the interaction among
various loops. An alternative strategy, "setpoint environment control" was
developed, whose underlying philosophy was that if flows, temperatures,
pressures, etc., in the plant were held constant, the product quality would also
be constant. These requirements can be inconsistent, for example, it is
impossible to hold reflux flow constant and at the same time manipulate it to
compensate for a disturbance. The concept of "dynamic process control," resolves
these inconsistencies by distinguishing between material balance controllers and
product quality controllers. Material balance controllers act as low-pass
filters (i.e. regulation) and product quality controllers act as high-pass
filters (i.e. servo systems). Surge capacities can be chosen such that the break
frequency of the material balance control system is an order of magnitude lower
than that of the quality control system to avoid significant interaction between
the two control systems. Thus, poor quality control can be overcome by
installing sufficiently large surge capacities in the process. For traditional
processes with large surge capacities and over-designed unit operations, this
approach is adequate for designing an effective plantwide control system. Global
economic competition has forced the process industries to improve their capital
productivity and raw material utilization. The overall goal of this research is
to develop a systematic method for synthesizing optimal plantwide control
systems for integrated continuous chemical processes. A controllabil ity index,
which quantifies the cost associated with dynamic controllability, is defined.
The Optimal Load Distribution Principle (and the Minimal Dynamic Cost
Principle), which allow optimal handling of disturbance propagation and
uncertainty propagation throughout the entire process, are introduced. These two
concepts permit a systematic design of a plantwide control system which
minimizes the total cost. The theory can also be used to quantitatively compare
alternate flowsheets based on both steady-state economics and dynamic
controllability. Case studies will include several industrial processes, e.g. a
hydrodealkylation of toluene to produce benzene, styrene, and cumene, and butane
alkylation. The results will be incorporated into the undergraduate process
control course so that students can design a plantwide control system for the
process that is designed in the process design course.