* 9713971
* Control of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems with Periodically  Varying Parameters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Subhash Sinha, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2001
* USD 172,019.00

This research project deals with the dynamics and control of complex mechanical
systems, and addresses the order reduction problem associated with a large set
of ordinary differential equations having periodic coefficients. A new approach
in the design of controllers for large-scale general dynamic systems with
periodically varying coefficients is suggested. The idea is based on the fact
that all quasi-linear periodic systems can be replaced by similar systems whose
linear parts are time invariant via the well-known Liapunov-Floquet (LF)
transformations. A general technique for computation of the LF matrices for
large-scale systems is presented. Hence, the control problem associated with
linear systems with periodically varying coefficients is transformed to a time-
invariant form. The time invariant equations are then used to develop control
strategies for the time variant systems. Next, the problem of controller design
for nonlinear systems with periodically varying parameters is addressed. It is
proposed that the `time-dependent normal form` theory be used to simplify the
quasi-linear systems resulting from the L-F transformations. For the non-
critical cases (where the real parts of the eigenvalues of the linear part of
the system are nonzero), the designs can be achieved via normal form
transformations. In the event when linear part contains a critical
uncontrollable mode, the control system design is pursued through an application
of the `center manifold' theory and suitable Liapunov control functions. The
practical significance of this study is demonstrated through applications to
some typical problems including the controller designs for an asymmetric
magnetic rotor-bearing system, columns and plates subjected to periodic loads.
Large models using finite elements are constructed for these problems and the
control algorithm are implemented on the reduced order systems.