* 9713868
* Strengthening the Community College Network for Science,    Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Lynn Barnett, American Association of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2000
* USD 484,058.00

The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) is conducting a project
consisting of a sequence of three interconnected activities designed to enhance
the quality of science, mathematics, engineering, and technological (SMET)
education in community colleges. Activity One. Fall, 1997 Conference of
Community College SMET Educators. This is national meeting of representatives
from groups interested in science and engineering advanced technological
education, including principal investigators from current National Science
Foundation (NSF) Advanced Technological Education (ATE) projects and centers,
private and public sector leaders, and professional associations, among others
concerned about such programs. Activity Two. A Case Study of the ATE Program.
This activity is a study of the four-year old NSF ATE program. The study is
looking at what has been accomplished through the program and its relationship
with other stakeholders in the process (businesses, schools, four-year colleges
and universities, and others). The case study focuses on approximately ten
projects. A 100 to 150 page monograph is being produced which is being widely
distributed throughout the community college community. It is being used to
shape Activity Three described below. Activity Three. Fall, 1998 Conference of
Community College SMET Educators. The purpose of this conference is to
underscore and discuss the findings of the assessment conducted in Activity Two.
A conference report includes these recommendations and is being shared with
conference participants and distributed to the larger community of SMET-
interested audiences. *