* 9713372
* A Study of Structure-Process-Property Relationships in BlownPolymeric Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Junuthula Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 09/30/2000
* USD 399,989.00

This research has the long term objective of establishing the structure-
process-property relationships in both high density polyethylene (HDPE) and low
density polyethylene (LDPE) blown films. Crystallization kinetics and film
morphology as a function of both molecular architecture and processing
parameters will be investigated using physical models and numerical simulation
of the process. The research will include the development of suitable
constitutive models for the theology and crystallinity of the polymer being
blown. Experiments based on commercial scale film blowing apparatus will be used
to evaluate Constitutive models and determine appropriate boundary and initial
conditions for the numerical simulation of the film blowing process. A
transient, non- axisymmetric, and nonlinear finite element model of the process
will be developed. The computational model will also be used to study collapse
and instability in a non-axisymmetric setting. The three principal investigators
are uniquely qualified, because of their background in theoretical and
computational mechanics,polymer structure and mechanical property
characterizations, and polymer processing and theology, to successfully carry
out the research. A stable film blowing process requires a delicate balance
between the excess pressure inside the bubble, the resin extrusion rate, the
film wind-up speed, and the cooling rate. These parameters vary considerably
from polymer to polymer due to slight differences in melt strength and
crystallinity. In practice, the best combinations of process variables required
to produce good quality film is achieved through a series of trial-and-error
steps that results in large-scale wastage of polymer resin and person hours.
Computer simulations of film blowing process offers an attractive alternative
for at least three reasons. First, computer simulations can help answer basic
questions about how specific process variables influence bubble stability.
Second, simulations will help identify which resin Properties are most important
in determining performance in film blowing processes. Third, if the constitutive
relationship between molecular orientation and polymer crystallinity is properly
formulated, the connection between the ultimate film properties and process
conditions can be identified. Together-, these three factors should
significantly reduce the number of experiments needed to optimize commercial
film blowing processes for new polymer resins. The research investigates
phenomena that are interdisciplinary in nature. Phase change, crystallization
and surface flow phenomena are of interest to various manufacturing processes
and scientific problems. The research will be carried with the help of students,
who will be trained to develop theoretical formulations, finite element model,
and interpretation and correlation of the numerical results, and the students
will also be trained to run the film blowing equipment and collect data to
assist and correlate numerical simulations. This training of students to think
and understand the fundamental, as well practical aspects, is considered as
important contribution as the results of the research.