* 9713635
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Environmental Sensors Using Sol Gel Processing
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* David Greenspan, U.S. Biomaterials Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1999
* USD 18,880.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. David
Greenspan, Chief Technology Officer, U.S. Biomaterials Corp. in Alachua,
Florida, and Dr. Morsi M. Morsi of the Glass Research Department at the National
Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this joint research is
to study the feasibility of manufacturing environmental sensors using
biologically active sol gel glasses impregnated with active biological and
synthetic organic molecules. Sol gel processing is used to make many
compositions of materials, among which are Gel-Silica Optics which have
commercial value. These materials are optically transparent, yet they contain a
large volume of stable interconnected porosity. The porous matrices can be
impregnated with optically active second organic or inorganic phases for
creating a new class of active optical sensors. The project will involve work at
the NRC to develop impregnation processes for incorporating organic and
biological molecules inside the porous optical matrices; optical
characterization of the IR and UV-Vis spectra of the sensor prototypes; and
comparison of the optical characteristics of the sensor molecules in their
matrices with the molecules in solution. Work at the U.S. Biomaterials Corp.
laboratory will include development of porous optical matrices of various
composition of biologically active CaO-P2O5-SiO2 gel-glasses; characterization
of the pore size distributions and surface areas and isoelectric points of the
matrices; and conduct of biological activity testing of the prototype sensors to
determine whether the conformations of the sensor molecules are retained intact
following the impregnation process. Scope: This research project will bring
together the bioactive gel-glass matrix technology of the US institution, and
the sol-gel and biotechnology expertise of the NRC. The project can lead to
establishing a new capability in Egypt for high technology industry for
manufacturing environmental biosensors capable of being coupled with the fiber
optics device industry. The application to environmental sensors in Egypt is
useful to the United States where the environmental quality is considered a
global issue. This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign
collaboration in areas that benefit both sides. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.