* 9713280
* Fundamental Research in Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor      Deposition of Hydrogenated Amorphous Silicon and            Nanocystalline Silicon Films from SiH4/H2/Ar Discharges
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2001
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2001
* USD 495,000.00

9713280 Aydil This project combines an integrated theoretical and experimental
approach to the systematic investigation of effects of plasma processing
conditions on the structure and properties of a-Si:H and nc-Si:H films during
PECVD from SiH4/H2/Ar glow discharges. The project aims at obtaining fundamental
information regarding key internal plasma variables that determine film
properties, such as crystallinity, crystal size, hydrogen content, and defect
density. The goal is to elucidate how deposited film properties are affected by
the identity and flux of chemically reactive molecular fragments and ions
arriving at the film surface. Atomic-scale computer simulations will be employed
to study the interaction of radicals and molecular fragments (e.g., SiH, SiH2,
SiH3, H) from the plasma with the film surface. Molecular-dynamics, molecular-
statics, lattice-dynamics, and Monte Carlo simulators based on recently
developed interatomic potential-energy functions, will be used to study plasma-
surface interactions. Also, hybrid off-lattice kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
will be used for full-scale dynamical simulations of the deposition process over
realistic time scales for a range of processing conditions. Results of computer
simulations will be compared with experimental data and the insights gained from
the simulations used to guide new experimental studies and design new deposition
strategies. %%% This research activity cuts across traditional boundaries
between different disciplines including physics, chemistry, engineering, and
materials science to address forefront issues in a field with high technological
relevance. The nature of the research also provides an effective mechanism for
educating students and postdoctoral scholars in addressing technologically
important research problems using an integrated experimental and theoretical
approach. The research will contribute basic plasma and materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. ***