* 9713952
* Electron Gun Control of Smart Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* John Alan Main, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 12/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

This research project deals with electronic gun control of smart materials and
structures. Smart materials such as piezoelectrics, magnetostrictives, and
electrostrictives are finding increased use in modern design because of the
direct coupling they provide between mechanical energy and electrical energy.
Upon application of a stress to piezoelectric material an electric field is
generated in the material, and when an electric field is applied to the material
it changes dimensions. This makes piezoelectric materials ideal for use in
compact electromechanical actuators. The electric gun control is accomplished by
critically examining the materials, structural modeling, and the system itself.
This includes characterizing the electron- material interactions that occur when
the electrons from the electron gun strike the piezoelectric material. Advances
in structural modeling and system design are possible since an elimination of
the need for static electrodes in smart structures gives the system designer a
lever of latitude in structural design and control algorithm selection that has
not been seen before. Successful realization of the electron- gun control
concept leads to significant technological advances and industry applications in
a wide range of disciplines ranging from noise suppression to medical imaging.