* 9713854
* Subsurface Construction, Resulting Ground Movements, and    Protection of the Built Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* James Long, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2001
* USD 368,300.00

This research is aimed at developing guidelines for assessing, controlling, and
monitoring ground movements and building damage that are acceptable to
contractors, designers, and preservationists and that will provide adequate and
economic protection of structures. Tasks in this project include the following:
1) Large model-scale tests: Four large model-scale tieback walls (1/10th scale)
will be constructed to investigate the effects of excavation wall stiffness and
building stiffness on potential building damage. These tests allow control of
the environment and material properties, and permit extensive instrumentation
and monitoring of wall, soil, and building. 2) Collection and analyses of field
date: Field data from excavations and tunneling will provide additional
information on behavior of full-scale structures. Collaboration with major
structural engineering firms, contractors and consultants will provide data from
a wide variety of excavation and tunneling projects both in the U.S. and
internationally. Analysis and presentation of these data will furnish critical
information for documenting behavior and improving guidelines for monitoring
ground movement and controlling damage. 3) Numerical analyses: Finite element
modeling will be conducted to investigate the interaction between ground,
retaining walls, and surrounding structures during and after excavation. Results
of analyses will be compared with field cases and with results from large model
scale tests. 4) Development and assessment of guidelines for controlling damage:
Guidelines for evaluating and controlling ground movements and limiting building
damage will be developed from the results with participation of practitioners in
workshops. The recommendations will establish guidelines for estimating typical
ground movements for various conditions, and help identify economical and
accurate ways to monitor ground movements and building response. Assessment of
these guidelines will center around two workshops that will allow broad-based
participation by leaders in the engineering, architecture, preservation, and
construction communities to ensure that the guidelines and recommendations
generated will be safe, fair, usable, and cost-effective as well as properly
disseminated in spheres of both design and construction.