* 9713782
* Shape Grammars: A Method and Representation for Product     Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* George Stiny, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2002
* USD 476,865.00

This grant provides funding to support the theoretical and practical
development of shape grammars to computationally model the generation and
structure of consumer products. The theory will provide a rich foundation for
the creation of grammars of form and function for this engineering application;
the specific product grammars will provide a means to rapidly generate new
products or recreate known products. Initially, a grammar to generate coffee
makers will be completed. A manufacturing analysis of the coffee makers will be
performed and related to the grammar rules and the grammar itself will be
implemented. Two to three additional grammars for new product classes will be
generated and their cost performance and implementations will also be pursued.
As the grammars are completed, investigations into how the resulting products
map onto corporate identity will be performed. As well, once the manufacturing
cost analyses are completed, explorations of the product design space generated
by the grammar will be performed. Theoretical advancements relating form and
function through shape grammars will continue throughout the project. Product
design in today's competitive environment is pushed by fast time-to-market and
one-of-a-kind design. As the multitude of products emerge, a company finds the
need and difficulty in maintaining their corporate identity across the product
lines. Long term there is no easy way for companies to keep up with this
consumer demand without computational assistance. Successful completion of this
proposal will show that shape grammars are a computational representation that
models important characteristics of product design in a concise and intuitively
descriptive manner; they are also a means to use the representation to direct
the generation of designs, limiting the scope of design to keep it controllable,
yet allowing freedom for expression within the design process. The work will
extend existing theory to incorporate product characteristics, implement the
theory in usable grammars, and pursue application of the theory to the design of
products. The result will be a more detailed understanding of how formal
grammars can model the design process, rapidly generate novel design concepts,
and give better feedback to a designer and corporation on how to model desired
characteristics into a product through computer automation.