* 9713924
* Purchase of a Flow Cytometer for the Large-scale            Assessment of Biogenic Particles in Estuarine and           Coastal Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Thomas Malone, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 104,372.00

This project will provide for the acquisition of a standard bench top flow
cytometer with argon laser illumination, five parameter analysis, and cell
sorting capability. Flow cytometry is an important tool for interdisciplinary
research on the dynamics of microbial populations and biogenic particles that
participate in the cycling and flux of major elements in aquatic ecosystems of
the land-sea margin. Flow cytometry was originally developed as a tool to
analyze individual cells or biological particles in cellular biology and
clinical research. It has more recently found wide applications in aquatic
biology, because it can provide a level of temporal and spatial resolution of
the abundance and characteristics of biogenic and non-biological particles in
aquatic systems that no other current technology can match. This level of
resolution is currently needed to complement largescale models of elements
cycling in estuaries and oceans, where the distribution and characteristics of
biological particles are the key factors that determine the fats and flux of
essential chemical components. Thus, flow cytometry is no longer a technology
restricted to clinical studies, but can profitably complement other techniques
routinely used in aquatic ecology and biochemistry. This proposal represents an
attempts to expand the use of flow cytometry in the study of the density,
distribution, cellular characteristics, taxomic composition and trophic
interactions of biogenic particles in estuaries and continental shelf ecosystems
of the middle Atlantic region. The instrument will reside at the Horn Point
Environmental Laboratory which has made a major commitment to the study of
plankton dynamics, physical oceanography, and physical-biological interactions
in estuarine and marine ecosystems. The instrument is extremely versatile and
will be used in laboratory-and ship-based studies as well as in laboratory
course work. Operation is relatively easy and user-friendly, makin g it an ideal
tool not only for ecological research, but also for education.