* 9713583
* SGER: Multi-Stream Approach Using Syllable Length Temporal  Evidence in Acoustic Modeling of Conversational Speech
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Hynek Hermansky, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 12/31/1998
* USD 49,738.00

The project studies the multi-stream approach to automatic speech recognition
(ASR) using stream definitions in the modulation spectrum domain. The multi-
stream approach is a new acoustic modeling technique to increase the robustness
of ASR systems. It derives different information sub-streams from the speech
signal followed by independent feature extraction and probability estimation in
each sub-stream. The vectors of class-conditional probabilities obtained from
each sub-stream are merged to obtain the final decision. The multi-band model
which utilizes different regions of the frequency spectrum in the sub-streams
has been shown to be robust to frequency-selective degradation. The aim of the
project is to utilize different ranges of the modulation spectrum in different
sub-streams. A study of the relative importance of the different ranges of the
modulation spectrum indicates that they might carry different information. This
makes the various elements of the modulation spectrum interesting candidates for
the multi-stream approach. The computation of these features requires looking at
longer segments (typically syllable length segments) of the signal. The proposed
project is an attempt to apply the new assumptions of relative independence of
elements of the feature vector and medium-term time dependencies between feature
vectors to ASR with a view to improve its robustness.