* 9713878
* Robust Scheduling and Diagnostics Using Simulation-Based    Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Alexander Shapiro, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 280,618.00

9713878 Spearman This award provides funding for the development of an approach
to finite capacity scheduling that uses simulation-based optimization techniques
and real-time information now available in modern manufacturing execution
systems (MES). Our approach will be to incorporate powerful simulation
optimization techniques with a fast manufacturing simulator to develop a
scheduling methodology that incorporates variability, computes "optimal"' lead
times, and provides sensitivity analysis. The specific issues we will address in
our research include: (1) converting a "bill of process"' (i.e., the combination
of a bill of material, the involved routings, and the processes) along with a
set of demands into a fast "sample path" simulation model; (2) developing useful
objective functions that use information found in an MES and that reflect the
desires of production planners; (3) examine various gradient estimation and fast
optimization methods; (4) develop methods for sensitivity analysis that provide
information useful to a production planner to assist in making an infeasible
production schedule feasible (e.g., adding capacity, pushing out due dates); (5)
test the methods using the Virtual Factory Laboratory at Georgia Tech and in the
plants of our industrial partners. If this research is successful it will
improve manufacturing scheduling in a number of ways. First, it should improve
existing MRP II systems by computing planned lead times that consider current
and predicted congestion levels. As such, large existing software systems need
only be retrofitted rather than replaced. Second, the system will explicitly
consider variability and randomness. By considering these factors, appropriate
lead time buffers can be set without extra "padding" thereby remaining
competitive in terms of both quick response and the ability to meet commitments.
Third, the developed methodology should be able to provide useful diagnostics
for a schedule indicating which requirements are difficult to attain and how
they might be relaxed. This should provide the ability to know how to make an
infeasible schedule feasible in the most cost effective way.