* 9713654
* Proactive Maintenance:  Integration of Engineering,         Statistics, and Operations Research Towards a General       Framework and Methodology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Vijayan Nair, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2002
* USD 285,548.00

This grant provides for the development of a science base for the integrated
proactive maintenance strategy. Various fundamental issues will be studied,
which include affordable in-process sensing optimization and validation with
consideration of the global goal of proactive maintenance; degradation modeling,
analysis, and prediction by combining in-process data and limited historical
information; multi attribute decision making; uncertainty measurement and risk
analysis; and global optimal maintenance policy determination and evaluation.
The research will be organized into four interrelated tasks: (1) Optimizing
strategies for the use of affordable in-process sensing; (2) On-line feature
extraction and sensor fusion from multi-dimensional observations; (3) Developing
predictive failure models combining in-process sensing data, engineering
knowledge, and limited historical data; and (4) Developing a simulation testbed
for evaluation of proactive maintenance policy. The central idea is to develop a
methodology to achieve proactive maintenance by integrating information (with
uncertainty consideration) provided by: (1) Engineering: in-process sensing and
on-line modeling, diagnosis, and failure prediction; (2) Statistics; reliability
models and self-learning/updating; and (3) Management Science: cost and risk
analysis; uncertainty measurement, and performance evaluation. The
implementation of proactive maintenance methodologies are expected to
significantly improve the maintenance of manufacturing equipment and processes,
which has a significant impact on manufacturing quality, productivity, and cost.
The success of the research project will contribute to maintenance science by
overcoming the barriers among different disciplines, and demonstrating the
effectiveness of the integrated methodology on proactive maintenance. In
addition, the research will also provide original contribution to each
individual discipline's research in areas such as (1) affordable and optimized
in- process sensin g and feature extraction techniques; (2) reliability analysis
with limited historical data; and (3) Bayesian decision-making and self-learning
algorithms for maintenance policy improvements. The research testbed will serve
as a basic for future research and demonstration of proactive maintenance.