* 9713433
* Temperature Superconducting Tapes and Wires
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Imtiaz Haque, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2001
* USD 149,200.00

9713433 Ahzi The mechanical processing of high temperature superconducting tapes
and wires is modeled by: (1) developing advanced micromechanical modeling of the
elastic- plastic response of compacted high temperature superconducting powders
with particular applications to Bi- based oxides (BSCCO); and (2) implementing
these models to simulate wire drawing and tape rolling and pressing of the
oxide-powder-in-tube (OPIT) process for the fabrication of superconductina tapes
and wires. The fabrication of the BSCCO superconductors (tapes and wires)
produced by the OPIT process with optimal mechanical and electrical transport
properties is currently limited due to the lack of understanding of the
mechanical response during the densification of powder oxides. Predictive tools
for the simulation and design of advanced processing methodologies for producing
long wires and tapes with optimal properties are developed under this project.
Physically-based models for the polycrystalline matrix fully coupled with the
porosity modeling are developed. These models are based on rate-dependent
plasticity and have the unique ability to predict the evolution of texturing
during plastic deformation and the evolution of the relative density of the
materials. For superconductors, both mechanical and most importantly electrical
properties are strongly dependent on the the final texture, relative density,
and on the presence of microcracks. Therefore, physically-based material models
with the ability of coupling the texturing, porosity and microcracking effects
provide a better understanding of the mechanical response during mechanical
processing of these materials. The phenomenon of non-conformity (instability) in
the sectional area of the superconducting core of rolled tapes, inherent to the
rolling of two-phase composite workpiece (Ag-sheathed BSCCO) is studied using
micromechanical models which account for the porosity, textural hardening
(locking), and weakening due to micr ocracking in the superconducting core. The
modeling and computational efforts are extended to simulate fabrication of
multifilamentary superconductors. ***