* 9713023
* Characterization of Local and Non-local Interactions of     Stoichiometric Adsorption Complexes in High-Silica Zeolite
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Raymond Gorte, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2001
* USD 317,000.00

Profs. Gorte and White will investigate the interaction of chemisorbed molecules
with Bronsted acid sites in high-silica zeolites, such as ZSM-5. They will
identify the reaction intermediates, determine the energetics of formation of
1:1 stoichiometric complexes and their long-range interactions, and model the
surface chemistry by molecular dynamics. They will examine adsorbed
intermediates derived from industrially significant reactant molecules, such as
alcohols, thiols, aldehydes, esters, phenols and substituted aromatics, and will
identify molecular probes suitable for the characterization of long-range
interactions. The spectroscopic characterization will be done with TPD, TGA,
multi-phase solid-state NMR, NQR, and IR. For the NMR work, the zeolite will be
in the form of large single crystals mounted with random orientations in
capillary tubes. The NMR spectroscopy will involve multiphase-pulse sequences,
line-narrowing sequences, magic-angle spinning and isotopic substitution, with
techniques such as REDOR and PISMA. Particularly important is the addition of H
NMR of methyl groups to investigate the environment of the acid sites.
Information from microcalorimetry of weakly basic molecules having various
functional groups will be correlated with the spectroscopy, with the objective
of rationalizing the energy barriers for surface reactions. Those results will
be complemented with ab initio quantum chemistry calculations of structures and
energies, and ab initio quantum molecular dynamics of the chemisorption and
reaction steps of probe molecules in cluster models of the zeolites.