* 9713798
* Fracture of Functionally Graded Materials - Modeling,       Synthesis and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,08/17/1999
* Zuhair Munir, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/17/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9713798 Paulino Physically based models which can be used to predict and
optimize FGM mechanical performance are developed under this project. Discrete
and continuous FGMs are analyzed using the boundary integral equations and the
finite element methods, respectively. Optimization of the compositional gradient
by means of numerical simulations provides relevant input for material
synthesis. A novel technique known as Field- Activated Combustion Synthesis
(FACS), is used in the synthesis process. Brittle FGM system, MOSi2/SiC,
consisting of two layers joined by a compositionally graded interface sandwiched
between the layers is used. With different applied electrical fields, different
compositional profiles are obtained for this system. The spatial distribution of
the phase concentrations of Mo and Si are determined from electron microprobe
analysis. The distinct samples, with various compositional profiles at the
graded interface, are tested by carefully placing a crack inside the
compositionally graded.layer. The fracture behavior of FGMs with crack faces
parallel and perpendicular to the property gradient are investigated both
experimentally and numerically. The numerical models are calibrated by fracture
mechanics experiments. The influence of compositional distribution functions on
the structural behavior and the mechanics of crack initiation and propagation in
FGMs under mechanical and/or thermal loads is studied. The study contributes to
the understanding of mechanical behavior and optimal (or near optimal)
compositional distribution functions of MoSi,)/SiC and Ti3SiC2/SiC FGMs, in
particular, and to the actual design of FGMS, in general. ***