* 9713731
* Understanding and Modeling the Creep Behavior of Lamellar   TiA1 Based Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2000
* USD 269,871.00

*** 9713731 Hemker Fully lamellar two phase TiAl based intermetallic alloys
offer a very attractive mix of mechanical properties and are considered to be
strong candidates for replacing nickel base superalloys in several structural
applications involving temperatures of up to 900' C. At these temperatures, the
creep performance of these alloys is of primary concern. Unfortunately, our
understanding of the processes that control high temperature deformation in many
advanced materials, including TiAl, is currently rather limited. The underlying
creep mechanisms in these advanced alloys are often quite different from that in
pure metals; the influence of steady-state creep is much smaller than it is in
pure metals, and transient deformation processes (i.e.. primary and tertiary
creep) have been found to dominate the creep behavior. In these cases, the Dorn
description of power-law creep is no longer valid and attempts to characterize
the creep behavior with activation energies and stress exponents, derived from
minimum creep rates, have met with very limited success. This has profound
consequences for the prediction of creep performance, because the FEM codes used
for creep analysis require the input of creep laws that characterize the creep
behavior of the material. Wherever possible it is desirable to have these laws
based on the physical deformation mechanisms. The widely referenced Dorn
description of power-law creep is based on diffusion assisted climb in recovery
processes that lead to steady state creep. However, as is shown in the PI's RIA
related research, in most intermetallic alloys, including TiAl , the diffusion-
assisted recovery processes which lead to steady state creep in pure metals are
replaced by a gradual evolution of the deformation microstructure. For this
reason, the Dorn equation cannot be used to model creep in this set of alloys
and it is necessary to develop an alternative set of mechanism-based creep
relations for TiAl based lamellar alloys. The primary goal of this work will be
to derive a fundamental set of creep laws that are based on observations of
microstructural evolution as a function of creep strain. This will require a
close integration of mechanics and materials and will involve work at three
specific length scales: i) the microscopic deformation mechanisms will be
identified and characterized by TEM observations of fully lamellar
polycrystalline specimens that have been crept to various amounts of creep
strain, ii) the mesoscopic effects of grain size, lamellar spacing, and lamellar
orientation will be separated and characterized with single crystal and
microsample creep tests, and iii) the macroscopic creep behavior of these alloys
will be modeled with constitutive relations that are based on the micro-and
mesoscopic measurements. The PI's experience with creep testing, TEM, and TiAl
has been teamed with the co-PI's expertise in developing continuum models of
multiphase materials in order to assure a bridge between the mechanics and
materials issues in this study.***