* 9713997
* Influence of Fracture Surface Roughness Characteristics on  the Specific Fracture Energy of Concrete as a Function of   Specimen and Aggregate Size
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Philip Perdikaris, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 01/31/2000
* USD 134,196.00

9713997 Perdikaris The influence of the microscale and concrete compressive
strength on the fracture energy per unit crack surface area will be evaluated by
studying the roughness characteristics of a fracture surface, such as the
surface roughness index, fractal dimension and wavelength content. The major
objectives of this research are: a) to perform 3-point bending tests under CMOD
control on concrete beam specimens of three sizes with three maximum aggregate
sizes and three concrete compressive strengths and determine the roughness
characteristics of the fracture surfaces, that is the roughness index, fractal
dimension, and Fourier amplitude spectra for each fracture surface b) to study
the roughness characteristics of the fracture surfaces and to evaluate their
dependence on the maximum aggregate size and concrete compressive strength and
their influence on the "load vs. load-point-displacement" response and the
specific fracture energy. c) to develop a micromechanics-based semi-empirical
analysis, wherein the apparent toughness will be calculated based on the given
roughness characteristics of the observed crack paths and aggregate size. This
research program will be undertaken through a university- state-industry
collaboration. The results will improve the methods of specification and
evaluation of the performance of normal and high strength concrete resulting in
more efficient designs.