* 9713642
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Pollution Reduction and      Material Conservation in Pretreatment of Cellulosic         Textiles
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Hechmi Hamouda, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 24,041.00

9713642 Hamouda Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project
by Dr. Hechmi Hamouda, Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry, and Science
at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Mohamed El-Rafie,
Head of the Textile Research Division at the National Research Center (NRC) in
Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this joint research is to study the feasibility
of combining pretreatment processes of cellulosic textiles with the goal of
reducing the energy and chemicals used in pretreatment, and of reducing the
large amounts of water used in the repeated washing operations, thus reducing
the industrial water pollution. Two categories of textile fibers would be
considered, cotton and cotton-blends, and flax. The first of these requires
three pretreatments of desizing, scouring and bleaching, while flax fibers
require scouring followed by three bleaching steps of hypochlorite, hydrogen
peroxide and sodium chlorite. Each of these steps must be followed by washing,
thus the huge requirements for water, chemicals, and energy, as well as the
resulting pollution load. Scope: This research project will involve two
experienced researchers from well respected institutes for textile research with
complementary expertise and facilities. Solution of the problem they will
address would have significant benefits to a major industry in both countries,
and would have special environmental impact on countries where water use and
polluted water discharge are problems. Egypt and several other developing
countries rely extensively on their textile industries, and yet these are some
of the most polluting industries for the water available for human use. The
collaborating scientists plan to conduct laboratory tests, and to scale the
studies to actual manufacturing scale. This proposal meets the INT objective of
supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas that have benefits for both sides.
This project is being supported under the US-Egy pt Joint Fund Program, which
provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities. * * *