* 9713678
* FSML Repair and Restoration of Existing Housing Used for Visiting Scientists and Graduate Students at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Herbert Windom, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 74,000.00

The Skidaway Institute of Oceanography is a small, autonomous research unit of
the University System of Georgia, with 15 research faculty and 40 permanent
support staff. It was established in 1967 with the mandate to conduct research
in all fields of oceanography and the marine sciences and to serve as a base of
operations and central facility for any of the research and educational
institutions in the State of Georgia. This mandate and the Institute's remote
pristine location, convenient to coastal and shelf waters, guarantee a constant
influx of visiting scientists and student seeking access to Skidaway's state-of-
the-art research facilities, accessible research locations, and opportunities
for collaboration with Skidaway's interdisciplinary and internationally-
recognized research faculty. Four older housing units are at least fifty years
old and are in need of substantial repair and restoration to maintain their
current habitability. Among the necessary tasks for this project are: replacing
the elderly shingle roofs of all four units; removing three units from septic
tank systems and connecting them to the sewer system; replacing windows in one
unit; re-siding and insulating two units; bringing all four unit up to code in
fire safety with the inclusion of firewalls and hardwired fire alarms; upgrading
electrical service to two units; replacing decrepit kitchen and bathroom
facilities in two units; and completing plumbing upgrades in all four units.