* 9713956
* FSML: Enhancement of Research With Experimental Aquatic     Ecosystemics at the Kansas Ecological Reserves
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* SHARON DEWEY, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 10,705.00

As environmental disturbance, fragmentation, and pollution become more
widespread, it is imperative that new collaborative mutidisciplinary research
provide insights into complex ecological phenomena on a larger scale than has
been possible in the past. The facility that is the subject of this project is a
regional center for research on the responses of lake systems to disturbance at
varying scales. The investigators associated with this facility have many years
of experience using small experimental surrogate ecosystems(e.g.. experimental
ponds) to identify the responses to disturbance of larger, "real world",
systems. The objective of this project is to enhance the aquatic research
facility at the University of Kansas field station, the Kansas Ecological
Reserves (KER), in order to continue the extension of this work to larger
scales. The aquatic facilities at the KER are extensive with nearly 200
experimental ponds over 55 outdoor fiberglass tanks and different types of
enclosures for smaller scale experiments within these systems. Research over the
20 year history of this aquatic program, reported in nearly 100 publications,
has often focused on the use of these relatively small surrogate ecosystems for
aquatic research. This work has firmly established that experimental
perturbations applied to these surrogate adequately simulate a variety of
environmental changes. New modeling techniques are being developed to
extrapolate these results to the "real world at larger spatial and temporal
scales. To extend this empirical research to larger lentic ecosystems )lakes and
reservoirs). 1991 a 4.5 ha, 13 m deep reservoir was constructed in a protected
50 ha watershed. This reservoir was constructed as a model ecosystem with many
of the important characteristics of larger lentic systems. Now investigators
working at KER can conduct empirical investigations in a large, secure and
carefully managed lake/ reservoir surrogate. The proximity of this lar ger scale
surrogate ecosystem to one of the largest experimental pond facilities in the
nation makes the facility attractive to researchers from institutions throughout
the region. No limnological manpipulations are conducted in the reservoir at the
whole-lake scale so that natural reference conditions can be continually
provided. However, experimental perturbations simulating environmental change at
this reservoir scale can be studied in situ enclosures and in adjacent smaller
experimental ponds and tanks.