* 9713276
* The Roles of Lattice Vibrational Excitation and Product     Electronic Excitation in Dissociative Chemisorption on      Covalent Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Sylvia Ceyer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/2000
* USD 512,000.00

This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, is concerned with the dynamics of halogen interactions with silicon
surfaces. Using molecular beam scattering methods, Professor Ceyer and her
colleagues at MIT will test the hypothesis that the high reactivity of XeF2 (as
compared with F atoms) with silicon is due to the large energy transfer that
occurs upon collision of the XeF2 molecule with the silicon lattice. This is
counter to what would be expected thermodynamically. Using a range of
fluorine`carriers` with differing masses, this hypothesis will be directly
tested. In addition, the detailed dynamics of abstractive chemisorption will be
probed by monitoring emission from electronically excited XeF* species which may
result from the interactions of XeF2 with the silicon surface. The etching of
silicon by fluorine containing species forms a part of silicon etching
technology, with applications in the production of electronic devices. This
research project addresses fundamental questions about the dynamics of surfaces.
Using a range of molecular beam and surface sensitive spectroscopic methods, the
effect of collisional excitation of the silicon lattice on the reaction dynamics
will be probed. The dynamics of abstractive dissociative chemisorption of
fluorine containing molecules will also be investigated.