* 9713852
* Acquisition of a Versataile Microwave Plasma CVD System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Relva Buchanan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 08/31/1998
* USD 96,650.00

Acquisition of a microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition (CVD) system with
capability for ECR (electron cyclotron resonance) source, in situ heater stage,
and DC bias will create a versatile CVD facility with capability for deposition
over a wide range of pressures and temperatures. Additional components including
12 channel mass flow controllers, vacuum pump, traps, and pressure
indicators/controllers will complete the CVD system. Furthermore, the 2
additional reactor chambers will avoid cross contamination because of the
deposition of different materials by Co-PIs providing flexibility in cleaning
without the reactor downtime. The microwave plasma CVD system will also be
capable of enhancing chemical vapor deposition of hard-to-process and unique
nonequilibrium materials/phases such as cubic boron nitride (c)-BN over a range
of temperatures (including moderate to low temperatures) because of the ECR
source and in situ heater stage. The system will have an initial capability for
deposition of a broad range of high-tech materials/coatings required for several
research projects of PI and Co-PIs. This CVD system will be used to synthesize
advanced thin films/coatings and unique materials including in particular: (a)
Carbide, nitride, or oxide coatings on a broad range of fibers to create
engineered fiber-matrix interfaces for studying their roles on the
micromechanics of crack bridging, fracture, and matrix cracking behaviors in a
number of research, projects on fiber-reinforced ceramic composites; (b)
Thermal/oxidation barrier coatings on superalloys and composites for
aircraft/aerospace applications; (c) Ceramic thin films for electronics, sensor,
and corrosion protection applications; and (d) Super-hard c-BN coating for
cutting tool inserts because this material performance better than diamond
coating for cutting iron-based alloys and several US companies like Kennametal,
MegaDiamond, GE, and Milacron have showed interest in c-BN and thermal barrier
coatings. While all of these are interesting materials, only a few important
ones, such as oxidation resistant fiber coatings, c-BN, thermal/oxidation
barrier (ZrO2/Al2O3) , and PZT will be synthesized initially. An
interdisciplinary team consisting of several faculty from the Department of
Materials Science and Engineering and a Visiting Scholar will be using the
proposed microwave plasma CVD system to process coatings for the current and
future research projects. Together this team has over 40 years of cumulative
experience with the processing of materials by CVD and characterization of their
properties. The availability of the system will enhance their capabilities for
synthesizing unique inorganic coatings for applications in fiber-reinforced
composites, cutting tools, corrosion protection, electronics, and environmental-
related areas. A strong interest is shown by a number of industries on research
work that will become possible because of the availability of this facility.