* 9713670
* A Design Methodology for Uncertain, Unstable Plants with    Hard Actuator Saturation
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Suhada Jayasuriya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 10/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

The major objectives of this research project are to develop a transparent and
practical set of design tools for synthesizing controllers for guaranteeing
acceptable performance in uncertain, unstable plants under hard actuator
saturation; to develop a methodology that removes the need for integral control
and more generically the need for imbedding an internal model inside a control
loop for a large class of problems; and to demonstrate the applicability of the
developed methodologies on two laboratory systems; one a single flexible link
attached to a rigid hub and the other a flexible link driven by a worm gear
transmission. In order to achieve the objective of developing a design
methodology, first stable, uncertain singleinput single- output (SISO) plants
under saturating control is considered. Next, SISO, linear, uncertain plants
with poles in the closed left half plane subjected to actuator saturation are
enclosed and finally linear, uncertain plants with poles in the right half plane
subjected to actuator saturation are investigated. Preliminary results indicate
that using local feedback around the saturation nonlinearity such that the
closed loop system has an impulse response of one sign allows the system to
gracefully come out of a saturation state so that feedback remains active for
the most part. Both time domain and frequency domain methods are considered. To
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed design methodology two laboratory
scale systems currently available in the PI's lab at Texas A&amp;M University
are used. Both systems are fully instrumented to be controlled by a PC. One of
the systems has a model linearized about a trajectory characterized by poles on
the imaginary axis and the other has a linearized model characterized by poles
in the right half plane. The key goal of the demonstration are to let the
driving d.c. motors saturate and to compare the performance with a controller
design that does not explicitly consider hard saturation.