* 9713497
* Nanostructured Magnetic Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* John Barnard, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 11/30/2001
* USD 362,184.00

9713497 Barnard This is a systematic study of processing/microstructure/magnetic
property interrelationships in nanostructured magnetic networks. The project
objectives include fabrication of a set of networks of varying dimensions and
magnetic materials, quantitative assessment of network microstructure and
topology, determination of the physical origin of the unusual magnetic
properties, and evaluation of the potential of network materials as magnetic
recording media. Networks are fabricated using simple sputter deposition onto
the surface of nanostructured substrates (nanochannel alumina), e-beam
lithography, and naturally phase separating systems. Quantitative
microstructural and topological characterization are carried out in both the as-
deposited and annealed states using a combination of scanning electron
microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy. The
nanostructural characteristics (crystallite size, crystallographic texture,
etc.) of the networks are documented by transmission electron microscopy and
selected area electron diffraction. Magnetic characterization and correlation of
magnetic properties with network geometry and dimensions are at the core of this
proposal. A multitechnique approach including temperature dependent
measurements, annealing studies, magnetic imaging, and ferromagnetic resonance
are used to develop an understanding of network magnetic domain structures,
reversal mechanisms, and stability. The unique topology of the networks proposed
here allows for detailed study of the effects of transitioning from traditional
continuous film media (nanoscale in one dimension, the thickness) to media
comprised of discrete pillars, bars, and dots (nanoscale in two or three
dimensions). This research project is particularly strong in the areas of
educational and human resources development. The program is multidisciplinary
and has strong fundamental and technological components. Both the graduate stude
nt and post-doc budgeted for the project employ aspects of solid state physics,
metallurgy, thin film science, magnetic characterization, materials processing,
microstructural characterization, and materials selection. %%% Nanostructured
networks are a unique geometry which exhibit unusual and potentially useful
magnetic behavior associated with their the small dimensions and novel topology.
A nanostructured network is a contiguous topology which may be pictured as a
thin film with a high density of holes or pores. When the pore size, mean pore
separation, and network thickness approach nanoscale dimensions, strong
confinement effects on magnetic properties (such as increases in coercivity of
more than two orders of magnitude over continuous films of equivalent thickness)
are observed. Networks are unique in that their dimensionality can be
continuously controlled at the nanometer scale by varying the thickness, pore
size, and porosity. The properties of magnetic networks are only beginning to be
explored.