* 9713107
* Dissertation Research: Social Organization and Changing     Labor Patterns in Anasazi Prehistory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Stephen Plog, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 9,951.00

Under the direction of Dr. Stephen Plog, MS Tracy Perkins will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze changes in food preparation
techniques among Anasazi peoples in the US Southwest during the period between
ca. 800-1000 AD. While the use of domestic crops such a maize significantly
preceeds 800 AD in this region, it was with the emergence of the Anasazi peoples
that the foodstuff became the central dietary staple. A number of important
social changes appear to be concomitant and villages changed from agglomerations
of individual below ground pit structures to larger mulit-room above ground
pueblos, examples of which can be found in the region today. Population size
also increased and groups adopted a more settled way of life. Men's religious
societies characterized by kivas also appear at this time. MS Perkins wishes to
understand how the organization of labor and thus basic social organization was
altered as part of this overall process and she will focus on one specific
activity - maize grinding. This was a crucial subsistence activity since
grinding maize before cooking significantly enhances its nutritional properties
and abundant grinding implements attest to the importance of this task.
Archaeological data indicates that at many Anasazi sites special grinding rooms
were present and are marked not only by a concentration of grindstone but
specialized bins built into walls and floors. MS Perkins will visit research
centers in the Southwest and record and synthesize information collected in the
course of past archaeological excavations. She will include this in a single
consistent data base and with this information determine how production changed
over time and how it varied by environmental and geographic region. Preliminary
analysis indicates that the pattern is not straightforward. The results will be
integrated with other classes of data to provide insight into the broader
process of social change. This research is important for several reasons. It
will synthesize a widely recorded but little analyzed class of data and the
results are likely to be used by many archaeologists. The work will shed new
light on how complex societies arise and contribute to training a promising
young archaeologist.