* 9713768
* Multiple Sensor Integration for Rapid Surface Digitization  and Agile Metrology of High Precision Engineered Mechanical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2002
* USD 305,021.00

This grant provides funding for the development of an integrated framework that
supports information integration of multiple sensors for rapid surface
digitization and agile metrology of high precision engineered mechanical
components. The objective is to develop an information integration technology
that facilitates rapid acquisition of high precision coordinate data, and to
demonstrate the developed technology using an integrated system. This integrated
system consists of a high precision coordinate measuring machine, a motorized
probe, a high speed laser scanner, and a 3D vision system. An intelligent
information aggregation module for sensor fusion and feature recognition will be
developed. In this module, high level geometric abstractions will be extracted
from discrete coordinates. When CAD models are unavailable, the resulting
geometric abstractions form a preliminary description of the surface geometry
and feature topology of an unknown object. The obtained information is
subsequently used to guide the laser scanner and/or the contact probe for high
speed coordinate data acquisition and to strategically control the coordinate
measuring machine for high precision/rapid sampling of critical surface areas.
By integrating the developed technology with the state of the art equipment, a
highly automated, high speed, high precision, 3D coordinate acquisition system
will be developed. Rapid acquisition of high precision coordinate data from
parts having complex geometry has many applications. Typical examples include
part localization and automatic calibration in inspection and agile machining,
coordinate metrology in dimensional control, and reverse engineering in rapid
product design and realization. The primary goal of this work is to develop the
required knowledge and technology that support multi-sensor integration and
information automation in the context of rapid surface digitization and agile
metrology. If successful, the results of this research will lead to significant
improvements in sensor integration and precision metrology. It will have
potential applications in a whole spectrum of manufacturing problems with a
major impact on metrology, inspection, and reverse engineering.