* 9713690
* Impact of Asset Utilization on Replacement Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* George Wilson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 208,592.00

Hartman 9713690 This grant provides funding for the development of an
optimization tool to determine replacement decisions for a group of assets
subject to a random operational environment. Traditional models, which provide
replacement decisions over discrete (annual) intervals, are based on expected
operating, maintenance and salvage costs which are dependent on asset
utilization levels determined by operational (daily) decisions. However, due to
uncertainty associated with operations, such as fluctuating demand or budget
levels, these expected utilization levels may not be realized in practice, thus
invalidating the replacement schedule. The research will link strategic
(replacement) and operational (utilization) decisions such that replacement
schedules are functions of asset utilization. This problem will be examined in
the context of the transportation industry, with sponsors including a railroad
and a truck leasing firm. A double-ended queueing model is researched to
approximate the operations of the transportation system and determine
utilization levels. This model is built into a non-linear optimization model
which determines minimum cost purchase and sale decisions. The research solution
procedure for the large scale non-linear program is based on augmented
Lagrangian techniques. There are numerous potential applications of this
research in industry and the military as these organizations generally rely on
groups or fleets of assets which are subject to varying levels of utilization in
an uncertain environment. The analysis will merge two traditionally separate
decisions, the static replacement problem and the dynamic operational problem,
such that strategic capital budgeting decisions are based on a measurement of
actual operations. As acquisition decisions are dependent on asset utilization,
the model will improve the asset replacement decision process which
traditionally relies on static data. This research will also contribute to
improved solution techniques for large scale non-linear optimization models and
provide more investigation into double-ended queues which despite their numerous
applications are not prominent in research.