* 9713739
* Analysis of Wind Loads and Structural Resistance Data from  Town of Southern Shores Low-Rise Structure
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Nicholas Jones, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 07/31/2001
* USD 116,152.00

9713739 Jones This project is to conduct the analysis of wind load and
structural resistance data from the Town of Southern Shores (North Carolina)
low-rise training facility structure. With the support of Project Blue Sky-
developed by the Town of Southern Shores and funded through FEMA and industrial
sponsors-the- PI is installing a full-scale measurement system in the Pitts
Training Center. The System will record the wind environment, pressures, and
structural responses for a multi-year period. The analysis of the collected data
will be made using state-of- the-art procedures, and the tailoring and further
development of those procedures to the wind engineering context. Specifically,
in addition to routine statistical analyses, the wavelet transform will be used
as a fundamental tool to improve understanding of the physical processes
involved in bluff-body aerodynamics. In addition, it is envisioned that these
techniques will improve our ability to model wind loads on bluff structures
through he use of wind tunnel techniques. If the structure experiences Atlantic
storms over the next two- year period, the likelihood that high-quality data
will be collected under strong- (up to hurricane-) wind conditions is high.
These data will be unique, and potentially will provide insights into wind
loading on low-rise structures that have heretofore been impossible. ***