* 9713644
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Thermozyme Biotechnology-    Study of Production of Lipase/Esterase From Bacillus        Stearothermophilus
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Chung-Dar Lu, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2000
* USD 25,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Chung-
Dar Lu of the Department of Biology, Georgia State University in Atlanta, GA,
and Dr. Ahmed I El-Diwany, Mubarak City for Scientific Research in Alexandria,
Egypt. The goal of this joint research is to study the use of thermozyme
technology for industrial applications, with focus on the following specific
objectives: construction of genomic libraries of a thermophile, Bacillus
stearothermophilus; generation of recombinant strains for intensive production
of thermostable lipase/esterase; pilot plant lipase/esterase production; and
improvement of lipase/esterase characteristics. Scope: This research project
will involve scientists who have complementary experiences and have access to
facilities that are needed for the collaboration. The first two objectives of
constructing a genome library on B. stearothermophilus and generation of
recombinant strains will be addressed at Georgia State by Dr. Lu and a graduate
student in his laboratory, where the necessary facilities exist, and where
similar work has been done earlier. The third objective of the lipase/esterase
production will be carried out by Dr. El-Diwany, while the fourth objective of
improvement of lipase/esterase characteristics will require interaction by the
two laboratories as well as by PHARCO, a collaborating industrial concern in
Egypt. Successful work on this project can lead to improvement in the production
of various enzymes that are capable of withstanding high temperatures without
adverse effects on their useful properties. Such enzymes are important and are
widely used in industry. This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.