* 9713914
* Torsional Vibration and Gear Rattle in Automotive Manual    Transmissions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Yu Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 09/30/2000
* USD 198,207.00

This GOALI/IUCP (Industry-University Collaboration Project) is a joint research
program between the New Venture Gear Inc. (Troy, MI). It develops modeling,
analysis and design techniques for the reduction of torsional vibration and the
elimination of gear rattles in manual transmissions of passenger cars and light
trucks. Gear rattle is produced by the impacting of gear teeth through their
unloaded mesh backlash as a response to engine torque fluctuations. The
complexity of torsional vibrations and various nonlinearities (e.g., backlash,
friction hysteresis, and multi-stage stiffness) of manual transmission present
many challenges for the analysis of torsional vibration characteristics and gear
rattle behavior. This GOALI/IUCP investigation focuses on a comprehensive
understanding of the torsional vibration and gear rattle characteristics.
Through the development of a new and powerful numerical analysis technique,
finite elements in the time domain (FET) an efficient modeling and simulation
capability is attained for performance assessments and parametric studies of the
strongly nonlinear system. This modeling capability is utilized to develop
computer tools to be used by the design engineers to discover; feasible
conventional improvements and to optimize powertrain configuration. Furthermore,
the computer analysis tools are integrated within Chrysler's vehicle powertrain
technologies such as the automated clutch with controlled slip. This project
provides a unique opportunity to combine the strong expertise in basic research
available in academic settings and the Chrysler's extensive experimentation and
product development. With Chrysler's support of research funds and the
participation of a 8-member team, this collaboration further strengthens an
established partnership with expanded industry-university interactions through
mutual visits, student summer internships, and collaborative experiments,
allowing the university researchers to sharpen their research focus while
tackling a serious real-world application problem.