* 9713609
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Synthesis, Characterization  and Application of Reactive Sizes to Cotton Warps
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Abdelfattah Seyam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2001
* USD 25,357.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr.
Abdelfattah Seyam, College of Textiles, at North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Nabil Abou-Zeid, of the Textile Research Division, the
National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt. The goal of this joint research is to
seek improvement in the sizing materials used in manufacturing of textiles. One
objective is to reduce or eliminate the need for removing the sizing. Current
sizes are designed to be washed off after treatments, thus releasing
considerable amounts of chemical waste in the water used for washing. A second
objective is to demonstrate that it is possible to improve the quality of the
final product with the permanent sizing. To accomplish this the researchers plan
to seek chemical bonding between the sizing with the cellulose molecules of the
cotton fabric. For this purpose, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) will be used. The work
will involve converting PVA with different molecular sizes to reactive products
through introduction of: N-methylol groups; chlorine; epoxy groups; and pendent
double bonds. These reactions will be carried out under various conditions to
control the reaction and hence the reactivity of the products and their other
properties. Selected reactive PVA products would then be applied to cotton
warps, and the resultant yarn will be tested for the desirable properties of the
woven fabrics. Scope: This research project involves scientists with significant
experience from two well known research centers in the area of textile chemistry
and manufacturing. The objectives of the research is to develop products that
can be used as permanent sizes which can then impart to the yarns certain
properties such as texture, wear, and weight. The NRC in Cairo has already done
a significant amount of exploratory work in the area of applying reactive
compounds to typical starch sizing materials. The NCSU researcher is an expert
in the area of resin-treated cotton yarns. The collaboration by these two
scientists will benefit from their complementary expertise as well as from the
wide range of chemical and manufacturing facilities at the two institutions. The
project objectives are of benefit to Egypt and to the US, since they both have
strong interest in improving the environmental impact of the textile industry as
well as the quality of the products. This proposal meets INT objective of
supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.