* 9713516
* Guest/Host Interactions in High-Silica Zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2001
* USD 255,680.00

Prof. Raul F. Lobo will study the host-guest interactions of organic structure-
directing agents in as-synthesized high-silica zeolites, in order to obtain
correlations between organic structure and pore structure. The synthesis will
evolve systematically from pure silica cathrasils to high-silica silica-alumina
zeolites, utilizing various derivatized alkylammonium salt templates, and will
affect cage and pore structures. Additionally, Prof. Lobo will investigate how
to control the density and location of defect and Al3+ sites during the
synthesis. Thermogravimetry will be used to measure internal volume.
Multinuclear solid-state NMR experiments will be used to characterize the
interaction, deuterium NMR to investigate the dynamic state of organic molecules
as a function of temperature and molecule size, and NMR of other selected labels
of the organic molecule to describe the molecule motion in several zeolite
structures. Heteronuclear chemical shift correlation of 29Si and 1H will be used
to obtain information on the molecular arrangement with respect to the location
of tetrahedral Al3+ cations and zeolitic framework defects. To characterize the
defects, also X-ray diffraction experiments will be done, for which 25 ? single
crystals of pure ZSM-11 will be synthesized. The NMR experiments and in
particular the spin-echo double resonance (SEDOR, 23Na{1H}) and rotational echo
double resonance (REDOR, 29Si{23Na}) will be done to determine the spatial
proximity of organic and inorganic components of the as-synthesized zeolite. The
proposed research will help to improve the design and synthesis of zeolitic
materials. This information will also be reflected in more accurate molecular
mechanics and quantum mechanical models used for template selection and zeolite
synthesis, and will improve the molecular simulation models of transport and
diffusion in zeolites. Extrinsically, it will provide a stronger fundamental
basis for the design of catalysts and molecular sieve separation materials with
tailor ed pore structure and active site distribution. These chemically active
materials support a major fraction of the chemical industry, including
petrochemical, fuels, fine chemical, agrochemical, and others.