* 9713014
* Workshop:  Third DIMACS Workshop on DNA Based Computers, in Philadelphia, PA, June 23-25, 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Harvey Rubin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 05/31/1998
* USD 20,680.00

There is a fundamentally new intersection of computer scientists,
mathematicians and molecular biologists working in an area loosely known as DNA
computation, in which the basic set of questions are in the process of being
defined. The field was born in 1994 when Len Adleman (USC) showed how to solve a
version of the traveling salesman problem using DNA (Molecular Computation of
Solutions to Combinatorial Problems. Science, 266, 1021-1024, 1994). Adleman's
paper had a catalytic effect on the scientific imagination even though it
admittedly solved only a "toy" problem that could easily be solved using pencil
and paper, let alone a teraflop supercomputer. By clearly articulating the
principles of his computation, the massive parallelism inherent in DNA
reactions, the energy efficiency of these reactions, and the enormous storage
capacity of DNA, he challenged the community to discover the limitations of this
approach. Furthermore, it is widely believed that, if these principles are
scalable, the potential of DNA computation would be truly spectacular. Richard
Lipton (Princeton) published a paper a few months later in Science (DNA Solution
of Hard Computational Problems. Science 268, 542-545, 1995) generalizing
Adleman's result to a fundamental problem in the class of problems known as NP
complete. The objectives of the Third DIMACS Workshop on DNA Based Computers
will be to present new work in the field and to disseminate in printed and
electronic form, information in all areas that relate directly to computing with
DNA including: algorithms, applications, techniques, architectures, practical
obstacles to DNA based computers, proposed solutions to such obstacles,
computational processes in vivo, and relevant ideas regarding biological
evolution. We will encourage papers reporting experimental results. The
Organizing Committee is composed of a diverse group of individuals from around
the United States. The Committee has made a commitment to make sure that st
udents and investigators with various and diverse backgrounds will attend the
meeting. We expect approximately 200 individuals will attend. DNA Computation,
is a relatively new field, without an established Journal. The June
International Meetings are the focus for the field. The Conference will be held
at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on June 23-25,
1997. The meeting will be announced in several scientific journals as well on as
on a dedicated web site. There will be three days of talks with time for
informal sessions and impromptu presentations. The Proceedings of the Conference
will be disseminated, as before, by AMS- DIMACS.