* 9713549
* Operational Methods in Semiconductor Manufacturing:  Methodsfor Modeling Stochastic Processes in Semiconductor          Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Lee Schruben, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Janet M. Twomey
* 12/31/2001
* USD 799,999.00

This award provides funding to investigate how the random elements of
semiconductor manufacturing impact overall factory productivity. Algorithms will
be created and tested for simulating dependent, transient random processes such
as product demand, tool reliability, operator availability, and step yield.
Statistical procedures will be developed for determining the types and amount of
data that are needed to accurately represent these processes in factory queueing
models and simulations. A central part of the research program will be designing
efficient experimental procedures for optimizing the performance and validity of
factory models. Experimental and analytical techniques for using these models to
support the optimal timing of resource investments such as tool purchases and
personnel cross-training will also be developed. If successful, this research
will provide engineers in the semiconductor industry with fundamental knowledge
necessary for the creation of valid models and efficient analytical tools useful
in designing semiconductor fabrication facilities. A key to improving the cycle
times and throughput of these multi-billion dollar factories is the
identification and control of the random factors of production. Conventional
semiconductor factory models assume that independent and identically distributed
random input processes produce steady-state output processes with known
performance objectives, economic parameters, and constraints. The realities of
semiconductor fabrication are quite different. In the semiconductor industry,
capacity requirements, product demands, and competitive cycle times are always
changing, as are the very products, processes, and personnel skills involved.
Currently, factory-level models are overly optimistic because they ignore many
of the transient dependencies in the random phenomena found in real
semiconductor manufacturing. This consistent optimism has had serious economic
consequences. Valid factory models based on this research will be critical to
the continued economic health of this vital industry. Furthermore, the costs of
data collection are enormous. This research will provide guidelines for
estimating how much data is necessary and how it should be used in engineering
design. The modeling methodologies developed in this research will also help
engineers to determine optimal settings of critical factory operating parameters
that can make the difference between financial success and disaster.