* 9713618
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: An Anchored Comparative Map  of the River Buffalo Genome
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Womack, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 12,540.00

9713618 Womack Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project
by Dr. James E. Womack, Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&amp;M
University in College Station, TX, and Dr. Soheir El-Nahas, Department of Cell
Biology at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of
this joint research is to utilize a panel of hybrid somatic cells, generated in
the Egyptian laboratory, to map comparative anchor loci developed initially for
use in the cattle gene mapping in the US laboratory. These will include
comparative anchor tagged sites (CATs) primers where applicable, and custom
designed bovine PCR primers for anchor loci recalcitrant to mapping with CATs
primers. The goal is to build a comparative map of river buffalo genome,
anchored at ten centimorgan intervals to the maps of cattle and other mammals
including human and mice. These maps will permit "comparative candidate
positional cloning" of genes of economic interest in buffalo from the high
resolution maps of other species. Scope: This research project will allow two
experienced researchers to collaborate on a project of significant potential to
the scientific interests in the United States and in Egypt. The project has
great potential for the improvement of buffaloes in Egypt through the
identification of genes for economically important traits and markers. The US
laboratory will be able to continue its pursuit of identifying the chromosomal
homology between humans and cattle, since most of the CATs primers remain
untested in cattle and consequently are unmapped. Thus any primers discovered to
work in buffalo by the Egyptian laboratory will have a high probability of
working in cattle and can then be added to the cattle map. The net result of the
collaboration to screen the CATs primers will be a more efficient screen than
either laboratory can perform alone. This proposal meets the INT objective of
supporting U.S.- foreign collaboration in areas that have shared benefits for
both sides. This project is being supported under the US- Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities. ***