* 9713708
* Development of Soil Filter Design Nomograms Incorporating   Physicochemical and Biological Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Larry Glasgow, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 03/31/2002
* USD 357,936.00

Existing criteria for soil filter design are based largely on particle retention
principles, often involving comparison of particle size distributions of filter
and the base soils, and do not account for filter clogging associated with the
transport of colloid-sized fine particles. This research addresses the need for
a comprehensive understanding and methodology development for design of filters
incorporating physicochemical and biological mechanisms. Recent advances in
filtration and biofilm theories will be exploited in the proposed research to
develop design nomograms from fundamental principles. Specifically, the goals of
the projects are: 1) to systematically perform an experimental evaluation of the
role of physicochemical and biological characteristics of pore fluid suspension
on soil filter clogging, 2) to develop and validate a mathematical model that
quantitatively predicts the extent of soil clogging in terms of physicochemical
and biological characteristics of the filter media and the pore fluid
suspension, and 3) to use the model in a design mode and generate easily usable
nomograms for designing soil filters. The experimental investigation will
include two stages. In the first stage, biological activity will be suppressed
and the effect of physicochemical characteristics such as the filter medium
properties (particle and pore size distributions, void ratios) and the pore
fluid composition (measured in terms of ionic strength/pH) will be assessed
systematically. In the second stage, bacterial strains will be introduced and
the effects of substrate concentrations and dissolved oxygen on biomass growth
will be assessed. The filter medium in the experiments will be thoroughly
characterized at the end of testing to determine the extent of particulate and
biological clogging. The influent and effluent will be monitored continuously
during the experiments. All information for model development and validation
will be generated from the experiments. Finally, the study will take advantage
of ongoing failure investigation on the Won-Ju landfill leachate collection
system in Korea. The mutual collaboration with the Korean team will provide the
field perspective necessary for validation of the research and the developed
design tools.