* 9713881
* FSML: Enhancement of Support Facilities for Visiting        Scientists at Konza Prairie Research Natural Area
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* David Hartnett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/1999
* USD 142,934.00

Konza Prairie Research Natural Area (KPRNA) is a 3,487 ha tallgrass prairie
preserve managed as a biological research station by the Division of Biology,
Kansas State University. Over 120 projects, involving KSU researches from 14
Departments and 5 Colleges, and 65 visiting researches from other institutions,
are being conducted on the site. KSU research on KPRNA is supported by $5 M in
extramural funding from 15 government agencies and private foundations. Current
facilities include a large renovated stone ranch house and barn that serve as
research and educational headquartes,a small laboratory, 30 km of fencing, 17 km
of maintained gravel roads, fire management equipment, and 60 watershed
treatment units (avg. size 0.55 km2) maintained under different long-term
prescribed fire and gazing treatment combinations. Ungulate grazers are managed
within a 949 ha bison enclosure and handling facility, and a 325 ha cattle
enclosure. The replicated watershed-level grazing and prescribed fire treatments
provide the infrastructure for over 80% of the research on the site. The overall
research on KPRNA, the numbers of visiting (non-KSU) scientists, and the number
of small plots maintained for their research programs have all grown
significantly in the last decade. Therefore, a three phase development plan for
KPRNA was initiated including 1) producing a long range Master Plan, II)
stabilizing and renovating the existing facilities and equipment, and III)
constructing new laboratory, support facilities, and living quarters for
visiting scientists. Phases I and II are essentially completed. This project
will begin Phase III and focuses on enhancing support facilities for visiting
scientists. Specifically, the project to increase laboratory space for visiting
scientists and to support the purchase of a special purpose tractor needed for
maintenance of both the long-term watershed-level treatments and the greatly
increasing numbers of small plots established by co llaborating and individuals
visiting researchers. The expansion of experimental plot research on KPRNA has
resulted from an increasing conceptual focus on key questions regarding 1)
underlying processes and mechanisms driving large-scale community and ecosystems
patterns and change, and 2) assessment of their generality across grasslands and
other terrestrial ecosystems via cross-site studies. Concurrently, matching
funds will be used to install onsite computing facilities and T1 computer line
connection to the KU campus, and to construct a new building to house fire
management equipment. The completion of this proposed work will significantly
enhance the KPRNA research capacity, laboratory and computing support facilities
for visiting scientists and students, and data management and communication
system. These improvements will facilitate further in collaborative cross-
disciplinary research on grasslands and other terrestrial systems.