* 9713886
* Construction of Tidal Marsh Mesocosms at the Baruch Field Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Bushek, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 48,000.00

This project will develop and construct sets of large outdoor mesocosms which
will be used by resident and visiting investigators to conduct manipulative
experimental research. The facility represents the next phase in the development
of field laboratory infrastructure designed to expand the usefulness of the
seawater, stimulate new research directions and collaborations, and provide
student training and public opportunities at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory.
New administrative, faculty, and staff appointments coupled with record levels
of research and educational use of the field station have resulted in plans for
the future growth and enhanced productivity of the Baruch Institute. The
mesocosm facility represents a major new initiative designed to promote the
testing of hypotheses regarding salt marsh structure and function. Comprehensive
long-term datasets based on up to 25 years of regular measurements in the North
Inlet Estuary have provided insights into the role of abiotic and biotic factors
in long-term change, but opportunities for researchers to conduct large scale
manipulative experiments in the tidally dominated natural system are limited. A
group of engineers and scientists will design a set of eight replicate 3.5m by
13m units which can be planted, flooded, and drained in such a way as to
simulate conditions in the adjacent tidal marsh. Associated infrastructure and
controls will allow for future manipulations using hydroperiod, salinity, and/or
temperature as test factors. A set of smaller mesosms will be established to
provide research opportunities for addressing questions which require different
spatial scales or time frames. Together, the array of units for ecological
studies will advance the research and educational goals of the facility, perhaps
more than any other improvement that can be made at this point.