* 9713569
* A Workshop on 'New Directions in Materials Design Science   and Engineering'; Atlanta, Georgia; October 19-23, 1998
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1998,07/31/1999
* David McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/1999
* USD 43,001.00

9713569 McDowell To refine the vision of Materials Design Science and
Engineering (MDS&E), develop a common understanding of its fullness, and chart
out a conceptual roadmap necessary to pursue it within the broad materials
education and research community, the Materials Council of the Georgia Institute
of Technology, in collaboration with the materials faculty at Morehouse College,
will hold a workshop in the fall of 1998 in Atlanta . The primary objectives of
the workshop are to identify the critical issues and potential impact of MDS&E
on the nationOs educational and research enterprise, both obstacles and
opportunities, and to identify specific areas for follow-on workshops. The
workshop engages keynote speakers and panel discussions in each of four themes:
Structure-Property Relations across Length Scales, Materials Synthesis and
Design, Elements of Process Design Science and Engineering, and
Multidisciplinary Materials Education. The distinguished speakers and panelists
in each theme are drawn from a broad range of science and engineering
disciplines. A report outlining a refined vision of MDS&E that identifies key
challenges and opportunities will result from the workshop. This grant is funded
by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate. %%% The workshop contributes to the directions that should
be taken in future materials research and development by examining anticipated
needs and impact in the field.