* 9713356
* Advancing the Techniques of Thermoleastic Fracture Mechanics of Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* John Nairn, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2001
* USD 169,735.00

CMS 9713356 PI: John A. Nairn University of Utah New techniques for solving
fracture problems in composites that treat the residual stresses commonly
arising in composite materials by using thermoelastic fracture mechanics
formulations are developed using a four-pronged approach: the derivation of new
exact thermoelastic fracture analyses specific for composites; the development
of approximate techniques including variational fracture mechanics, the analysis
of observed finite fracture events, and experimental verification. The exact
techniques provide new tools for analysis of composite fracture and are used in
place of stress intensity factor techniques, which are powerful for isotropic
and homogeneous materials, but are much less useful for composites. The
approximate techniques are aimed at finding general tools for accurately
determining the quantities appearing in the exact analyses. These techniques
will be based on new variational theorems that will make it possible to derive
useful upper and lower bounds for energy release rate. The term "finite fracture
events" refers to the observation that composites often fail by a series of
discrete fracture events (e.g., fiber fracture, ply cracking, or debonding)
rather than by continuous crack growth. The present work develops fracture
mechanics tools for dealing with such discrete fracture events. All analysis
methods are verified by application to real and relevant failure processes in
composite materials.