* 9713922
* 3-D Characterization and Analytical Description of          Desiccation Cracking
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Carol Miller, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/2001
* USD 258,576.00

This research focuses on desiccation cracking, and on the need to develop
geometric information on crack geometry through the development of
nondestructive testing techniques or application to fine grained soils that are
susceptible to changes in properties including strength, volumetric
relationships, and hydraulic properties. The objective of the proposed research
is to develop an ultrasonic nondestructive testing technique to determine the
depth of desiccation cracks in clay soils and to relate the depth of cracking to
various clay properties. The investigators will formulate a series of predictive
equations relating to the development and propagation of cracks, such as: depth
of cracking, surface crack density, and rate of crack propagation as a function
of plasticity and activity, mineralogy, initial water content, compaction
conditions, and strength of soils, and wetting and drying cycles applied to the
soils. The crack characteristics that will be analyzed experimentally include
soil moisture suction corresponding to crack initiation, depth of propagation,
surficial geometry, rate of crack propagation, and moisture flux through cracks,
with a focus on the effects of cracking on hydraulic properties of the soils.
The research will experimentally determine the modification of flow through the
clay as a result of the presence of cracks. The ultrasonic method will provide
an innovative tool to analyze the depth of cracking in soils, and will be used
together with previously developed image analysis techniques to determine 3-D
characteristics of cracks. These two methods can be applied to analyze tension
cracks, freeze/thaw cracks, or any other type of crack developing in soils. The
ultrasonic equipment can also be readily transported to the field for tests, and
photographs of the desiccation process are the only input required for the image
analysis. The predictive equations will allow for determining extent of cracking
using basic soil characterization data as opposed to complicated theoretical
solutions. Results of the research will apply to design and construction of
engineering structures on soils susceptible to cracking and construction of
waste containment facilities. In addition, the results will apply to groundwater
recharge problems, contaminant transport in the vadose zone, and agricultural
problems.