* 9713143
* Investigation of the Physical, Chemical, and Catalytic      Properties of Transition Metal Cations in Zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/2000
* USD 200,675.00

Abstract - Bell - 9713143 Profs. Alexis T. Bell and Jeffrey A. Reimer will study
the catalytic, structural and stability properties of transition-metal cation-
exchanged zeolites. Test reactions will include N2O decomposition and olefin
dimerization. The physico-chemical probes will involve TPD, and infrared, Raman,
NMR, ESR, and UV-Vis spectroscopy, both ex situ and in situ, in order to
determine cation distribution and oxidation state before and after reaction, and
adsorbed and reactive intermediates identity during reaction. Other techniques
such as XRD and SEM for microstructure, and Guoy balance for magnetic
susceptibility, will also be used. Double resonance, line broadening, and magic-
angle spinning NMR techniques will be exploited to probe the distribution and
electronic properties of exchanged cations. The influence of zeolite structure,
Si/Al ratio, co-exchanged cations, cation loading, and synthesis and reaction
conditions, on catalytic, structural, and stability properties will be
determined. In particular, the study will involve the use of commercial ZMS-5
with Si/Al ratios above 10, cation-exchanged with, e.g., Cu, Co, Ag, Ga, In, and
Zn. The synthesis-structure-property-performance relations will be studied to
provide a basis for the design and industrial application of transition-metal
cation-exchanged zeolites. This type of catalysts is of relevance in the
petroleum, bulk chemical, fine chemical and environmental protection industries.