* 9713724
* A Unified Framework for Robust Parameter Varying Control    with Applications to Engine Control Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Karolos Grigoriadis, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 06/30/2003
* USD 230,946.00

This research project deals with the analysis, design,and implementation of
robust controllers for nonlinear systems such as operating under variable
conditions such as internal combustion IC engines. The operation of modern IC
engines for automotive use must satisfy a diverse range on conflicting
constraints imposed by economical, environmental , societal and marketing
factors, such as; regulating exhaust emissions to near zero levels to meet
government standards, providing increased fuel economy consistent with consumer
acceptance, maintaining satisfactory vehicle performance over a wide range of
operating conditions, and performing safely and reliably over the life of the
vehicle. At the present time there exists no unified control methodology to
provide robust controllers for nonlinear systems with time-delays, saturation
constraints and large operating parameter variations. In addition, since modern
controllers are to be implemented in a digital microprocessor, issues related to
the implementability of these controllers are essential, but are often ignored.
Hardware limitations and real-time computational constraints require the
implementation of low-order digital controllers. This research project addresses
the important and challenging short comings and limitations of modern control
theory. Novel tools based on recently developed robust gain-scheduled control,
fixed-order control sampled-data systems, alternating projection algorithms and
linear matrix inequality methods are developed. The model of a diesel engine,
provided by Cummins Engine Company, is used as a design paradigm to demonstrate
the applicability of the developed techniques. Cummins has agreed to collaborate
closely with the investigators by providing industrial expertise, simulation
models, test data, and access to their experimental test facilities. The
research results provide valuable insight and optimized design methodologies to
control a large class of practical control engineering problems,such as engines,
robots and manufacturing processes in a unified and computationally efficient
manner.