* 9713608
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Chemical Finishing of Cotton Using Chitosan-Based Products
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Samuel Hudson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/2001
* USD 21,701.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Samuel
M. Hudson, Department of Textile Engineering, Chemistry, and Science at North
Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Ahmed I. Waly, Textile
Research Division at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The
objective of this joint research is to study the feasibility of using chitin
materials and products for finishing cotton fibers. Chitin is an acetylamino-
polysacharide analogous to cellulose in structure and abundance. It is a
naturally occurring polymer found in the cuticle of crustacea. A derivative,
chitosan, is obtained from chitin by deacetylation using strong alkaline
conditions. It is more reactive and useful than chitin by having both the
hydroxyl and the amino-groups. It is intended in this project to synthesize
reactive chitosan derivatives through introduction of chlorine, epoxy, double
bond, or methylol-containing moiety in the molecular structure of chitosan and
modified chitosan; it is planned to establish the appropriate conditions for
applications to cotton fabrics of these chitosan products either alone or in a
mixture with other finishes. Scope: This project will involve two experienced
researchers from two institutes for textile research, and with complementary
expertise and facilities. The American scientist has considerable experience in
dealing with chitosan materials and their various applications in the medical
profession and in other areas where toxicity would be a problem. The Egyptian
scientist has had experience in modifying these materials to add strength to
these fibers especially in wet environment. The successful development and
utilization of these chitosan products should help improve the properties of the
resulting fibers for general use in textiles, and especially for specific
applications such as in medical applications as a biomedical polymer useful in
wound dressing, as a hemostatic agent, and in drug delivery systems. This
proposal meets INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas
that have benefits for both sides. This project is being supported under the US-
Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in
both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.