* 9713743
* MOTI: A University-Industry Virtual Alliance for Radical    Innovation in Flat Glass Manufacturing
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Roger McNichols, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 08/31/2001
* USD 352,900.00

In close collaboration with companies spanning the flat glass manufacturing
value chain, this research team will assess changing end user requirements,
design tools to measure the impact of this continuous-discrete dichotomy on
manufacturing performance, and develop advanced tools that measure
organizational culture and structure. The objectives are target R&D efforts on
radical innovations in manufacturing operations with the greatest potential
impact on long range (2010) competitiveness, and to propose changes in
organizational culture and structure needed to implement radical change. The
flat glass manufacturing value chain were selected as partners because this
manufacturing closely couples large-scale, continuous glass making furnaces to
multiple post-furnace discrete-part fabrication and sub-assembly steps which
supply end users with diverse flat glass product requirements (e.g. automotive,
building products and flat panel display). The team will collaborate in market
assessment, model building and validation with company partners from the flat
glass industry, and will work with technical and management representatives to
ensure that the research learnings are transferable. Modeling of the
manufacturing system will address all process and distribution steps from raw
materials through production of flat glass to final customer specifications, and
will identify key research areas required to achieve radical innovation in
manufacturing. Modeling of organizational culture and structure will identify
and recommend techniques for overcoming barriers to the development, design, and
implementation of radical innovation. An integrated study of the value chain for
flat glass manufacturing will identify new approaches to radical innovation in
manufacturing and supply infrastructure. The results will stimulate
implementation of real time monitoring and control and activity based costing,
at the company as well as at the plant level. The knowledge can be transferred
throughout the glass indus try and to other mature, material intensive
industries through participating company partners, industry organizations and
government agencies such as the Department of Energy, Office of Industrial
Technology (OIT). Dissemination of research results through conferences, journal
papers, training tools, and case studies will significantly impact both theory
and practice of innovation. The results will enhance student preparation for
industrial and academic careers, and will stimulate further University-Industry
partnerships.