* 9713044
* Modeling The Growth Of Crystals From Solution Via High      Performance Computing
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2001
* USD 246,361.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9713044 Jeffrey Derby/U. Minn. This project will develop and apply
novel theoretical models based on massively parallel finite elements techniques
to describe the growth of single crystals from solution. The proposed models
features a self-consistent coupling of three-dimensional, continuum transport
analyses with detailed kinetic models for growth. This goal is significant,
since there have been no prior rigorous models to describe three-dimensional
effects representative of realistic growth systems. Subsequent application of
this model will focus on several outstanding issues in solution crystal growth,
including the determination of crystal growth rate and habit, the effects of
hydrodynamics open facet stability, the modification of growth habit by
transport effects, the dynamics of growth hillocks and spirals and related
phenomena (such as the effects of anisotropic surface diffusion on spiral
shape), the formation of step bunches, and the formation of liquid inclusions.
He understanding gained from successful modeling of solution crystal growth
systems will lead to better process operation and design, ultimately yielding
better quality crystals at higher production rates and lower costs. These
crystals have important current and future applications in advanced optical,
magnetic, and electronic devices. In addition, the computational challenges of
realistically modeling these systems are significant, and the continued
development of algorithms for massively parallel supercomputing will be
noteworthy in itself. This work will advance a scientifically important and
technologically relevant research topic involving the NSF-identified priority
areas of advanced materials, advanced research topic involving the NSF-
identified priority areas of advanced materials. Advanced manufacturing, and
high performance computing and communication. The proposed work focus on the
growth of large, inorganic crystals from solution; however, the fundamental
issues addressed here are also applicable to many other processes, including the
hydrothermal and flux growth of crystals, liquid-phase epitaxy, and industrial
crystallization (including protein crystals and other organic crystals). The
results of this work, namely the powerful theoretical tools and the more
complete understanding of the coupling of transport and kinetics during the
growth of crystalline materials, will undoubtedly also impact these areas.