* 9713793
* A Dynamic Analysis of the Crankshaft-Block System in an     Internal Combustion Engine Including the Elastohydrodynamic Behavior of the Main Bearings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Zissimos Mourelatos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 09/30/2001
* USD 135,000.00

This GOALI project is a collaborative research and educational effort between
the University of Michigan and the General Motors Research and Development
Center. It targets the general area of simulating the vibration and noise
performance of an operating engine, leading to design changes for noise
reduction. The specific research focus is on developing an analytical tool for
predicting the dynamic response of an engine crankshaft-block system including
the oil-film hydrodynamics. Previous work on dynamic reduction and lubrication
constitutes the foundation of this effort. The fundamental research concentrates
in the areas of developing a dynamic substructuring methodology for capturing
the local flexibility of the cap and bulkhead of the block dynamics, developing
a new perturbation technique for solving the oil- film Reynolds equation,
developing a computational efficient solution for the electrohydro dynamics
(EHD) lubrication problem, and developing a crankshaft-block-oil film coupling
algorithm. Applied research is performed in parallel by General Motors Research
and Development Center in applying dynamic reduction to crankshaft and block
dynamics, including the local flexibility of the bearing caps and engine
bulkheads, utilizing a `hourglass control` method for developing the oil-film
fluidicity matrices, and performing the numerical implementation and validation
for the crankshaft-block-oil film coupling algorithm. The educational objectives
are identivied in the ara of joint advising, introducing new technology into the
University curriculum, and developing a short course for engineers in the
Industry. Substantial investment in the part of General Motors is included in
the proposed work in terms of the paralled applied research effort, performing
testing for validation, time allocation for joint advising, and collaboration in
achieving all the educational objectives.