* 9713636
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Computer-Aided Design and    Manufacture of Fiber Reinforced Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Yasser Gowayed, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 32,512.00

9713636 Gowayed Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project
by Dr. Yasser A. Gowayed, Department of Textile Engineering at Auburn University
in Alabama, and Dr. Faissal Abdel-Hady, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Ain Shams University, in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this joint research is
to study the feasibility of manufacturing fiber reinforced composites using
computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing methods. Specifically the
goal of the two sides is to design and manufacture a compressed natural gas
pressure vessel from composite materials to be used in dual fuel passenger cars.
The two sides plan to: connect novel compost design techniques, developed by Dr.
Gowayed, based on Non-linear Programming (NLP), to machine control operators,
developed by Dr. Abdel-Hady; construct a computer-aided Manufacturing system for
filament winding at Ain Shams University; and manufacture a prototype for a
compressed natural gas pressure vessel for dual fuel passenger cars. Scope: This
research project will bring together the expertise of two scientists from two
countries towards accomplishing an objective with potential benefits to the
United States and to Egypt, as well as to the global environmental picture. The
purpose is to develop a light weight vessel that can be used to store liquefied
natural gas for use as a fuel in dual fuel passenger cars, thus reducing the
adverse emissions that result from burning petroleum products, especially in
congested cities around the world. The project can lead to establishing a new
research capability in Egypt for the manufacture of fiber composites using
advanced computer-aided techniques. An important feature of this project is the
participation of two private-sector industrial concerns in Egypt in the research
and testing. This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign
collaboration in areas that benefit both sides. This project is being supported
under the U S- Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. ***