* 9713547
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: An 18 O Paleotemperature Curve for  the North Atlantic for the Last 1000 Years, From Annual     Growth Bands of the Bivalve Arctica islandica
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* John Hayes, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 97,483.00

9713547 Weidman This study will produce an ocean temperature record for the
northern North Atlantic covering the last 1000 years, based on stable oxygen
isotope analysis of annual growth bands of the long-lived bivalve Arctica
islandica. Bands from the period ca. 500-1000 yr B.P. will be dated by
radiocarbon analysis, whereas those from 100-500 yr B.P. will be dated by
aspartic acid racemization which will provide significantly better precision
than radiocarbon for this period. An annual 18O record for the last 100 yr has
already been constructed from live-collected Arctica (Weidman and Jones, in
prep.). The study will be carried out using subfossil shells dredged from
surface sediments in the Nantucket Shoals region. This outer continental shelf
area is shallow enough to provide a temperature record of upper ocean waters but
far enough off shore to be away from the influence of continental freshwater
inputs. The site is further distinguished by being the location of a
particularly long instrumental record of temperatures obtained from the former
Nantucket Lightship and is currently a NOAA long-term weather monitoring site. A
time series of ca. 25 shells, spanning the relevant age range and each
containing a record of &gt;50 years growth, will be selected for analysis. The
second primary goal of this study is to evaluate cross-matching of band width
variations among individuals to construct an annual time series, analogous to
tree ring series. This has the potential to produce a continuous annual record
of environmental changes in the North Atlantic over recent centuries. Long
(&gt;100 yr), high-resolution records of marine environments are rare, in
contrast to terrestrial environments, and are largely absent for higher-latitude
ocean regions. This paucity of suitable ocean temperature records restricts our
understanding of linkages between atmospheric and oceanic climate variations.
Such information is critical to understanding the nature and causes of recent
climate changes. These include the long-term (century scale) variations of the
Medieval Warm Period, the Little Ice Age, and the warming trend of the 20th
century, which have been documented from terrestrial records, as well as
shorter-term (decadal scale) fluctuations such as the North Atlantic
Oscillation. The methods that are brought together in this study for the first
time to extract such records from mollusk shells can also be used to obtain
paleoclimatic records from other ocean regions. The 1000-year time series of
shell growth bands that will be assembled will serve as an archive of the marine
geochemical record and will be made available to other workers for other types
of analyses. The proposed study constitutes a collaborative research project
between G. Goodfriend at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and C. Weidman
at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.