* 9713846
* Energy Extraction-based Feedback Control Methods for        Silencing Noise
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Sameer Madanshetty, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 04/30/2001
* USD 305,604.00

In this research project,energy extraction methods for active noise control are
developed. A major goal is to explore and design robust feedback control methods
for rendering sound fields silent through energy extraction, and not via wave-
cancellation. The technique developed are applicable to local as well as global
silencing of sound fields. Further, these energy extraction methods are
effective for progressive sound fields (for example, duct-borne noise) as well
as reverberant noise configurations. Any selected resonant modes as well as
broad-band noise are suppressed. In the context of duct-borne sound, sound
energy is trapped (for extraction) in the region between the source and the
control. The sound fields, downstream of the control are essentially silenced.
Initial experimental work focuses on 1-D control of duct-borne noise with
subsequent extension to the acoustic caging of 3-D sound sources. Using the
proposed robust energy extraction methodology for noise silencing, in principle
all noise configurations could be silenced: 1-D, 3-D, progressive wave fields or
reverberant acoustic chambers. In all cases the noise could be confined to a
small region near the source, rendering all space outside the confinement zone
silent. Since the units do not exactly provide phase and amplitude matching for
silencing, they will be simple, robust, and economical and have universal
applicability.