* 9713943
* Engineering Environmentally Durable Carbon Fiber Reinforced Vinyl Ester Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1998,10/31/2001
* John Lesko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 10/31/2001
* USD 230,000.00

9713943 Riffle This project is an interdisciplinary plan for engineering carbon
fiber reinforced vinyl ester composites to meet the rigorous environmental
durability needs for infrastructure. Composite materials will be designed
specifically to withstand long-term moisture and UV exposure based on both
chemical constituents and composite construction, particularly fiber-matrix
interface design. The project encompasses modified resin and composite
development, hygrothermal and ultraviolet laboratory exposure, environmental
field testing, and residual mechanical property analyses as a function of
exposure. This is the first comprehensive study of an important class of
candidate materials for infrastructural uses where the constituent chemistry,
the environmental exposure, and the mechanics of degradation are linked. NIST
will provide state-of-the-art ultraviolet testing facilities and expertise for
both the laboratory and field experiments in collaboration with the project. The
Tom's Creek Bridge project, a vinyl ester/carbon/glass vehicular bridge
constructed in Blacksburg, VA during the summer of 1997, will be leveraged as a
field-testing site. The work will also be done in close collaboration with major
resin suppliers to insure that modifications under consideration have potential
for large volume production, and to insure that technology is transferred to
appropriate producers efficiently. The experimental plan is to design and
fabricate composites, age materials, and characterize damage. ***