* 9713755
* Power Efficiency of Active Structural-Acoustic Control      Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,05/04/1999
* Donald Leo, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 05/04/1999
* USD 185,066.00

This research project deals with the development of a general theory of power
efficiency for active structural acoustic control systems. Two classes of
problems are studied: the control of free-field sound radiation from structures,
and the control of structural sound transmission into enclosed spaces. For both
classes of problems, the power efficiency is defined as the reduction of
acoustic power output normalized with respect to the electromechanical power
input. The research emphases are to derive expressions for the power efficiency
for both classes of problems; to determine the effect of transducer selection
and control law implementation on the power efficiency; and to investigate the
fundamental limitations in power efficiency for active structural-acoustic
control. The research strategy consist of four classes. First, power efficiency
expressions are derived for both classes of control problems. An investigation
in transducer selection and control law implementation is then performed with
analytical models. Next, the fundamental limitations in power efficiency for
both classes of problems are studied. The final task is an experimental
investigation of the concepts derived from the numerical studies. The
development of power efficiency models is novel because it enables different
control implementations to be compared with a consistent metric. By providing a
systematic method of comparing the tradeoffs in active structural-acoustic
control, engineers are able to perform one to-one comparisons of such factors as
transducer selection and location, control law implementation, and
electromechanical design. The research provides a tool by which practicing
engineers can quantitatively compare the merits of active control designs for
applications such as the suppression of sound radiation in transportation
systems, aerospace vehicles, and precision machinery.