* 9713913
* Variable Weight Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines, Offset      Surfaces, and Gouging-Free Computer Numerical Control Tool  Path Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Kwun-Lon Ting, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2001
* USD 154,270.00

This grant provides funding for the development of variable weight non-uniform
rational B-splines (VW NURBS), a method for offset surface generation, and a
technique for gouging-free tool path identification in computer numerically
controlled (CNC) machining. The properties of VW NURBS will be explored. The
results from VW NURBS will be applied to approximate offset curves and surfaces,
in which the error can be adjusted by constructing weight functions of VW NURBS
and by using a subdivision algorithm. The gouging condition of a CNC machining
tool path will be identified by using the offset surface in user interface. The
proposed method will determine the optimal cutter radius and its inclination
angle to avoid any local interference in manufacturing free-form surfaces with a
ball-end mill or a flat-end mill. If successful, this research will lead to a
fundamental advancement in CAD/CAM development. VW NURBS is a systematic
extension of NURBS, the most promising model used in the current commercial
CAD/CAM software. It offers a more general model than NURBS and can enhance the
flexibility, capability, and efficiency of CAD/CAM systems. In addition to CNC
machining, the method of offset curve and surface generation can also be applied
to tolerance analysis, mold and die making, rapid prototyping, robot path
planning, and finite element mesh generation. The proposed gouging
identification method will allow one to optimize the cutter size and orientation
easily, and hence, enhance the productivity and quality of CNC machining.