* 9713625
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: High Yield Pulping of Rice   Straw and Cotton Stalks
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Hasan Jameel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2001
* USD 21,109.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Jameel
Hasan, Department of Wood and Paper Science at North Carolina State University
in Raleigh, NC, and Dr. Housni ElSaied, Cellulose and Paper Department at the
National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of this joint
research is to study ways to utilize basic cellulosic raw materials considered
to be waste from agricultural products, for producing high quality pulp. The
main materials to be studied would be rice straw and cotton stalks. The final
pulp would be tested for use in the packaging paper products in place of the
expensive imported materials or in combination with recycled paper material. The
use of mechanochemical processes can be expected to increase the percent yield,
in pulp from the raw material, from the low 20's to the 80's to 90's, while
reducing the aqueous effluent which usually include black liquor. The research
will include laboratory studies at the NRC, large scale testing at a paper
company (RAKTA) in Egypt, as well as at the US laboratory at NCSU. Scope: This
research project will involve a US scientist from a highly regarded department,
with a strong research program, and a senior researcher in the area of paper and
pulp at Egypt's largest research laboratory, as well as one of Egypt's largest
industrial concerns. These three groups will have complementary research
facilities, and should be able to produce the results described above. The
problem they are seeking to address is quite significant for many developing
countries, especially where forest resources are few or non-existent, such as in
Egypt and many countries in the Middle East. It is also important to the US
where the use of agricultural waste is quite desirable to limit the use of the
nation's forest resources. The work in this project will seek to reduce the
resulting pollution from this generally polluting industry which utilizes
chemicals for dissolving and polishing paper products. The collaborating
scientists plan to do laboratory work, to be later scaled up to manufacturing
conditions. This proposal meets INT objective of supporting U.S.-foreign
collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. This project is being supported under
the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.