* 9713967
* LExEn:  Experimental Studies on Hydrogen Biogeochemistry in Anoxic Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1997,09/30/2001
* William Reeburgh, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 09/30/2001
* USD 280,000.00

9713967 Reeburgh Hydrogen plays a central role in microbial metabolism and is
kinetically and thermodynamically maintained at low concentrations. Hydrogen
partial pressure is a major control on anoxic systems, and can be supplied
biologically and abiologically. Hydrogen can be detected and measured with great
sensitivity, but reliable measurements on natural systems are difficult, as
disruption of microenvironments by sampling may lead to production and
consumption hydrogen. Most studies on hydrogen to date have involved the use of
co-cultures, where two organisms are used to set and control the hydrogen
partial pressure. This project includes the development and application of an
apparatus that will permit setting and controlling the hydrogen partial pressure
of a culture system. Rate measurements and gas composition changes occurring in
the culture vessel detected by upstream-downstream gas measurements will be used
to study methanogenesis, anaerobic methane oxidation (reverse methanogenesis)
and isotope fractionation associated with both under a range of hydrogen partial
pressures. This project has three goals: 1) To build and operate a culture
system in which the hydrogen partial pressure can be set and maintained at
varying levels. The approach will be to set the system's hydrogen partial
pressure and study microbial behavior under a range of partial pressures. 2) To
use this apparatus to test the hypothesis that anaerobic methane oxidation is
conducted by methanogens operating in reverse at low hydrogen partial pressures.
Studies on pure cultures of methanogens, mixed cultures of methanogens and
sulfate reducers, and samples from natural environments where anaerobic
oxidation is known to occur will be carried out. 3) To determine C and H stable
isotope fractionation factors under a range of growth rate and culture
conditions. Fractionation factors are available, but are difficult to apply
generally because of the range of conditions under which they were obtained. The
apparatus developed in this study will permit upstream-downstream gas phase
sampling and determination of isotope fractionation factors under a range of
growth rate and substrate conditions. In addition to settling the remaining
question of the organisms and mechanisms responsible for anaerobic methane
oxidation, this approach will permit determination of isotope (C and H)
fractionation factors for both methanogenesis and reverse methanogenesis on pure
and mixed cultures under a range of conditions. The techniques for controlling
hydrogen concentration developed in this study may be useful in studies of
hydrogen metabolism and interspecies hydrogen transfer by other groups of
organisms in extreme anoxic environments. Funding is being provided by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Directorate for Geosciences and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.