* 9713950
* Second Conference on Firesafety Design in the 21st Century
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2001
* David Lucht, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 03/31/2001
* USD 68,099.00

The United States leads other industrialized nations in per capita fire losses.
Fires cost the American economy on the order of $128 billion per year, in
addition to thousands of human casualties. Of this amount, more than $20 billion
is spent on fire protection features for new buildings. Over the past thirty
years, researchers have developed promising new methods for designing fire
safety in buildings. And there is ample evidence these new approaches stand to
yield vast benefits in the form of more con-effective fire protection in
buildings of all kinds. Unfortunately, few of these new research results are
being used on a day-to-day basis by designers or regulatory authorities. The
purpose of this Second Conference on Fire Safety Design in the 21st Century is
to review the results of the last conference in the light of experience that has
transpired since that time; to review identified strategies for shaping the
future of applied fire research results and design practices; to make
recommendations for future change and to widely disseminate the results of the
conference. Conference attendees will include participants having perspectives
representing all facets which are involved in or affected by advanced fire
protection engineering design and regulatory practices.