* 9713415
* Control Configured Combustors:  A Systems Framework for     Active Control of Combustion Dynamics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1998,07/31/2002
* Ahmed Ghoniem, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2002
* USD 360,000.00

9713415 Annaswamy We propose to study active control combustion dynamics, with
particular emphasis on suppression of thermoacoustic instability. Our approach
is to develop a systems framework which will include (a) models for the
different components which contribute to the instability, e.g., the heat release
dynamics, the acoustic dynamics, the actuator-sensor dynamics, (b) the effect of
active feedback control on these components and their mutual interactions, and
(c) self-tuning algorithms as part of the control design to allow changes in the
operating conditions of the process. Each subcomponent model will be studied in
increasing order of complexities which are compatible with practical systems,
e.g., heat release dynamic models for bluff body-stabilized combustion, in
vortical structures in shear layers, from fuel injectors used as actuators, etc.
We will focus on showing, using a systems framework, how an overall controlled
combustor model which is synthesized using these component models is capable of
describing the subtle dynamic behavior observed in practical systems. Particular
attention will be given to an understanding of model-based control strategies
that are based on the predicted response of the combustion systems using these
models and that account for effects not previously understood, such as coupling
among acoustic modes and coupling among different controller components and the
combustor. ***