* 9713963
* FSML- Renovation of Dauphin Island Sea Lab's Wet Lab Facility
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1998,08/31/2001
* George Crozier, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

The Dauphin Island Island Sea Lab (DISL) serves Alabama's research and
instructional needs in the marine sciences. Students at all educational levels,
including K-12 pupils,undergraduate and graduate students, teachers-in-
training, elderhostel participants, and the general public, benefit from the
programs offered at DISL. Although DISL's academic staff and physical plant have
been growing steadily during the quartercentury of its existence, its
educational and research missions have been hindered by the lack of adequate Wet
Lab facilities for experimentation under controlled conditions. DISL has a
University Programs staff of ten academic faculty, all of whom are active
researchers and teachers. The faculty study a variety of basic and applied
problems in oceanography and marine biology, and they provide advice to
industry, government, and the public. Research areas include the effects of
spatio-temoral scale on herbivory in seagrass communities, predation on
commercially important fish at the larval stage, flow and mass transfer of
nutrients at scales ranging from the individual organism to the whole ecosystem,
the effects of eutrophication on water-column dynamics in near-coastal
ecosystems, the chemical oceanography of organosulfur compounds,
paleoceanography and paleobiology, and the ecology of gelatinous zooplankton.
DISL's current Wet Lab facility was assembled in 1987 and destroyed by Hurricane
Opal in 1955. It is at present running at a basic level and being used primarily
for holding specimens and for minimal instructional purposes. Each member of the
University Programs faculty at DISL has need of a far more sophisticated
facility for teaching and research. Collaborations between DISL faculty and
researchers at regional, national, and international levels would be greatly
enhanced by an improved Wet Lab. This vibrant project will support the partial
renovation of the Web Lab, bringing it to a level of operation commensurate with
the growin g marine science institution that is DISL. The existing building will
be refurbished to include a plankton and larval fish culture room; indoor
recirculating flumes for experiments on the biomechanics of flow; and indoor wet
tables for holding specimens. An on- site computer facility will be used to
monitor the seawater, freshwater, electrical, and associated control systems;
provide data management and processing capabilities; and make data available to
other researchers through the World Wide Web.