* 9713557
* Experimental study of Interfacial and Sub-Interfacial       Quasistatic Crack Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Sridhar Krishnaswamy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2001
* USD 155,411.00

Study of failure mechanisms in bimaterial and multiphase material systems is
motivated by the industrial importance of multiphase components made from
metals, ceramics and polymer composite materials. An understanding of failure
modes in these systems is relevant in applications ranging from advanced
composite aircraft structures to packaging of electronic devices. Failure in
such systems can be due to a variety of mechanisms: macro- and microcracking of
a brittle matrix, cracking along interfaces between dissimilar materials,
delaminations and so on depending on the specifics of the material system. Under
a prior research grant from the NSF, the PI's research group has developed a
compact Polariscope/Shearing Interferometer (PSI) that can be used as either a
polariscope or a shearing interferometer. This single device allows one to
obtain stress states from optically anisotropic materials (such as Homolite and
epoxy) as well as essentially optically isotropic materials (such as PMMA and
glass). The range of material mismatch parameters that can be provided by
combining optically isotropic and anisotropic model materials essentially spans
the range that is typically obtained in technologically important bimaterial
systems, consequently results from the model material combinations have wide
ranging applicability. Direct optical data regarding crack initiation from
statically-loaded bimaterial systems have been obtained. In this work, full-
field optical interferometric information will be obtained about the stress
state around quasi-statically propagating interfacial and sub-interfacial
cracks. The optical interferometers previously developed for monitoring crack
initiation will be used in this study in conjunction with a relatively high-
speed video recorder (6000 frames/see) to monitor quasi-static propagation.
Simultaneous with the video recording of the optical data, load and load-point
displacement data will also be recorded using a load cell and a linearly-varying
displacement transducer mounted on the loading device, and these will be used in
numerical modeling that can be of use in interpreting the experimental data. A
series of experiments on bimaterial and multilayer sandwich specimens will be
conducted. Phenomena of particular interest are: * the interfacial crack
propagation regime where the crack propagates entirely on the interface between
two dissimilar materials; * the crack kinking regime where the crack starts from
the interface but kinks into the material with lower toughness; * the sub-
interfacial crack propagation regime after the crack kinks from the interface
and continues in the material with lower toughness; * the crack tunneling
mechanisms in sandwiched layers. The data gathered, and the analysis performed,
should provide us with additional information to gain a better understanding of
crack kinking and crack tunneling phenomena, in addition to substantiating the
current state of knowledge of issues of interfacial crack initiation and crack
paralleling.