* 9714408
* Chemistry of New Zintl Phases in Supercritical Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 01/31/2002
* USD 280,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research by Dr. Joseph W. Kolis, Chemistry Department, Clemson
University, for the study of novel synthetic methods for transition metal-main
group solids. The relatively low reaction temperature of supercritical fluids
permits isolation of kinetically stabilized phases not otherwise easily
obtainable. Solids of the general formula AxMyEz, where A=alkali metal, M=Cu,
Ag, and E=S, Se, will be prepared in supercritical ammonia or ethylenediamine.
Attempts will also be made to use bismuth and tellurium. The resulting compounds
are expected to have low dimensional structures and potentially interesting
electronic properties. A dominant strategy for the synthesis will be to replace
monovalent alkali metals with divalent cations, or replacement of monovalent
coinage metals with open shell transition metals such as manganese (II) or iron
(II). In addition, new techniques will be developed for some unusual aqueous
solvents. Hydrothermal brines with high concentrations of halides, sulfides or
carbonates will be used to synthesize new metal chalcogenides under conditions
similar to those under which naturally occurring gems and minerals form. Solid
state compounds are useful in electronic devices, so development of new
materials and new methods to prepare materials are important areas of research.
The new methods to be developed with the support of this award not only are
novel and may result in useful new solids, but may have implications for
understanding formation of minerals in nature as well