* 9714845
* Symposium on the Advancing Frontiers of Condensed Matter    Science; Philadelphia, PA, October 13-14, 1997
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Elias Burstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9714845 Burstein A special Symposium on "The Advancing Frontiers of Condensed
Matter Physics" is organized at the University of Pennsylvania on October 13 and
14. This symposium will bring together highly regarded scientists in the most
promising subareas of Condensed Matter Physics for a two-day program of invited
talks and discussion sessions, to be held at the University of Pennsylvania. The
program features a session in which will be presented the results of the two-
year NRC study on the Future of Condensed Matter Physics as well as a session on
the Status of Basic Research in Industrial Laboratories. This symposium will
also be opened to graduate students. %%% A special Symposium on "The Advancing
Frontiers of Condensed Matter Physics" is organized at the University of
Pennsylvania on October 13 and 14. This symposium will bring together highly
regarded scientists in the most promising subareas of Condensed Matter Physics
for a two-day program of invited talks and discussion sessions, to be held at
the University of Pennsylvania. The program features a session in which will be
presented the results of the two-year NRC study on the Future of Condensed
Matter Physics as well as a session on the Status of Basic Research in
Industrial Laboratories. This symposium will also be opened to graduate
students. ***