* 9714122
* Developing a Framework for an International Study of Exemplary Practices in the Application of Technology to K-12Education
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Jacqueline Hess, Academy for Educational Development
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 01/31/1998
* USD 72,141.00

Developing a Framework for an International Study of Exemplary Practices in the
Application of Technology to K-12 Education Project Summary A number of current
efforts to restructure educational systems include technology as an important
component of the national strategy. In doing so, it is particularly important
for decision-makers and educators to understand the ways technology can impact
learning in the context of the culture, the curriculum, educational system
goals, evaluation criteria, as well as the costs and projected benefits of the
technology implementation. To help inform national policy decisions related to
the application of technology in education, it is particularly important to
identify and carefully document exemplary practices within different educational
systems. A well-designed study of U.S. and international experience in
educational technology implementation will provide examples of successful
strategies and will identify the problems and pitfalls encountered and how they
were overcome. The study may identify the importance of the knowledge, skill and
commitment of the teacher in successful integration of technology into the
learning environment and help define patterns and profiles that may help
distinguish successful technology implementation efforts within and across
countries. For example, what common characteristics and strategies can be
identified in the planning and implementation of technology at the state or
provincial level? In addressing these questions and others, the study should
help further an understanding of the appropriate application of technology
within different cultural contexts. It should also describe effective ways of
facilitating the transfer of educational technology under varying resource
constraints. The Academy for Educational Development (AED) and the International
Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) propose a project that will develop a
framework for an international study of exemplary practices in the application
of the new information technologies to K-12 education. The framework would be
developed by a distinguished group of approximately 20 national and
international researchers, educators and policy-makers who would come together
in a short-term intensive workshop. Prior to the workshop, a larger group of
educators, technologists, and policy-makers will be engaged in a 4-6 week
mediated on-line discussion in order to capture a broad view of the most
significant issues, approaches and experiences. Both AED and ISTE have extensive
experience and expertise in addressing international issues of technology in
education. The co-investigators and a number of individuals identified in the
potential list of invitees (see Attachment 1 ) have worked together in designing
the UNESCO ITEC Project: An International Study of Information Technology in
Education of Children. This experience will provide a base of knowledge related
to many of the issues related to designing a study of technology across national
contexts, educational systems, and cultures and will help assure that the
workshop and subsequent on-line work is productive and focused. The experience
of the ITEC study participants, coupled with fresh perspectives provided by
other invitees, will assure the development of a coherent and realistic
framework for an international study of exemplary practices in the application
of technology to education.