* 9714424
* National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing    Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,03/31/2002
* David Harrison, Sinclair Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2002
* USD 2,000,000.00

The National Center of Excellence for Advanced Manufacturing Education (NCE/AME)
is a national partnership focused on a customer-driven approach to manufacturing
education. The Center, funded in part by the National Science Foundation's
Advanced Technological Education Program, is operated by the Advanced Integrated
Manufacturing (AIM) Center, a partnership between Sinclair Community College and
the University of Dayton. Through its work, the Center encourages strong
customer/supplier relationships between manufacturers and educators. The program
is developing interdisciplinary curriculum materials leading to an associate's
degree in manufacturing engineering technology and is providing substantial
faculty development opportunities for all educators involved in manufacturing-
related fields. The program provides students a seamless educational pathway
beginning in secondary schools with possibilities to continue to a baccalaureate
degree and beyond. Faculty and teachers involved include those from mathematics,
science, communications, business, and engineering technology. The competency-
based, occupationally-verified approach to the programs' curriculum development
activities ensures that the skills acquired by students provides them the
knowledge and ability to become quick contributors to the companies that employ
them. These curriculum materials emphasize hands-on problem solving activities
throughout, enabling participants to build a strong foundation of analytical and
problem solving skills required for lifelong learning and technical growth.
Faculty and teacher development workshops offer opportunities for high school,
community college, and university educators to better understand the technical,
analytical, and interpersonal skills required in today's career fields and
provide tools for them to integrate these skills into the classroom. The
Center's partners include educational institutions throughout the United States;
manufacturing employers of all sizes; the Miami Val ley Tech Prep Consortium,
other secondary school systems; and teachers; national professional
associations, including the Society of Manufacturing Engineers; and local,
state, and federal government agencies.