* 9714833
* Urban LTER: Central Arizona - Phoenix LTER
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1997,12/31/2006
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 6,014,755.00

Grimm 9714833 This project is a long-term study of the Phoenix metropolitan area
and fringing regions of central Arizona into which Phoenix is rapidly expanding.
Objectives of this LTER program are to: 1) generate and test general ecological
theory in an urban environment, 2) enhance understanding of the ecology of
cities, 3) identify feedbacks between ecological and socio-economic factors, and
4) involve K-12 students in the enterprise of scientific discovery. Phoenix is
one of the largest and most rapidly growing cities of the arid and semi-arid
American west. Because Phoenix is young, urban redevelopment is minor compared
to expansive growth of the city's edges, where agricultural lands and natural
desert habitats are being rapidly converted to suburbia. Historic patterns of
growth will be reconstructed using maps, planning documents, aerial photographs
and satellite imagery to generate a GIS-based record of urban change. Modeling
will be centered on a hierarchical, spatially-explicit, patch-dynamic approach,
based on land-use patch types. At intermediate scales, landscape models will be
developed to determine configuration effects of multiple patches. A regional
simulation model of the entire area will be developed to predict and test
ecological consequences of alternative patterns of future development. Patch-
specific ecological characteristics will be monitored in five core areas:
primary production, natural population and community characteristics, storage
and dynamics of organic matter, movement of materials (including water), and
patterns of disturbances by redevelopment, fire and flood. A successional model
will guide this work; both short-term ecological trends associated with land-use
change at the patch scale, and long-term changes as patches mature will be
followed. Of special interest is ecological change within a given patch type on
the city-center to suburban-edge gradient. Socioeconomic factors are included in
this study as feedbacks between land-use decisions and ecol ogical
characteristics. That is, how do ecological features shape land-use decisions
and how, in return, do ecological consequences modify future land use policy?
Research will determine the importance of ecological factors to individual
perceptions of quality of life. In addition, objective analyses of change in
property values and shifting demographic patterns within the urban landscape
will be assessed as an indicator of ecological and other values. These efforts
will be enriched by multiple partnerships with agencies and municipalities. This
research effort includes a substantial commitment to K-12 education by involving
teachers and students as hands-on research partners, through interaction with
developing urban science curricula, and by providing a real time electronic
interface with research discoveries via the Internet. This component of the
project is enhanced by a strong interface with numerous educational partners in
the greater Phoenix area.