* 9714166
* 1998 National Science Foundation Design and Manufacturing   Grantees Conference; Monterrey, Mexico; January 5-8, 1998
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Way Kuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 208,266.00

This award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design and
Manufacturing Grantees Conference. The conference will involve researchers from
the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation, the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers, the Division of Electrical and Communication
Systems and the Mechanics and Materials Program in the Division of Civil and
Mechanical Structures, located within the Directorate for Engineering, the
Division of Information, Robotics and Intelligent Systems, located within the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and
manufacturing related projects in the Division of Materials Research, located
within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The conference
ensures that the individual researchers are informed about the ongoing
activities of their colleagues. An elimination of duplication of their efforts
may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from this activity. An
overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity could be expected. In
addition, the conference program organization allows for ample time to discuss
manufacturing research in detail with the collective research community at the
meeting, with feedback to and input from the National Science Foundation.
Finally personal contacts between the grantees and program directors in the
Divisions should contribute to clarifying many current issues in their work. The
aims of the conference are to enhance communication between researchers,
encourage joint research, promote synergism, and develop networks for technical
interchange. Attendees to the conference gain an early access to the information
disseminated.