* 9714914
* US-India Cooperative Research: Evaluation and               Characterization of Composite Materials Under Dynamic       Loading Conditions, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Bhagwan Agarwal, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2000
* USD 13,548.00

9714914 Agarwal Description: This award is for the US-India research
collaboration "Evaluation and Characterization of Composite Materials under
Dynamic Loading Conditions". The co-investigators are Professors Shukla of the
University of Rhode Island and B.D. Agarwal, Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT), Kanpur. The PIs will carry out research utilizing the experimental
facilities established under an earlier Special Foreign Currency grant that
supported the development of a dynamic stress and fracture analysis laboratory
at IIT, Kanpur. The facility is now ready and is being used for dynamic
photoelastic experiments. The focus of the research is to further developments
in the fabrication of transparent composites and to conduct new investigations
on the dynamic fracture and damage growth in fiber reinforced composite
materials. The experimental technique will utilize the principles of dynamic
photography and fractography. Scope: This award will allow the PIs to continue
the interesting work begun on the characterization of composite materials under
dynamic loading conditions using the now completed experimental facility at
Kanpur. The PIs have developed a unique technique for determining the internal
strain state of composite materials. These materials are finding increasing
application, many of which will involve dynamic loading. The research will
provide new fundamental information about composite materials. The benefits are
mutual and the research results will be published. ***