* 9714668
* Complimenting Internet Caching With Pseudo-Serving          to Mitigate Network Congestion
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* S. Louis Hakimi, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 02/28/2003
* USD 312,501.00

Under flash-crowd conditions, where congestion arises near the server because a
large number of users wish to retrieve files from it over a short period of
time, users are in a unique position to benefit enormously from each other by
sharing retrieved files. Pseudo-serving, a new paradigm for Internet access,
provides incentives for users to contribute to the speedy dissemination of
server files through a contract set by a super-server. Under this contract, the
super-server grants a user a referral to where a copy of the requested file may
be retrieved in exchange for her assurance to serve other users for a specified
period of time. In this proposed project, we will investigate issues that must
be resolved in order to make pseudo-serving an effective tool for dissipating
flash-crowds on the Internet. This includes issues related to the acceptability
of the contract to the user, the ability of the super-server to set contracts
that account for the physical distribution of sources of the requests, security
issues and various approaches in dealing with contract breaches, and strategies
for integrating pseudo-serving into various caching policies. The outcome of
this research will help the World Wide Web to scale more gracefully and provide
a mechanism through which users can barter their local resources for
preferential access to information from busy servers.