* 9714991
* Gordon Research Conference on "Electronic Materials:        Chemistry, Excitations, and Processing," New England        College, Henniker, NH
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Steven George, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1998
* USD 7,000.00

9714991 Storm A Gordon Research Conference will be held July 6-11, 1997 on
'Electronic Materials: Chemistry, Excitations, and Processing' with focus on
chemical issues in the growth, processing, and performance of three materials
systems--Group III Nitride Semiconductors, Organic Thin films, and Quantum
Confinement Structures. Emphasis will be given to the role of molecular and
collective excited states in the emission of light and in synthesis and
processing via excited states and non-thermal pathways. New applications and new
techniques will be explored in three special sessions; a)requirements for
quantum materials for computing and communicating in the 21st century, b)newer
synthetic methods, expected to have impact on electronic materials in the next
decade, c)new and powerful optical techniques for in situ monitoring during
growth and processing. Objectives of the Conference are: a)to stimulate
communications among the materials communities working in these areas, b)to
delineate the crucial role of chemistry in moving these materials systems to
technological success, and c)to stimulate the academic chemistry, materials
science and engineering, and condensed matter physics communities toward
multidisciplinary, collaborative research and education in electronic materials.
NSF funds will be used to support participation by graduate students and young
faculty. There will be an opportunity to assess the field, future directions,
and to establish ties between universities, research institutions, and industry.
It is expected that top scientists in the field will attend, and that the
symposium will provide an effective forum to discuss and delineate critical
scientific issues. %%% An evaluation of chemical issues in the growth,
processing, and performance of the materials systems--Group III Nitride
Semiconductors, Organic Thin films, and Quantum Confinement Structures,
especially critical materials and device related research areas, and the
relationship of materials research to device fabric ation along with current
assessments of the most important developments in this field will be of great
value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of materials in computing,
data processing, and communications. ***