* 9714859
* Earthquake Deformations of Subway Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Vincent Lee, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1999
* USD 99,995.00

9714859 Lee Most large metropolitan areas here in the United States, or
countries in other parts of the world, already have or are planning to have
underground infrastructure systems as an alternate way of urban transportation.
It is important to understand the characteristics of damages associated with the
underground construction and to find out the cause of both geotechnical as well
as structural deformations, and also, to study the influence of local site
effects in the vicinity of the structure on the amplification of structural
deformations resulting from strong earthquake motions. Experiences from previous
earthquakes suggest that the recorded motions in some areas had larger than
expected amplitudes. These are usually areas with large depths of alluvial
sediments together with comparatively soft soil deposits near the surfaces.
Massive civil infrastructures (dams, freeway networks, bridges and now the
underground subways) respond to strong earthquake ground motions that are highly
dependent on the surface and subsurface topographies at the local sites. This
project is to study the effects of the interactions among the subways, the
multiple structural foundations and the local geology, to explore how all these
key elements will affect the resulting amplifications of foundation motions. The
proposed method is based on the wave propagation in elastic solid media. The
challenge in solving the problem will be in the boundary conditions where the
nonorthogonal compressional and shear potentials are coupled. This will be
overcome with expanded series and integral representations of the wave
potentials. Results from these studies will be compared with the actual
deformations as recorded from previous earthquakes. The comparisons will serve
as guidelines to the correct modelling of the problem under consideration. With
proper understanding of how surface (buildings and freeways) and subsurface
(underground subways) structures performed during str ong-motion earthquakes,
future structural design of new buildings and retrofit plans for existing
structures can be improved by including these local site effects to provide the
correct design strength and reinforcement. Then it will help to minimize
property damage and the loss of life in future earthquakes to come. ***