* 9714885
* Air-Sea Coupling Mechanisms in Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Lynn Shay, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 570,356.00

9714885 Shay The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Office of Naval
Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the
USWRP. One of the primary goals of the USWRP is to perform the research
necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts of hurricanes. The goal of
this research effort is to improve understanding of the role of air- sea
interactions in modifying the near-surface wind structure of tropical cyclones.
Of particular importance is to understand the role of these interactions as
tropical cyclones pass over warm oceanic features that surround the United
States Eastern Seaboard and the Gulf of Mexico states. Specific research
objectives are: (a) Determine locations and heat content of warm core oceanic
eddies; (b) Examine the forcing of warm ocean features on enhanced surface
stresses, fluxes and waves in the APBL and the role of the OPBL feedback on the
APBL; and (c) Quantify the roles of mixing and horizontal advection of SST and
salinity gradients including the mass, heat and salt budgets in the OPBL.
Research approach involves an ocean monitoring program based on satellite remote
sensing to detect warm, mesoscale oceanic features during the summer months.
These features will be monitored using the analyzed sea-surface height anomalies
derived from the NASA TOPEX and Geosat Follow On missions to determine their
locations relative to the forecast storm track. Sea surface temperatures will be
monitored from Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer. Additionally, as part
of the NOAA Hurricane Research Division experimental field program, a coupled
atmospheric and oceanic ob servational program will be conducted from an NOAA
aircraft. Observations will include measurement of upper ocean current,
temperature and density structure using airborne expendable profilers.
Concurrent observations of the turbulent fluxes of momentum, heat and moisture
in the APBL during these oceanographic deployments; and remote-sensing of
surface winds and stresses using the Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometer and
airborne C-Band Scatterometer, and possibly 2-dimensional directional wave
spectra from the NASA Scanning Radar Altimeter will be acquired during
reconnaissance and research missions. Successful completion of this research
will lead to a better understanding of the role of warm upper oceanic features
on surface wind variations. This may lead to improved boundary layer
parameterizations and improved hurricane intensity forecasts. ***