* 9714058
* FSML: Upgrade of the Scientific Capabilities of the         Romberg Tiburon Center's Research Vessel
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* William Kimmerer, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/2000
* USD 99,000.00

The Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies is a marine laboratory
operated by San Francisco State University (SFSU), a predominantly undergraduate
institution (M.A.) highest degree awarded) with a 57% minority enrollment. The
Romberg Tiburon Center (RTC) is the only academic research facility on San
Francisco Bay, one of the largest estuaries in the US It is primarily a graduate
facility with a tightly focused research mission aimed toward gaining
fundamental understanding of the physical and bilogical processes of San
Francisco Bay and its surrounding environments. Research scientists at RTC have
trained and supported over 45 students in the last five years and have extensive
collaborations with fellow university, and federal and local environmental
agency scientists. RTC initiated in 1996 its annual Visiting Scientists Program,
which supports a visiting scientist at the Center, and 2 other visiting
scientists will be in residence in 1997-1998 as well. Fundamental aspect of
RTC's research and educational program involves the use of the Research Vessel,
the R/V Questuary. This 38 foot vessel was acquired in 1991 and underwent major
renovations costing approximately $90,000 in order to be re-engined this year.
Although the Questuary is now a modern, sea worthy vessel, it is capable of
limited oceanographic sampling and database development due to its out-of-date
navigational and scientific sampling equipment. The primary objective of this
project is to upgrade the scientific capabilities of the Center's primary
research vessel by acquiring an integrated instrument package to collect
environmental data with high spatial and temporal resolution and state-of-the-
art data acquisition and storage.