* 9714161
* LEXEN:  Methanogenesis and the Climate of Early Mars
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* James Kasting, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1999
* USD 111,497.00

9714161 Kastings The project involves theoretical modeling of the effect of
methane and CO2 ice clouds on martian paleoclimate. Early Mars appears to have
been warm and wet, yet existing climate models, which assume a C02-H20
atmosphere, have been unable to explain this. Preliminary calculations show that
the addition of ~1% CH4 to the martian paleoatmosphere could have brought the
mean global surface temperature above the freezing point of water early in the
planet's history. Most of the warming is caused by the absorption of incoming
solar radiation at visible and near-infrared wavelengths. Methane has a complex
band structure in this wavelength region that needs to be accurately
parameterized in order to do the climate calculation properly. C02 ice clouds
also need to be included in the computer model to determine their effect on the
planetary radiation balance. Calculations with an atmospheric photochemical
model suggest that a CH4 mixing ratio of 1% by volume could have been maintained
if there was a source of methane at the martian surface comparable in magnitude
to the present biological flux of methane on Earth. Such a source could, in
principle, have been provided by methanogenic bacteria living on the surface of
early Mars or within basaltic rocks. The recent identification of possible
fossilized bacteria in the martian meteorite ALH84001 is entirely consistent
with this scenario. Finding a solution to the early Mars climate problem would
help us to better understand Mars' history and may have implications for the
prevalence of life on other planets both within and beyond our own Solar System.
This award is jointly supported by Division of Atmospheric Sciences, Astronomy
and the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities