* 9714253
* Mechanisms for Rapid Intensity Changes in Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* William Frank, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/2002
* USD 295,889.00

9714253 Frank The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval
Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the
USWRP. The intense winds and rainfall! associated with landfalling hurricanes
are organized on smaller scales than those that can be forecast using currently
available analyses and models. Although much of the damage caused by hurricanes
results from small-scale and rapidly changing features of the core, the physical
mechanisms governing changes in the winds, convection and related phenomena are
poorly understood. There is, however, growing evidence that the major changes
and asymmetries observed in the cores of hurricanes are strongly modulated by
larger- scale features that can be predicted. A promising approach to improving
forecasts of the structure and intensity of hurricanes near landfall is to
improve our quantitative understanding of these causal relationships. This
research program will study the mechanisms by which hurricane structure and
intensity vary near and after landfall using a series of numerical simulations
of hurricanes. A state-of-the-art non-hydrostatic model will be used to simulate
rapid, small-scale variations in the hurricane core as it responds to imposed
variations in wind speed, vertical wind shear, large-scale gradients and
anomalies of potential vorticity, and changes in boundary layer processes. A
primary focus of the study will be on the manner in which the imposed variations
in external circulations and surface properties affect the hurricane's secondary
circulation, and hence modulate the magnitude and distribution of convection.
The re search will also analyze the manner in which asymmetries in the storm
convection, including convection in the spiral rainbands, affect the storm's
intensity and core structure. The results should provide significantly improved
understanding of the processes governing rapid changes in hurricane structure,
and they should be of immediate use in improving forecasts of the winds, storm
surge and rainfall in hurricanes. ***