* 9714869
* WORKSHOP: Project Kaleidoscope Faculty 21 Summer Institute
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Jeanne Narum, Independent Colleges Office
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

9714869 Narum The F21, (Faculty for the 21st Century) Network, at the Center of
PKAL, (Project Kaleidoscope), fosters agents of change within the undergraduate
science/mathematics community. By enabling faculty at an early career stage to
make connections with the present generation of leaders and engage in productive
dialogue and meaningful activity directed toward transforming the undergraduate
natural science community, PKAL will help build a foundation for the future of
education and science in this country. As the PKAL F21 Network grows, it is
imperative to develop and expand opportunities for connections and professional
growth available to F21 members. Through a rigorous application process, the PI
will identify approximately fifteen F21 members each for a series of Summer
Institutes during the next three years. F21 participants will reflect the
diversity in higher education in this country; they will also represent the
various scientific disciplines. Selected participants will spend five days with
a small group of national leaders in education, public policy, and research who
will serve as mentors to Institute participants. The F21 Summer Institutes will
offer a carefully-orchestrated and coordinated set of activities, providing:
opportunity for serious dialogue about the future of science and technology in a
changing world and about the capacity of undergraduate SME&T programs-now and in
the future-to serve the national purpose, time to reflect on personal and
professional goals, templates for outlining an agenda for action in coming
months and years that enables them to achieve their goals and support as they
move toward implementing their agenda for action. Assessment will be a key part
of the PKAL F21 Summer Institute program. The PI will seek to determine the
increased leadership involvement at both the local and the national level in the
continued effort to transform the learning environment for undergraduates in
SME&T.