* 9714757
* WGIDPO:  Gaining Confidence in Math:  Instructional         Technology for Girls
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Klaus Schultz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/2001
* USD 638,448.00

Mathematics is a critical filter for girls' participation in science and
engineering careers, yet many girls dislike and avoid math, and are therefore
underprepared for college science majors and graduate programs. The goal of this
project is to increase girls' interest in math and their confidence in their
ability to learn math, through the power of intelligent computer instructional
technology. In collaboration with teacher partners (classroom teachers, and math
and computer specialists) the awardee has developed a computer tutor,
WhaleWatch, for teaching fractions to elementary school girls and boys.
Preliminary experiments indicate that girls who work with WhaleWatch show
enhanced math self concept and also place a higher value on the AnimalWatch, to
include a) 20 hours of mathematics activities and biology; b) extensive graphics
and visualization tools for instruction; and c) enhanced instruction and help
features that are individually tailored to each student's progress. The impact
of AnimalWatch on girls' math self concept, their beliefs in the value of
learning math, and their emotions and attributions about math performance will
be evaluated in fifth grade classrooms in collaborating school districts, to
identify the learning conditions that are most beneficial for girls. The effects
of AnimalWatch on teachers' expectations about female students will also be
evaluated. To effect systemic change in math instruction, teachers will be
provided with and trained in the use of AnimalWatch, which will be distributed
via CD-ROM.