* 9714276
* LEXEN:  Combining Culturing and Non-Culturing Approaches for the Isolation of Prokaryotes from a Hyper Arid Desert      Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* John Battista, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 09/30/2001
* USD 166,640.00

RAINEY 9714276 ABSTRACT Hyper-arid deserts can be considered extreme
environments with respect to their conditions of low humidity and low water
activity. Such natural environments on Earth represent the conditions closest,
with respect to the degree of desiccation, to those reported in free space or on
the Martian surface. The Atacama Desert in Chile, with rainless regions and low
humidity, is such a hyper-arid desert. Microbiological studies of arid
environments have generally involved semi-arid to arid environments is
available. The primary objective of the proposed study is to investigate
enrichment and isolation methodologies that will maximize recovery of the entire
range of prokaryotic diversity within a given sample from this extreme
environment. This will be achieved by employing different isolation and
enrichment techniques and monitoring the progress of these enrichments at the
molecular level. Both aerobic and strictly anaerobic communities will be
targeted. Various doses of ionizing and uv radiation will be applied as a
selective enrichment strategy. This study will provide bacterial stains that
will represent the diversity in a hyper-arid environment and that can be used
for further studies on the survival of microorganisms in similar extreme
environments, including extraterrestrial environments. These bacterial strains
will constitute a resource of model microorganisms for future studies of the
link between ionizing radiation resistance and desiccation resistance.