* 9714751
* WGIDPO:  Gender-Equity in Science, Engineering and Mathematics Education:  Making Connections for 3rd to 5th Grade Girls
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Kristina Johnson, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/2002
* USD 838,139.00

Girls' interest and confidence toward science, engineering and mathematics (SEM)
decline substantially as they advance through school. This change, followed by
declining SEM participation, reflects multiple factors such as gender bias in
classroom instruction styles and curriculum content, strong stereotypes
regarding acceptable roles for women, the perception of SEM as a masculine
realm, and girls' difficulty appreciating the relevance of SEM. This problem is
especially acute in some socioeconomic groups. This project brings together a
consortium of institutions and programs (Metropolitan State College of Denver,
The Optoelectronic Systems Computing Center; CU-Boulder, Educational Equity
Center, Girls' Inc., and Denver CONNECT) to affect girls and their teachers in
three diverse, urban school districts (including the Denver Public Schools with
over 66,000 students). Interventions focus on grades 3 to 5, the years during
which girls' comfort with SEM begins to decline. Programs address curriculum,
professional development, preservice instruction, and outreach and enrichment
activities. Collectively, these efforts will influence the entire educational
milieu including girls, their families, and their teachers. The project will
permanently establish a process of curriculum, pedagogical and attitudinal
change focusing on gender equity and how mathematics and science are taught at
the elementary school level.