* 9714354
* Improvement in QPF of Landfalling Atlantic Hurricanes Using  Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Gregory Tripoli, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2002
* USD 272,700.00

9714354 Tripoli The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Office of Naval
Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the
USWRP. One of the primary goals of the USWRP is to perform the research
necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts of hurricanes. This research
effort is a collaboration between Dr. Smith and Professor Gregory Tripoli of the
University of Wisconsin. Dr. Smith is an expert in the use and interpretation of
satellite information and Dr. Tripoli's expertise is in the realm of mesoscale
numerical modeling. This research focuses on better understanding of the
characteristics of Atlantic hurricanes and the improvement in the prediction of
their track, intensity and rainfall. The research includes the assimilation of
time-sequenced satellite moisture and wind products into a cloud resolving
version of the University of Wisconsin Nonhydrostatic Modeling System. Since
satellite observations can identify meso-beta scale structures, particularly in
the moisture and wind fields, which in turn modulate the meso-beta-scale
precipitation structures of the model forecasts, by beginning forecasts over the
open ocean where conventional data voids are greatest, the Principal
Investigators expect to achieve better skill in determining the timing and
position of landfall. Vertically resolved moisture profiles produced by the
operational satellite sounder retrieval system at the University of Wisconsin
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies (CIMSS), along with
vertically resolved cloud-tracked and water vapor winds also produced at CIMSS
will be nudged and blended into model forecasts for hurricane cases from the
1998 and 1999 hurricane season. The 1995 hurricane Opal event will be studied
prior to the 1998/1999 season in preparation for near real-time modeling
experiments during the two full seasons. The research will seek improvements to
both prediction of track-intensity factors, and quantitative precipitation
forecasting (QPF) during entire storm life cycles. To determine the impact of
the data assimilation, and to assess and validate the improvements in QPF both
before and after landfall, passive microwave measurements from Special Sensor
Microwave Imagery and combined passive microwave-precipitation radar
measurements from the upcoming Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission will be used
with physically-based precipitation profile retrieval algorithms operated at
Florida State University under the direction of Professor Smith. Successful
completion of this research will potentially lead to techniques for improved use
of advanced data from satellites for forecasting of hurricanes. ***