* 9714206
* LEXEN:  Longevity and Diversity of Microorganisms Entrapped in Tropical and Polar Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* John Reeve, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/2002
* USD 340,005.00

This project is to determine the phylotypes, abundance and antiquity of
microorganisms that can be resuscitated from within ice cores taken from such
diverse environments as the Tibetan Plateau, the South American Andes, and both
polar regions. PCR-amplified small subunit (16S and 18S) rDNAs will be cloned
and sequenced to determine the range of phylotypes that are, or were, present in
these ice cores that are refractory to laboratory culture. The experiments are
conceptually very simple, and technically require only routine microbiological
and molecular biology procedures; however, preventing contamination with
microorganisms and nucleic acids from exogenous sources will be critical. An
automated ice-sampling device will therefore be constructed specifically to
eliminate this problem. The ice cores are archived under carefully controlled
conditions at the BPRC, and several cores area available from most locations, so
that multiple samplings to evaluate different procedures and to confirm positive
results are possible without field trips. The experiments proposed will
determine the longevity of microorganisms entrapped in ice under different
environmental conditions, the diversity of microorganisms deposited at the same
geographical sites, but separated by thousands, or possibly by hundreds of
thousands of years, and the diversity of microorganisms deposited at the same
archeological times but at geographically very different and remote locations.
This might be the first concerted effort to apply PCR technology to amplify
material from within very ancient ice cores, and it seems very likely that
"extinct" genes, or at least fragments of extinct genes will be amplified,
facilitating intriguing comparisons with the sequences of their contemporary
homologs. Although many of the core isolates are likely to be Actinomycetes,
evaluating novel antibiotic synthesis by core isolates is beyond the exploratory
goals of this proposal. Determining the antibiotic resistance patterns of
microorgan isms that were entrapped in ice before the widespread use of
antibiotics will, however, be routinely undertaken.