* 9714702
* Traffic Management in Wireless ATM Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Jaime Bae Kim, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 91,348.00

This research collaboration project between NCR-9714702, Jaime B. Kim,
California State University, Northridge, and NCR-9714700, W. Melody Moh, San
Jose State University, aims to study traffic management in wireless ATM
networks. It includes the following two phases: PHASE 1: BASIC TRAFFIC CONTROL
In this initial phase, we will focus on two basic traffic management issues for
wireless ATM networks: 1. Admission Control We propose to develop admission
control schemes which can provide a high degree of QoS guarantee for the
multimedia traffic carried in micro-cellular, wireless ATM networks. The
proposed schemes can also adapt to the changing network conditions by constantly
monitoring current network traffic load and adjusting the amount of reserved
bandwidth. 2. Multicasting Flow Control We propose two new branch-point control
mechanisms: the ISQ (Ignore the Slow reQuests) and the WS (Weighted Sum)
schemes. Both schemes can be readily applied to the existing multicasting ABR
flow control mechanisms, most of which adopt the LSQ (Listen to the Slowest
reQuests) principle. We also propose two complete multicasting flow control
mechanisms for non-real-time traffic, each includes specific controls at
switches, branch-points, destinations, as well as the source. PHASE 2:
INTEGRATED AND EXTENSION OF BASIC TRAFFIC CONTROL This phase will focus on
integration of basic traffic control mechanisms to achieve the ultimate goal of
a complete traffic management scheme. For this purpose, extensions on basic
traffic control projects of Phase 1 will be carried out in the following
directions: 1. End-to-end admission control for multicasting connections 2.
Multicasting flow control for real-time traffic 3. Integrated traffic management
by combining admission control, dynamic bandwidth allocation, and flow control
For each of the sub-projects in both phases, we have identified research issues
for investigation and presented analytical and simulation me thods. We believe
that the proposed research is vital to the next generation of broadband wireless
networks.