* 9714268
* The Snow Alga Chlamydomonas nivalis:  PhotosynthesisUnder the Greatest Extremes of High Light, UV-B Radiation   and Low Temperature on Earth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 248,955.00

Vogelman 97-14268 The snow alga, Chlamvdomonas nivalis. grows on permanent
snowfields and is found in the alpine zone of the Rocky Mountairm, a habitat
that consists of some of the most extreme environmental conditions found on
Earth. In addition to surviving diurnal freezing temperatures, this organism
photosynthesizes under some clef the highest fluxes of visible light and
ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B; 280-320 run) found in a natural environment. The
proposed research will quantify microenvironmcnta1 extremes experienced by this
nucroorganism and will provide baseline information on its photosynthetic
performance tinder such severe conditions. Using a variety of portable
microscopic sensors and instruments, simultaneous er~virontnental measurements
of temperature, light, UV-B radiation, COz concentrations add of photosynthetic
performance will be made across snow-deplh profiles containing C. nivalis
populations. Photosynthesis will be measured in 'vitro by oxygen evolution and
under conditions of variable light avid temperature. Corroborative measurements
of carbon fixation will be obtained by measuring incorporation of i4C:O2 within
snow cores. Effects of W-B on C. nivaIis populations and photosynthetic
performance verity be determined frown We exclusion experiments conducted on the
snowfields. These experiments will establish a baseline for future studies of
molecular mechanisms that regulate adaptation and survival of this microorganism
in this extreme habitat.