* 9714412
* Implementation of a Coupled Air-Sea Numerical Model for     Improving Operational Prediction of Landfalling Gulf of     Mexico and Western Atlantic Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Isaac Ginis, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2001
* USD 478,000.00

9714412 Ginis The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval
Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the
USWRP. Under the auspices of the USWR, the Principal Investigators will
undertake a comprehensive numerical modeling/data assimilation program that has
as its objectives to develop and test a coupled ocean/atmosphere tropical
cyclone numerical model and to utilize this model to investigate the dynamical
role of the ocean in rapid hurricane intensity changes near landfall. The
primary components of the coupled hurricane/ocean numerical system are the
operational hurricane forecast model developed at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) and the Princeton Ocean Model. These will be combined
with new coupled initialization strategies and well-tested data assimilation
techniques in establishing this coupled model as a trustworthy numerical model.
New operationally available data sets will be a central component of the
prediction system. The Principal Investigators will employ the coupled model to
test a number of hypotheses concerning the oceans' dynamical role in rapid
hurricane intensity changes near landfall. These include the effects of ocean
eddies and strong ocean fronts (e.g. the Gulf Stream) in determining the track
and intensity of the hurricane. If successful, this research will lead to
improved operational predictive capabilities. This research will be conducted in
active collaboration with NOAA/GFDL. ***