* 9714334
* Magneto-Rheological Fluid Dampers for Structural Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Faramarz Gordaninejad, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/2002
* USD 279,100.00

9714334 Gordaninejad Innovative energy-absorbing protective systems are needed
to enhance the safety of structures in the event of earthquakes, severe storms,
and other natural man-made hazards. This project aims at the developing and
implementing magneto-rheological fluid (MRF) dampers for protect of structures.
The focus of the research will be on the proof-of-concept utilization of a novel
MRF damper for seismic protection of buildings. MFR dampers are semi-active
decides that contain magneto- rhelogical fluids. Initiation of the damper's
built-in magnetic field causes a fast and dramatic change in the viscosity of
MRF dampers contained in the damper. The fouled changes state from liquid to
semi-solid in milliseconds. The result is an infinitely variable, controllable
damper capable of very large damping forces. MRF dampers offer an attractive
solution to seismic energy absorption in structures because they require minimal
power for operation this can be battery operated. They are inexpensive devices
to manufacture, utilize, and maintain which require no mechanical, valving and
have large temperature tolerance and long operational life. The focus of this
project is to develop controllable MRF dampers that can demonstrate the
capabilities needed for protecting buildings under strong motions. The research
tasks included: (1) Comprehensive theoretical and experimental studies for basic
understanding of the behavior and identification of the proposed MRF dampers,
(2) Design and development of MRF dampers for building applications. Issues of
robustness, maintenance, aging, and heat transfer will be investigated, and (3)
Proof-of-concept laboratory tests on several scaled building systems. To
maintain and improve the present performance of structures under severe seismic
excitations and/or storms, new or improved technology is a clear solution. The
proposed MRF damper system will take advantage of the state- of-the-art in
advancement of materia l s to produce a practical, efficient, and inexpensive
protective system for seismic structures. Successful completion of the research
will contribute to the understanding, development and utilization of innovative
protective systems in the design of new and/or retrofit of aging structures.