* 9714414
* Quantitative Precipitation Forecasting Using Nonlinear      Statistical Guidance
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Richard Pfeffer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9714414 Pfeffer The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval Research
are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP.
Accurate quantitative forecasting of precipitation (Quantitative Precipitation
Forecasting, QPF) has proven to be an especially difficult problem and one where
little progress has been made over the last several years. For this reason,
better QPF techniques has been identified by both the scientific and operational
communities as an area ripe for research. The Principal Investigator will
investigate new applications of statistical techniques designed to improve QPF.
Two nonlinear methodologies will be pursued in this research with statistics
derived from 33 years of 3-hourly surface observations and 12-hourly upper air
observations covering the United States east of the Rocky Mountains. One
involves the design of neural networks with outputs that correspond to the
probability of occurrence of standard precipitation threshold values. The other
methodology involves the use of analogs of time sequences (rather than
instantaneous values) of synoptic variables obtained from ensemble numerical
forecasts to specify precipitation probabilities. ***