* 9714139
* CMS Workshop for the Advancement and Retention of Under-    represented and Minority Engineering Educators: to be held  September 24-26, 1997, Washington, DC
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,04/30/2003
* Rebecca Kellogg, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 04/30/2003
* USD 156,626.00

This Civil and Mechanical Systems Division workshop is designed to encourage
retention and advancement of qualified women and underrepresented minority
engineering educators in pursuit of scientific and engineering challenges. The
workshop brings together a select group of 100 of the nation's outstanding
engineering educators. Participants are women or minority engineering educators
who essentially have been in tenure track positions for less than five years, or
are in the final phases of their Ph.D. program and actively pursuing tenure
track academic positions. The participants are usually employed in teaching and
/or research positions and are actively developing their own unique research
programs in civil and mechanical engineering disciplines. The major goals of the
workshop are to foster technical and intellectual exchange among Ph.D. level
underrepresented and minority engineers who work in the area of civil and
mechanical systems; to instill in its participants, the sense of a technical
community in which they can thrive and to which they can contribute; and to
increase participant awareness of research and funding opportunities. The
workshop emphasizes an integration of research and education. A panel of
university deans discusses perspectives on reasonable career expectations and
demands, and includes an in-depth discussion of issues related to tenure,
teaching, research, publications, funding, outreach and a rewarding personal
life along the career path of an engineering educator. All participants give a
brief summary of their current research interests, thus increasing fellow
participants' awareness of the diversity of related opportunities for
involvement in civil and mechanical systems research areas. The workshop
proceedings include research interest statements from each participant, the
outcome assessments, and workshop recommendations