* 9714012
* Petrologic Studies of Martian Carbonates in ALH84001
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Edward Scott, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/2003
* USD 125,000.00

9714012 Scott Abstract This award supports a collaborative interdisciplinary
project to characterize the carbonates and associated minerals in Martian
meteorite ALH84001 toward an improved understanding of the conditions and
mechanisms involved in their formation. It is supported by the Office of Polar
Programs, the Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. These chemically and isotopically heterogeneous carbonates have been
described as possibly containing organic and inorganic fossils of ancient
Martian biota. Understanding the origin of the carbonates is the key to
evaluating these interpretations. Two models for the origin of the carbonates in
ALH84001 will be studied: shock melting of carbonates at high temperatures,
which would virtually preclude the presence of fossils of carbon-based life, and
low-temperature deposition in pores and fractures from aqueous fluids.
Petrologic studies using optical and electron microscopy and electron probe
analysis of thin sections will focus on the effects of shock melting and shock
metamorphism of minerals in ALH84001. Shock-formed silica and plagioclase
glasses will be studied in pyroxene fractures, crushed zones and uncrushed
regions and compared with analogous phases in other shocked meteorites and
terrestrial analogs to constrain the shock and deformation history of ALH84001.
Carbonate globules, disks and grains in pyroxene fractures, crushed and
uncrushed regions and their associated oxides and sulfides will be studied to
test whether carbonates could have crystallized from shock melts that formed and
were partly mobilized during the impact that melted plagioclase and silica.
Carbonates and shock-formed glasses will also be studied in sections with laser
micro-Raman spectroscopy and FT-infrared microscopy to search for carbonate ions
in glass and to understand the shock and thermal histories of glasses and
carbonates. Carbonates, glasses and other phases will be studied on fracture
surfaces of the rock with atomic force microscopy (AFM) to clarify the origin of
the carbonate and its relationship to the glasses. AFM studies will focus on the
distribution of organic phases in the carbonate, its crystallinity and the
degree of rotational disorder of carbonate-ions. These features will help in
distinguishing biogenic and abiogenic carbonate mineral phases.