* 9714180
* Dissertation Research:  Behavioral Change and Regional      Variation across the Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Ofer Bar-Yosef, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2000
* USD 9,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Gilbert Tostevin will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. Approximately 40,000 years ago Upper
Paleolithic archaeological industries appeared in Western Europe. They were
associated with the first appearance of anatomically modern humans and contain
finely made specialized stone tools as well as delicately carved bone and ivory
figurines which provide compelling testimony for cognitive abilities comparable
with our own. However point of origin for the Upper Paleolithic is unknown as in
the process by which it entered Europe. To attempt to answer this question Mr.
Tostevin will analyze 29 archaeological assemblages dating between 60,000 and
30,000 years ago from key regions in western Eurasia and the Near East. Although
numerous archaeologists have worked on such materials, the research has
proceeded in a regional context and employed individualized analytic techniques
which make broad scale comparisons across time and space impossible. Target
regions of Central Europe (specifically the Czech Republic), Eastern Europe
(Ukraine), Southeastern Europe (Bulgaria) and the Levant (Israel) have been
chosen because of the importance of their archaeological assemblages to this
issue and to the excellent excavation techniques used to procure them. Mr.
Tostevin will analyze the lithic (stone tool) components, determine degrees of
similarity and then interpret these in a geographical and chronological context.
In this way it should be possible gain insight into points and time of origin
and rates and direction of diffusion. Rather than study artifacts alone, Mr.
Tostevin will focus on the entire production process and base his comparisons
more on production technique than finished product. This research is important
because it will shed light on the appearance and spread of anatomically and
culturally modern humans. It will produce a large and consistent data set of
interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
scientist.