* 9714860
* Seismic Behavior of Composite Coupled Walls: Coupling       Beams Including Slab and System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1998,09/30/2004
* Bahram Shahrooz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 09/30/2004
* USD 80,745.00

9714860 Shahrooz

Through integrated analytical and experimental studies, this research will
address (a) effects of significant yielding of wall reinforcement and combined
wall flexural and diagonal shear cracks on stiffness and strength of
steel/composite coupling beams and beam-wall connection; (b) impacts of coupling
beam axial forces on member and connection performance; (c) level of axial force
in steel/composite coupling beams versus reinforced concrete coupling beams; (d)
slab effects on distribution of internal stresses and overall behavior of
coupled wall systems with steel/composite beams, and those with reinforced
concrete coupling beams; (e) importance of soil-structure interaction on
coupling beam rotation demands; and (f) general modeling of structural walls.
This is a collaborative investigation between University of Cincinnati (UC) and
The Building Research Institute (BRI) of Japan. In the experience study, four
approximately 1/3-scale sub assemblages of a coupling beam, wall pier, and floor
slab will be fabricated and tested. Wall gravity axial load will be simulated in
all specimens. The test results in conjunction with the analytical results will
be used to modify the existing state-of-the-art design techniques for
steel/composite coupling beams and their connections to reinforced concrete
walls.