* 9714092
* Enhancement of Research and Training Facilities at the      Oak Lake Field Station, South Dakota
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Nels Troelstrup, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 13,000.00

The Oak Lake Field Station (South Dakota) State University) is a 570 acre
facility located in the prairie pothole region of the Northern Glaciated Plains.
This station provides a unique setting to support long- term research and
instruction for topics on northern prairie ecosystems. Unusual soil types,
glaciated land forms and naive prairie vegetation together with field station
facilities provide opportunities The Oak Lake Field Station has experienced
continued growth of programs and utilization (3,700) user-days per year and
growing) over its brief eight year history. Facility and equipment challenges
have been generated from increased research and instructional emphases in
prairie ecology, limnological studies of prairie potholes and assessment of
hands-on,, inquiry-based environmental education materials. These challenges
demonstrate a need to establish a research and instructional science agenda and
strategic management plan to support future use of the site. The objectives of
this planning effort are to (1) define a science agenda (research and
instruction)for the Oak Lake Field Station, (2) identify facility and equipment
needs to support expanded scientific efforts, (3) establish collaborative
working relationships with programs at other biological field stations, (4)
establish communication with other field stations for the exchange of research
data and instructional materials and (5) develop a strategic plan and cost
estimates for proposed changes in the facility to be used in subsequent funding
requests for field station programs. These objectives will be addressed through
a combination of interactive workshops and intensive design efforts over a two
year period. Information developed from these planning efforts will be used to
develop support for station renovations and guide management for the next 510
years. The final product of this two year effort will be a strategic management
plan to support objectives defined within a new science agenda. This planning
effort will enhance the capabilities of the Oak Lake Field Station to support
regional and national science efforts in prairie ecosystems. These capabilities
will be evident from enhanced facilities (housing), field laboratory, supporting
equipment) and implementation of collaborative research and instructional
programs within the next few years. Field station directors and faculty at other
institutions will become aware of environments and facilities at the Oak Lake
Field Station. This increased awareness will enhance interbiome research and
learning activities for a broad group of scientists and students interested in
prairie environments.