* 9714552
* Evaluation of the West Coast Picket-Fence Observing Concept to Improve Mesoscale Prediction Downstream from the Eastern North Pacific Data-Sparse Region
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Geoffrey DiMego, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 87,955.00

9714552 Elsberry The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval Research
are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP.
The precedent circulations that contribute to the development of damaging
weather systems over the western and mid-western U.S. often approach from the
data-sparse region of the eastern Pacific. In many cases, these precedent
circulations have small horizontal dimensions that are not well resolved by the
existing upper-air sounding network. A special set of upper-air observing
stations called the West- Coast Picket Fence was established to measure the
circulations crossing the west coast of the U.S. during the Stormscale
Operational and Research Meteorology- Fronts Experiment Systems Test (STORM-
FEST) held from February to March 1992. In particular, three-hourly Picket Fence
soundings were obtained from the combination of seven special and seven existing
upper-air stations during four intensive observing periods. Analyses completed
thus far demonstrate that the higher spatial resolution of the combined Picket-
Fence sites with three hourly soundings better resolve the energy fluxes
crossing the coast than the seven existing sites with the regular 1 2-hourly
soundings. This Picket Fence is considered to be a prototype for a future system
of ground-based remote sensors that might be deployed along the west coast that
would monitor all circulations crossing the coast. One goal of the USWRP is to
determine the "best practicable mix" of observations, data assimilation schemes,
and forecast models that will yield cost- effective weather forecast
improvements for operations beyond the year 2000. Crucial steps towards
realizing this goal, and the associated goals of the North American Observing
System (NAOS) Program include the development and evaluation of new data sources
and observation strategies. We propose to evaluate the potential impact of a
quasi-linear array of special observing sites along the west coast of the United
States for the purpose of improving the downstream 0 - 2 day forecast accuracy
over North American. Specifically, we propose to utilize the operational and
special west coast Picket Fence data collected during STORM-FEST in tests with
the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) mesoscale data
assimilation and modeling system to examine the impacts of the special data and
new observing strategy on simulations of selected events during (the experiment
***