* 9714750
* A Foundation for Generalized Network Fault Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Cynthia Hood, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 02/29/2000
* USD 18,000.00

As computer communication networks evolve from offering best-effort service to
offering real-time services with stringent Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees
(e.g. video), the need for improved fault management techniques increases.
Network fault management is an open problem that continues to increase in
complexity. A major cause of the increase in complexity of this problem is the
heterogeneity of networks. Networks of today are comprised of a variety of
technologies (e.g. Wireless, ATM, Ethernet), that are expected to support a
diverse set of networked applications (file transfer, WWW, video conferencing).
The fault management problem has been studied in varying degrees for different
technologies, but there are many open issues 29 , 40 , and we are unaware of any
methods that can effectively be applied across technologies. Current methods are
largely ad hoc and rely on the expertise of a human network manager. Even within
single-technology networks (e.g. Ethernet LANs), strategies developed for one
network, cannot be easily generalized to other networks. In addition, the rate
of change within a network makes it difficult for the network manager to
maintain a high enough level of expertise to develop and maintain effective
fault management strategies. New techniques that can be generalized and applied
across technologies are needed to ensure network reliability in an efficient
manner. The long-term goal of this research is to automate as much of network
management as possible. Within network management, we will first focus on fault
management. Along these lines, the plan is to develop methods for fault
management that (1) can be applied across different technologies, (2) can
generalize from network to network, and (3) can adapt to changes in the network.
Previous research 12 , 13 , 14 has demonstrated that adaptive statistical
techniques can be used for network fault detection. These types of techniques
use the network measur ements to learn the behavior of the network and can thus
be generalized. The goal for this planning period is to identify a set of
problems within fault management that can be addressed using rigorous,
generalizable methods. Fault management encompasses a large, complex set of
problems that have not been well studied or defined. Before methods are
evaluated, the problems to be addressed must be identified. Each network
technology will be studied in terms of fault management, and a set of issues
that are common across all or most of the technologies will be extracted. For
each of the problems that are identified, the feasibility of using automated
techniques and generalization will be evaluated. Preliminary results will be
obtained using the TCP/IP test network. The result of the planning activities
will be a research direction that is focused on a set of feasible problems that
are widely applicable across network technologies. A web page will be created
for the fault management research planning project. The web page will contain a
description of the activities and results obtained. The URL of the web page will
be http://www.nml.csam.iit.edu/~planning/.