* 9714162
* A Mass Balance Framework for Assessing Flows of Environmental Pollutants: Application to Lead as a Case Study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1999,12/31/2004
* Cliff Davidson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 12/31/2004
* USD 449,396.00

Urban populations are exposed to a variety of environmental pollutants. To
develop strategies for minimizing exposure, it is necessary to understand the
processes by which pollutants are transported from their sources to eventual
sinks. This project will improve our understanding of the key processes involved
and will develop tools for assessing pollutant flows, focusing on the element
lead in the Los Angeles Basin. There are three general goals. First, processes
involving emissions of lead, as well as deposition and resuspension of lead-
containing particles, will be identified. This will be achieved by gathering
existing information on airborne lead concentrations over several years and by
conducting measurements of lead characteristic on achived filters. Results of
current research investigating deposition and resuspension of particles from
surfaces will be applied. Second, an improved mass balance model will be
developed that can be used to identify key source categories and sinks of lead.
Possible control strategies for reducing airborne concentrations of lead will be
identified. This part of the project will make use of existing mass balance
models, which will be modified and evaluated based on sensitivity analyses and
use of engineering approximations. Third, the project will include determination
of the net benefits of each of several control strategies based on knowledge of
lead sources and sinks, estimated reductions in human exposure, and costs of
abatement. Overall, the results of this project will help our understanding of
factors influencing human exposure to environmental pollutants and will assist
in developing control strategies to reduce exposure.