* 9714305
* Membranes Based on Polymers with Long Alkyl Side-Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Donald Paul, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9714305 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigator: Donald R. Paul Affiliation: University of Texas at Austin This
grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-element of
the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. Donald Paul at the
University of Texas at Austin. The research is directed at the development of
membrane materials that have temperature induced changes in permeability. This
is a novel approach where the permeability is not a smoothly increasing function
of temperature but a rather a situation where a small temperature change can
serve as a switch for substantial permeability changes. These temperature
induced switches in permeability are brought about by the use of polymers
containing alkyl side chain that crystallize relatively independent of the
polymer backbone. When the material is heated up beyond the glass transition
temperature of the side chains, the loss of crystallinity opens up transport
pathways and increases the permeability. The switch from a permeable to a
relatively nonpermeable membrane occurs across the glass transition temperature
of the side chains. There are several significant applications of such
temperature induced permeability switches. Amongst the most interesting is the
potential to use seasonal changes in temperature to release agricultural agents
such as pesticides of fertilizers. The temperature switches can also be used to
deliver drugs when these drugs are placed in capsules make from these polymeric
materials. The concepts presented here represent frontier areas of polymer
membrane research.