* 9714094
* FSML- An Arctic Winter Residence Facility for the Toolik    Field Station, Alaska
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Jean James, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 196,762.00

The Toolik Field Station, located on Alaska' s North Slope, provides a
nationally and internationally significant research platform for biological,
hydrological, geological, and atmospheric investigations on unique arctic
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. Since 1975 it has served investigators
and students from 63 institutions and universities from 39 states and 25
countries. Since 1992 use of the Toolik Field Station CFFS) has increased by 40%
to its current occupancy of approximately 3,500 user days in a four month field
season; this demand is expected to be sustained or grow further over the next 10
years. This proposal is for building a winter residence facility that, together
with the winter laboratory acquired in 1994, will expand access to TFS and its
arctic research programs to all of the year. Currently there are no field
research stations in the U. S. and few in the circumpolar region at which
scientists can work year-round. This new capability is expected to increase the
scope and nature of current research programs that have not before been able to
investigate and integrate into summer-based models the significant and important
winter- season processes that occupy 75% of the arctic year, and new
investigators from a variety of disciplines are expected to be attracted to
using the facility. A modern residence facility with redundant heating and power
sources and a satellite phone is necessary for winter research operations and
the safety of investigators and staff. A winter residence facility was a key and
highest priority item in the Toolik Field Station: The second twenty years,
recommendations on the science mission and the development of Toolik Field
Station, the report that resulted from a NSF workshop of U.S. arctic researchers
and logistics experts held in 1995. It is also an immediate priority of U.S.
Logistics for Arctic Science, a forthcoming publication of the arctic Research
Consortium of the United States. Current NSF-sponsor ed studies based at TFS
include the arctic Long-Term Ecological Research program, the U. S.
International Tundra Experiment program, Components of the Arctic System
Science's Land- Atmosphere-Ice-Interactions, The Effects of Climate and
Vegetation on Below Ground CO2 Fluxes in Arctic Ecosystems; Hydrologic Linkages
with Arctic Freshwater and Terrestrial Systems; Development and Validation of a
Biosphere Model for Arctic Tundra with Linkages to Satellite Radiobrighmess;
Primary Production in Arctic Ecosystems: Interacting Mechanisms of Adjustment to
Climate Change; Effects of Increased Season Length on Plant Phenology; Community
Composition, Productivity, and Ecosystem Carbon Fluxes in Alaskan Tundra:
Implications for Global Change; and Hormone-behavior Adaptations in Arctic
Birds; these are among 22 different projects that are expected to use TFS in
1997.