* 9714118
* FSML: Computer Network Facilities Improvement at Archbold   Biological Station, Florida
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Glen Woolfenden, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/1999
* USD 149,989.00

This project will provide a modern computational platform to facilitate broad
communication by the research and education community of Archbold Biological
Station (Archbold), and provide an active presence for the station on the
Internet to enhance research collaboration. Archbold, established in 1941, is a
not- for-profit independent research facility in central Florida, dedicated to
long-term ecological research. Staff, visiting investigators, and students
conduct research primarily focused onthe organisms and environments of the Lake
Wales Ridge and adjacent central Florida. Use of the facility is often intense.
Areas of research strength are population ecology and conservation
biologyemphasizing the relationship between species and ecosystem processes.
Complementary education programs involve research training for graduates and
undergraduates, use by college classes, and K-12 environmental education.
Archbold supports research and education by providing access to study areas and
organisms on its 5,000 acre globally significant scrub preserve, which is one of
the most distinctive regions in the U.S., and a 10,300 acre ranch landscape. The
station's integrated infrastructure- species diversity, land, long-term data,
ease of access, reference collections, fire and land management-are its greatest
asset. The project will support a computer networking system to integrate
Internet, Intranet, and Local and Wide Area Networking technologies into
Archbold activities. The design can be logically into four (1-4) primary
computing subsystems:(1)Telecommunications &amp; Internetworking Subsystem to
interface the Wide Area Network to the Internet; (2) Internet Presence or World
Wide Web Interface Subsystem to incorporate Archbold activities accessible via
www applications, email, and FTP (for efficient data transfer between remote
locations). Archbold proposes selection of Microsoft's NT 4.0 as a Server
platform based on a review of current performance and funct ionality and
analysis of the industry long- term outlook; (3) Local Area Network (LAN)
Subsystem including the physical backbone and individual workstation wiring to
bridge a new science LAN with the existing Administrative LAN; (4) Wide Area
Network Subsystem (WAN) with (LAN) Extension to off-site facilities and Dial-up;
as well as (5) a small attic conversion to accommodate a new computer
Information Center at the station; and (6) an Operations and Management Plan.