* 9714981
* Inorganic Redox Mechanisms in Aqueous Media
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Edwin Gould, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/2001
* USD 247,000.00

Dr. Edwin S. Gould, Chemistry Department, Kent State University, is supported in
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program, for
investigations of aqueous phase oxidation-reduction reactions which emphasize
less common oxidation states. Two areas will be studied: 1) reductions with
unipositive indium and 2) metal ion catalysis of oxidations by peroxynitrite. In
the first part of the study the factors that determine when In(I) reacts by 1e
and when it reacts by 2e pathways will be defined. These data then will be used
to determine which ligating units will allow effective inner-sphere bridging in
indium (I) reactions and to learn how the reactivity of In(I) compares with that
of other 2e oxo-acceptor species. In the second part of the project, the ability
of transition metal catalysts to modify rates of the reactions of the
peroxynitrite ion will be evaluated. In particular, conversions with both one
and two electron reductants will be studied and problems associated with
maintaining effective concentrations of catalytic metal centers in the high pH
region necessary for the survival of peroxynitrite will be addressed. Reactions
in which electrons are transferred between reactants are of enormous importance
in virtually all areas of pure and applied chemistry. In this project the little
studied indium +1 ion will be studied in order to develop fundamental knowledge
about its ability to provide one and two electrons to chemical processes. This
will provide background information to facilitate the develoment of further
applications for this species. The peroxynitrite ion, the subject of the second
part, is a powerful oxidant and is formed in biological systems by the coupling
of nitric oxide and superoxide. Transformations of this ion with reductants are
complicated by the decomposition of peroxynitrite to nitrate and this study will
develop the behavior of this biologically ubiquitous and unusually reactive
peroxo species. In addition to the chemical studies, an important goal of this
project is the training of a cadre of chemists with a strong background in
inorganic solution chemistry. This is an area of great importance, but one in
which there are few young practitioners.