* 9714308
* Collaborative Research: The Chemical Speciation of          Dissolved and Particulate Selenium in an Estuary: Effects   on Trophic Transfer and Biogeochemical Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Nicholas Fisher, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2001
* USD 255,838.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation, NSF 06-152. It is being jointly funded by
the Divisions of Ocean Sciences and Chemistry. The proposed research will
improve our understanding of the speciation and trophic transfer of selenium in
San Francisco Bay. Estuaries such as this, are complex physical, chemical and
biological environments that are not only geochemically crucial (e.g. elemental
transfer from the trash water to the marine environment), but are also
economically vital (e.g. fisheries, transportation). The estuarine geochemistry
of trace elements has been well studied, but the linkage between the chemical
speciation of these trace elements and their cycling throughout the whole
estuarine food web is largely unknown. The combination of innovative field and
lab studies proposed here will allow researchers to more accurately predict the
impact of Se input and speciation on the entire trophic structure of these
environments. Moreover, the methods and approach used here for Se should be
applicable to other trace elements and other estuarine environments. ** Cutter,
OCE-9707946; Fisher OCE-9714308 $ + - - á +f/ªÛ=+- ±- ╝- ¼f + + - À Ã ½ Ú ã ú u
) c Û + À À Ã ³ ½ Ú ¸ +$ ¸ +$ ¸ +$ ¸ +$ ¸ +$ P +$ P +$ P +$ ó +$╝ P P P +$ H K
@¹+ Normal ) a c ` A@ +- ` Default Paragraph Font : $@   : Envelope Address Ð @
+ Í+ ª 1¢ -▀ ) c Ú Ú ++++ ++ Ú ) , ã Ú b q ' , 3 ³ e l u õ = $ e Õ µ   Ð ª À Á z
harriet regina eason&amp;\\CLM-07\HEASON.$\abstracts\cutter.doc harriet regina
eason&amp;\\CLM-07\HEASON.$\abstracts\fisher.doc+@HP LaserJet 4L LPT1: HPPCL5MS
HP LaserJet 4L HP LaserJet 4L ` @ g , , @ MSUDN HP LaserJet 4L &gt; ( ` d HP
LaserJet 4L ` @ g , , @ MSUDN HP LaserJet 4L &gt; ( ` d Ð ` + Times New Roman +
Symbol &amp;+ Arial + CG Times + Book Antiqua + Fences ` A ª f h + F + F + O ª $
?