* 9714289
* The Growth and Characterization of GaN and InGaN Structures by Selective-Area Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Xiuling Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9714289 Li This CAA project addresses selective area chemical vapor deposition
of GaN and InGaN. The PI is a chemist planning to develop and expand her
scientific expertise in the field of epitaxy of III-nitride semiconductor
research, which will allow her to bring interdisciplinary approaches and
insights to the field. She expects to move into active research fabricating low
dimensional structures such as quantum wells, wires and dots and to study the
quantum size effect on optical and electrical properties. Her long range goal is
to develop new and better materials that have novel properties and potential
applications, to advance the understanding of III-V semiconductor materials
properties and to contribute to the realization of the full potential of III-
nitride as well as other III-V semiconductors in device applications. In this
project the correlation of optical properties with defect and impurity
distributions will be explored, the selective growth of InGaN films will be
carried out on single and dual stripe patterns., and the effect of selective
growth on the doping behavior of Si2H6 and Cp2Mg in GaN will be studied as a
function of mesa size and geometry. %%% The project addresses materials science
and engineering research issues in a topical area of materials science having
high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials
science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuits. Additionally, the
fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
contribute to improving the performance of advanced devices by providing a
fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
materials. ***