* 9714339
* LEXEN:  Collaborative Research:  Microbial Life within the  Extreme Environment Posed by Permanent Antarctic Lake Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Christopher McKay, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2001
* USD 488,758.00

*** Fristsen 9714339 Three to twenty meter thick permanent ice covers on lakes
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctic contain viable microbial cells in
association with sediment aggregates. These aggregates are now recognized as
sites where physical, chemical and biological interactions promote microbial
growth under extreme conditions inherent to the ice environment. This
interdisciplinary research program will define specific processes which allow
(1) the creation of liquid water (the essential element for life) in the
permanent ice, (2) the survival and structuring of microbial populations
subjected to freezing and thawing, (3) the production of substances which alter
the physical attributes of the ice crystal habitat and (4) nutrient supply to
the microbial populations which is essential for not only survival, but net
microbial growth and biomass accumulation. The work will be on ice aggregates
embedded within the permanent ice covers on the lakes in the Taylor Valley which
have been tentatively characterized in previous studies. Research on microbes in
permanent ice provides information on the ecology of microbes in ice ecosystems
and promises to have biotechnological implications. Furthermore, these studies
will provide insights into the conditions which support or have supported life
beyond our own planet in association with water ice which is currently present
within and beyond our own solar system. ***