* 9714591
* Enabling Future Multimedia Information Systems to           Leverage Next-Generation Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Kien Hua, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 01/31/2000
* USD 188,062.00

The objective of this research is to develop a suite of techniques to allow
video distribution at low cost. We explore a novel version of multicast called
Dynamic Multicast, a clever way to deliver videos to homes called 2-Phase
Service Model, and an efficient technique for disseminating videos on demand
over satellites called Skyscraper Broadcasting. - Dynamic Multicast is designed
to address the network-I/O bottleneck which hinders the server from taking full
advantage of the network capacity. With this technique, the system is able to
support many more simultaneous multicasts than the server is physically capable
of. - Skyscraper is designed to exploit the unique broadcast capability of
satellites. In this environment, since the bandwidth requirement is proportional
to the number of videos, not the number of users, we have a very scalable
technology. In terms of costs, the fact that this approach requires essentially
no wiring makes it very appealing. - The third technique, 2-Phase Service Model,
is intended for environments where the video playback requires a higher bit rate
than the physical medium can sustain. Home users can benefit from this
technology. It offers a very effective environment for searching high-resolution
video libraries from home. To demonstrate the feasibility of these ideas, we
implement three video-on-demand systems. We also conduct experiments to assess
the performance of these techniques using real video data. For more information
on this project, please visit the web page at
http://www.dsg.cs.ucf.edu/NSF/nsf.html.