* 9714288
* LEXEN:  Growth Media for Hyperthermophiles:  Geochemical    Constraints on Realistic Carbon and Energy Sources in       Shallow Marine Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Everett Shock, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9714288 Amend PROJECT SUMMARY The isolation and characterization since 1980 of
several dozen species of hyperthermophilic microorganisms are largely
responsible for the tremendous current interest in life in extreme environments
on Earth as well as on other planetary bodies in our solar system. Most known
hyperthermophiles were cultured from rock and water samples collected at deep
submarine hydrothermal vents or terrestrial hot springs. Although much has been
learned about microbial physiologies, phylogenetic diversity, and novel
metabolic pathways from this relatively sparse set of organisms, the true
extremes of genetic diversity and metabolic strategies on Earth and elsewhere
are impossible to predict a priori. This concept is underscored by the widely
accepted notion that less than 0.1 percent of all extant microbial species are
currently known. Knowledge of microbial species thriving in extreme environments
can be expanded through the application of innovative methods to isolate and
culture novel species of extremophiles. Like all living organisms,
hyperthermophiles are intimately associated with their host environment.
Therefore, a detailed understanding of the geochemistry of hydrothermal
environments is likely to place constraints on essential substrates for life. To
reach this overall goal, this project will combine thermodynamic calculations to
determine potential energy sources with detailed chemical analyses of
hydrothermal fluids to design new media for growing a wide variety of
hyperthermophiles. The readily accessible and chemically diverse hot springs in
the Aeolian Islands, Italy, including those on Vulcano, are ideal sampling sites
for this highly interdisciplinary study.