* 9714775
* WGIDPO:  Girls' Action (Getting into "Real Life" Sciences,  Achieving Changes to Improve Our Neighborhoods)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Charol Shakeshaft, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/2001
* USD 750,758.00

This project is a collaborative team of five institutions-Hofstra University,
New York Institute of Technology, the Uniondale Union Free School District, the
Hempstead Union Free School District, and Citizens Environmental Research
Institute. The project targets (1) seventh and eighth grade girls; (2) girls of
color; and (3) low income girls in an effort to increase the number of girls who
participate in mathematics and science activities. The project seeks to develop
female friendly classroom practices and science and mathematics curriculum and
to place that curriculum within the formal structure of the district
instructional requirements. Three hundred girls, three hundred boys, 200
parents, and 30 teachers/administrators will be served. Project deliverables
will be suitable for use nationwide. The strategies to improve attitudes toward
and participation in mathematics and science activities by girls include: (1) a
core project on environmental social justice encompassing the issues and data
from the communities in which the girls live; (2) integration of the project
into the seventh and eighth grade core science curriculum of the schools; (3)
development of the project so that it responds directly to The Learning
Standards for the New York State Mathematics, Science and Technology Frameworks;
(4) combination of single sex and coeducational classroom, summer, Saturday, and
after school experiences; (5) development of CD ROM and other instructional
materials as models for 7th and 8th grade instruction in New York State and the
nation; (6) training of teachers and parents in the curriculum materials, in
gender and learning issues, and in the objectives of the program; (7)
development of a seventh and eighth grade science curriculum that is gender
fair, encourages girls and children of color to pursue science and mathematics
and that can be used with all children to satisfy New York State Learning
Standards for Mathematics, Science, and Technology; (8) inv olvement of teachers
in the humanities and the arts-in addition to science, math and technology-to
further the goals of the project; and addition of computer technology and
learning in the classroom experience and in teacher skills. In addition, the
project staff includes specialists in all targeted areas. The project will be
led and staffed by female school district and university personnel with
expertise in environmental justice, science instruction in the middle school,
gender issues in science, adolescent female development, minority science
participation, classroom curriculum, biology, chemistry, mathematics, social
science, computer science, and environmental science.