* 9714850
* Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Organic Radical       Cations
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2003
* Heinz Roth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 11/30/2003
* USD 313,500.00

Professor Heinz D. Roth, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State
University of New Jersey, carries out chemical and spectroscopic studies of
organic radical cations with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program. Organic radical cations are generated by photo-induced
electron transfer and by chemical oxidation in a range of media, including fluid
solutions, frozen glasses, and solid supports (zeolites). Spectroscopic
techniques, including optical spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance, and
chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization, permit the study of the
structures of these radical cations. Through a combination of experimental and
theoretical techniques, Professor Roth explores the regiochemistry of radical
cation reactions, focusing on ring strain, extent of conjugation, and steric
hindrance as determinants of regioselectivity. Also explored are issues relating
to the reactions of triplet radical pairs, including biradical formation,
generation of biradicals or triplet states from `vertical` radical cations,
formation of perpendicular triplet states, and generation of extended biradicals
by coupling of triplet ion pairs. Many chemical reactions proceed via a sequence
of chemical steps, each producing a reactive intermediate species which
undergoes further reaction, ultimately leading to the final reaction product.
The intermediates in chemical reactions often display unusual chemical and
structural features, and often bear a positive charge (`cations`) or negative
charge or a lone electron (`radicals`). With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Heinz D. Roth, of the Department of
Chemistry at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, studies the formation,
structure, and reactivity of reactive intermediates containing both a positive
charge and an unpaired electron. Through the application of a variety of
physical and chemical techniques, complemented by calculational studies,
Professor Roth elucidates the chemical nature of these `radical cations,`
contributing to our fundamental knowledge of how chemical reactions occur.