* 9714060
* Pathways of Mineral Alteration and Organic Synthesis in     Hydrothermal Systems on Mars
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Everett Shock, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity supports
theoretical evaluation of mineral alteration in hydrothermal systems by Dr.
Everett L. Shock of the Earth and Planetary Science Department, Washington
University. The project is funded by the Office of Polar Programs, the Chemistry
Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Martian meteorites
show isotropic, petrological and mineralogic evidence for hydrothermal or
aqueous alteration of the martian crust. The presence of thermaphilic microbes
in terrestrial hydrothermal ecosystems raises the possiblity that subsurface
life, independent of photochemistry, atmospheric chemistry, and the presence of
a surface hydrosphere, may exist or have existed in hydrothermal environments on
other planets. In order to develop a predictive model for crustal alteration on
Mars, all petrologic, geochemical and isotopic data on minerals and organic
compounds in ALH84001 and other martial meteorites will be used to examine
various pathways for the formation of carbonate minerals, polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, and other organic compounds during water-rock reactions. Rigorous,
quantitative models of geochemical mass transfer based on irreversible
thermodynamics will be used. The results will determine the constraints on
temperatures and fluid compositions required for mineral alteration and organic
synthesis. Recent advances in the theoretical geochemistry of hydrothermal
systems and ongoing research in geochemical bioenergetics will be used in
developing the model. The research will involve conducting theoretical mass-
transfer calculations that simulate the reactions of aqueous fluids with a rock
of the composition of martian meteorites to establish the ranges of temperature
and fluid composition consistent with the deposition of carbonate minerals
without the formation of hydrous silicate phases. The conditions leading to
carbonate deposition will be compared to those necessary for synthesis of
aqueous organic compounds from carbon dioxide. Specific attention will be paid
to whether polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are compatible with the alteration
assemblage at metastable redox equilibrium. The discovery of microbes capable of
living in terrestrial hydrothermal conditions raises the possibility that life
may have existed in similar conditions on Mars or other planets. A theoretical
model that compares geological conditions to the requirements for organic
synthesis will be developed. The result will be an analysis of the potential for
martian hydrothermal systems to support hydrothermal ecosystems.