* 9714934
* Dissertation Research:  Subsistence and Mobility in the Late Upper Paeolithic:  Fauna from the Fucino Basin, Italy
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Fiona Marshall, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, MS Francesca Alhaique will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze archaeological faunas
collected during the excavation of a series of six cave sites located on the
edges of ancient lake Fucino in Abruzzo, Central Italy. Taken together the sites
span the time period between 18,000 and 10,000 years ago and thus document the
very cold period at the end of the last glaciation and the transition to warmer
Holocene climatic conditions. Occupation in the region appears continuous and in
contrast to most other inhabited portions of Europe, stone tool industries
remain relatively unchanged over this period. Thus it seems likely that a single
cultural group was present throughout and the complication of possible
population replacement can be discounted. MS Alhaique shall document changes in
settlement and subsistence strategy over this time. Many archaeologists have
argued that within Europe (and in other parts of the world as well), the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition was marked by a change in which hunting and
gathering groups became more sedentary, and shifted their subsistence focus from
a limited number of large mammal species to a broader range which included
smaller animals and birds. However careful faunal analysis of relevant materials
has rarely been conducted and other factors, such as age dependent selective
destruction of smaller more fragile bones has not been considered. In her work,
MS Alhaique will analyze the fauna from the six Fucino sites. Since these have
already been identified in most instances to a species level, she will focus on
human modification to the materials to determine which bones result from human
agency and on natural destructive factors which may serve to distort the sample.
She will also reconstruct season of death since this sheds light on length of
site occupation. Seasonality can be determined to the study of migratory species
and through cementum analysis of mammal teeth. The stage for the Neolithic
Revolution - the domestication of plants and animals - was set during the
terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene. The (supposed) increased focus on
smaller species, the apparent increase in sedentarization and population density
all foreshadow later developments. MS. Alhaique's research will provide
additional insight into the process. It will provide useful data on an important
archaeological region and assist in training a promising young scientist.