* 9714853
* Third International Workshop on Ordered Intermetallic       Alloys and Composites; Hangzhou, China; April 5-10, 1998
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Stephen Sass, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/1999
* USD 6,000.00

9714853 Sass The objective of this international workshop is a provide a forum
for material scientists, and engineers from various countries to participate in
an in-depth discussion of recent advances and critical issues for the structural
use of ordered intermetallic alloys and composites. The structural uses of
intermetallic alloys suffer a major drawback: most are brittle at ambient
temperatures. This poor ductility and toughness restricts the use of
intermetallics as critical components in industrial systems. For the past 10
years, substantial efforts have been devoted to this class of structural
materials, and, as a result, significant progress has been made in improving the
tensile ductility and fracture resistance of nickel, iron, and titanium
aluminides. The objective of this workshop is a provide a forum for experts from
various countries to discuss (1) fundamental variables controlling deformation
and fracture of ordered intermetallics at ambient and elevated temperatures; (2)
the design of ductile intermetallic alloys for structural uses; (3) further
improvements in low- temperature toughness and high-temperature strength by a
composite approach; and (4) the processing of intermetallic alloys and
composites by both conventional and innovative methods. This international
workshop is co-organized by Prof. Dongliang Lin (host) from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Dr. C. T. Liu from Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Prof. Stephen
L. Sass from Cornell University. It is held in Hangzhou, China, from April 5-10,
1998. Participation in this workshop is by invitation only. The proceedings of
this workshop is tentatively planned to be published in the Journal of Materials
Science and Technology. It is expected to have 25-30 scientists from outside
China and 25-30 scientists from China. %%% Ordered intermetallics based on
aluminides and silicides possess many attractive properties for high-temperature
structural use. In general, these intermetallic s show excellent strength at
elevated temperatures. Many intermetallic alloys exhibit an increase in strength
with temperature rather than a decrease as in conventional materials. Aluminides
and silicides are extremely resistant to oxidation and corrosion at elevated
temperatures in hostile environments. In addition, these intermetallic alloys
have a density lower than that of steels and superalloys by as much as 40%, thus
making the intermetallics ideal for fabricating moving parts in advanced heat
engines, gas turbines and other energy conversion systems. ***