* 9714608
* The Third International Conference on Progress in           Durability Analysis of Composite Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Kenneth Reifsnider, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 08/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

*** 9714608 The International Conference on Durability of Composite Systems has
enjoyed widely recognized success in bringing together scientists and engineers
in a technical area of mechanics and materials that is important to the economy
and critical to the defense of our country. This third Conference is the first
ever to be held in the U.S., the result of a successful proposal to the
International organizing board. This Conference also focuses on joint activities
between the U.S., Europe, and Japan, especially in technical areas of great
current importance to those countries. Special attention will be given to high
performance composites, especially polymeric and ceramic composites, and to the
time-dependent behavior of all materials as identified by the recent U.S.-EC
Commission on materials research in Brussels. A unique feature of the Conference
is the fact that conceptual progress is compiled at the end of each Conference,
and the next Conference builds on the progress that was made in previous ones.
Concepts were chosen in that way for the primary focus of the current
Conference. The timeliness of this Conference is of special importance. Europe
has initiated several major national programs in high performance materials for
severe environments, and the first results of those programs are just becoming
available. A major reason for requesting support for this Conference is to
provide a means of inviting and bringing to the Conference the major U.S. and
European players in those technical areas to bring important information about
those activities and the associated directions of research to the U.S. technical
community, and especially to make it possible to bring young researchers to the
Conference who could not otherwise afford to come. Conference organization
Conference organization is being handled by Virginia Tech with limited financial
backing from that Institute. Cooperating U.S. organizations include the Virginia
Institute for Material Systems, and Georgia Tech; others are being contacted.
The scope of the Conference includes all types of high performance polymer and
composite systems, interfaces and interphases, high-temperature materials, smart
materials and structures, fatigue, fracture, and damage analysis. Some 16
invited speakers have committed to the Conference, and 40 contributed abstracts
have been received. Contributed papers will be chosen in February of 1997.***