* 9714862
* WGIDPO:  AWSEM Advocacy Program:  Expanding Outreach to Engineering and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Joann Loehr, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 01/31/2002
* USD 871,442.00

Advocates for Women in Science, Engineering and Mathematics (AWSEM) is a science
and math advocacy program for fourth through twelfth grade girls. A program of
Saturday Academy at Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology, the
AWSEM project creates and supports regional networks of science and technology
professionals, educators, parents and community organizations dedicated to
enriching the opportunities in science, engineering and mathematics for young
women. These regional networks of community leaders work together to: (1) dispel
the pervasive attitude that science, engineering and mathematics are
inappropriate fields for women; (2) create links within local communities and
their public and private institutions to promote the expansion of science
opportunities for young women; and (3) establish a vertical support system
beginning with school girls and including college students, teachers, parents
and professionals that will ensure sustainable, long-term contact between young
women and science practitioners. AWSEM currently maintains a network of eighteen
after-school science and math clubs in the Portland metropolitan area dedicated
to hands-on learning and on-site experience with professional women. At present,
professional women at over twenty corporate, agency and academic worksites
provide day- long interactive site visits for club members throughout the
academic year. Other, AWSEM clubs have begun with the support and training of
AWSEM's staff, using AWSEM curriculum and materials. The program is in the
process of expanding nationally through a collaboration with the professional
organization, Women in Technology International (WITI). AWSEM maintains a
comprehensive regional database of science and engineering practitioners and
acts as a central resource center for local communities interested in
encouraging young women to study science and mathematics, offering day-long
workshops on creating advocacy programs, and developing and disseminating
supplementary curriculum and materials. These materials include "Passing the
Torch,: a video overview of the AWSEM Project, and the AWSEM "Action Kit," a
guidebook to creating advocacy programming, including sections for parents,
teachers and professional, templates for permission slips and other important
paper work, and over 45 hands-on curriculum pieces broken down by age group and
field. All templates and curriculum are included on disk as well. Other AWSEM
materials include the "Directory of Practitioners: Role Models for Young Women,"
a listing of over 150 women in science, engineering, mathematics and technology
interested in working as mentors, and the "Passport to Science,," a guidebook
for individual explorations of science. Since 1983, Saturday Academy's programs,
including AWSEM, have served over 44,000 motivated 4th through 12th grade
students throughout Oregon and Southern Washington, providing opportunities to
learn beyond the classroom by making use of the expertise, equipment and
facilities found in industry, higher education and community agencies. In 1996
Saturday Academy received the "Presidential Award for Excellence in Mentoring"
for its work in support of students from groups under-represented in science and
engineering.