* 9714411
* Collaborative Research:  Practical Ethical Instruction with Expert Analyzed Cases
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Matthew Keefer, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/2000
* USD 83,419.00

This project undertakes a systematic study of cognitive processes that support
students in learning important concepts and skills concerning practical ethical
reasoning in a professional domain. The investigators will build a corpus of
cases, strategies, and analyses from three general sources: (1) the case
examples and exercises taken from leading textbooks in engineering ethics (2)
the knowledge, reasoning skills and case examples provided by engineering
ethicists and professional engineers as revealed in protocols which the
investigators will acquire and analyze, and (3) the findings of the
investigators' previous empirical study of different strategies for analyzing
practical ethical dilemmas employed by novice and more experienced ethical
reasoners. As a result of that study, the investigators found that experienced
ethical reasoners are careful to identify issues and to specify conditions under
which specific professional role obligations recommend particular actions, that
they elaborate conditions which would affect the moral analysis of a problem, in
part through posing hypothetical variations of the problem, and that they
justify resolutions in terms of those conditions which they conclude apply in
the problem. The investigators will develop techniques for using the corpus to
challenge and instruct novices in a manual tutoring intervention and assess the
pedagogical value of those techniques. They will present an experimental group
of novices aspects of the experienced analyses and invite them to compare those
conclusions with their own reasoning. The goal will be to assess how novices
understand the use of hypothetical variations and their moral significance for
the analysis of the problem. A control group will not be exposed to the experts'
reasoning and conclusions, and their conclusions will be compared with the
experimental analysis of the same problems. The experimental design will also
allow investigators to contrast the protocols of novices analyzing problems from
the corpus and compare them to the experienced or expert analyses of the same
problems. Results will be reported in journals and at meetings and can form the
basis for developing a computational model and designing an interactive tutoring
system. The significance lies in the development of a better understanding of a
pedagogical strategy widely used in practical ethical instruction. The study
will shed light on how experts' analyses comparing problems to variations can
assist students in learning the process of ethical reasoning.