* 9714299
* LEXEN:  Protistan Biodiversity in Antarctic Marine          Ecosystems:  Molecular Biological and Traditional Approaches
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* David Caron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2002
* USD 367,355.00

*** Caron 9714299 The analysis of microbial biodiversity of extreme environments
is difficult because traditional methods for examining diversity are often
ineffective for assessing species richness within these communities. Additional
difficulties arise due to the difficulties of recreating and maintaining
pertinent environmental features during sample collection and procession. This
study focuses on the protistan assemblages (algae and protozoa) in the sea ice,
sediment and ocean environments of the Ross Sea, Antarctica. The identification
of protistan species in natural assemblages traditionally has entailed direct
microscopical analyses as well as enrichment and culture techniques for
assessing biodiversity. Determination of diversity for these assemblages in
therefore susceptible to biases as a consequence of sampling, enrichment and
culture, as well as selective losses due to sample preservation and
concentration for microscopy. The goals of this project are: (1) to develop and
apply molecular biological approaches to assess species diversity of small
protists (algae and protozoa smaller than 100 micrometers) in ocean water, sea
ice and sediment environments and (2) to obtain baseline physiological
information on the growth rates, feeding rates and growth efficiencies of
cultured protozoa under pertinent temperature regimes. Molecular biological
studies will involve the use of PCR-based protocols to examine small subunit
ribosomal RNA gene (srDNA) diversity. Approaches and techniques developed will
be applicable to any other water body or sediment and would provide a means to
examine the representativeness of protistan cultures in extant culture
collections. ***