* 9714348
* Planning Meeting for I/UCRC for Purdue Center in            Pharmaceutical Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Michael Pikal, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl A. Cathey
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT EEC-9714348 Pikal The key to bringing a successful therapeutic entity
to market is to develop a stable product that can be manufactured and
distributed in a dosage form useful to the patient. The development of the
manufacturing process for a therapeutic agent must proceed quickly and
efficiently in order for the pharmaceutical company to be economically
successful. However, there are significant technical challenges that must be
overcome, such as physical and chemical stability problems and changes in dosage
form performance introduced during the formulation or manufacturing process.
Many companies do not have the resources to sufficiently research or develop,
independently, new formulation and manufacturing strategies to overcome these
barriers. The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Pharmaceutical
Processing was established at Purdue University to partner with pharmaceutical
companies to gain understanding, at the molecular level, of the effects of
processing on critical qualities of pharmaceutical products and to improve
process monitoring with the goal of minimizing validation requirements. This
proposal addresses the establishment of a research site at the University of
Connecticut to complement and extend the technical base of the Pharmaceutical
Processing Center. University of Connecticut researchers will bring to the
Center expertise in: * stability behavior and characterization of proteins in
both solution and solid state, * the science and technology of freeze drying, *
materials science of amorphous pharmaceuticals, * tablet coating science and
technology, * dissolution behavior, and * the study of disperse systems with a
focus on emulsions, interfacial characterization, and micro-encapsulation.