* 9714580
* Fundamental Interactions at the Liquid-Solid Interface:     Combined UHV-Electrochemical-Optical Studies at Clean and   Adsorbate Modified Electrode Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Jeffry Kelber, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/2000
* USD 190,500.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, addresses fundamental questions of the growth of oxide and hydroxide
films on reactive metals in aqueous solutions. Professor Kelber, at the
University of North Texas, will use a combination of ultra high vacuum
electrochemical methods and reflection absorption UV/VIS spectroscopy to
characterize reactions at iron and nickel surfaces. X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy will be used for compositional analysis of the interfaces formed,
and the effects of substrate structure and composition on the reactions of the
surfaces in aqueous solutions will be probed. This research provides fundamental
understanding of the processes of corrosion, environmental adsorption of species
contained in groundwater, and the action of corrosion inhibitors at the surfaces
of reactive metals. A detailed understanding of the interaction of reactive
metal and metal oxide surfaces with aqueous environments is important to
controlling and preventing corrosion. The research carried out in this project
provides structural and kinetic information which will help to understand this
important process. A new method for probing these interfaces in situ using
reflection absorption UV/VIS spectroscopy is being developed. These studies will
increase our understanding of corrosion and related environmentally important
processes.