* 9714982
* Stratospheric Transport and Stratospheric/Tropospheric      Exchange: Insights and Constraints from Be-10, Be-7 and     Their Ratio
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sumant Nigam
* 03/31/2001
* USD 149,945.00

9714982 Dibb Cosmogenic isotopes represent a largely untapped source of
information on transport within the stratosphere and exchange between the
stratosphere and troposphere. The Be-10 and Be-7 (beryllium) pair of isotopes is
particularly useful as tracers because their sources are known, they are
basically non-reactive, and their greatly different half-lives makes their ratio
a useful clock over time scales of months to several years. The principal
investigator and researchers at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL) have compiled the small set of data that exist on these isotopes and
their ratio. They will increase the data base by nearly an order of magnitude by
measuring and analyzing samples taken during several recent airborne sampling
campaigns. Latitudinally, the samples range from more than 70(N to 70(S, from
both the lower stratosphere and the upper troposphere. In addition, during the
campaigns measurements were obtained of a variety of other tracers such as
ozone, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, methane and water vapor. These data will
be compared with the beryllium isotopes results data. Dr. Dibb also will work
with LLNL scientists who plan to simulate the transport and exchange processes
of the stratosphere. The observational data will serve as constraints for model
simulations of transports in these regions.