* 9714791
* WGIDPO:  Wildlife Science Careers Programs
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/2002
* USD 485,239.00

The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) will develop an exciting model program
designed to interest girls and young women in science. Operated in partnership
with the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York, the program will build on a
highly successful pilot project to reach over 6,000 girls throughout New York
City over the grant period and thousands more thereafter. The Wildlife Science
Careers Program will enjoy the full support of the WCS's professional staff,
which includes environmental educators, animal curators, animal keepers,
veterinarians, conservation biologists, field scientists, wildlife
nutritionists, exhibit designers, and others, many of whom are women.
Participating Girl Scouts will meet these professionals, observe them at work,
engage them in dialogue, take part in hands-on projects, and experience first-
hand the excitement and dedication involved in working for the survival of
endangered species and natural habitats. The three-year program will consist of
five main components: (1) Five-day Wildlife Science Career Workshops at the
Bronx Zoo for 315 Cadette Girl Scouts (ages 12 5o 14) that will introduce them
to careers in the wildlife sciences and conservation biology; (2) Field
experience for the participating Cadettes at the WCS's four other facilities
(The Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation and the Wildlife Centers of Central
Park, Prospect Park and Queens), through which the girls will engage in science
exploration activities and meet additional role models in science; (3) Two-day
training seminars for the Cadettes that will provide them with the skills and
materials to conduct career and science awareness workshops for troops of
younger Girl Scouts, enabling the Cadettes to meet the requirements necessary to
become Girl Scout Program Aides; (4) Two-day leadership training courses for 36
Girl Scout Leaders that will enable them to oversee the progress of the
participating Cadettes and to continue key program components after the co
nclusion of the grant period; and (5) An internship program for fifty Senior
Girl Scouts (ages 14 to 17), who successfully complete the training workshops as
Cadettes to become Program Aides, that will give them the opportunity to work
side-by-side with scientists and other professional staff in the WCS's five
facilities. The proposed Wildlife Science Careers Program represents a unique
means of increasing the participation level of girls and young women in science.
Utilizing a non-competitive, single-sex approach, the program will capitalize on
the enthusiasm children and young adults have for visiting informal science
centers, such as zoos, to engage the interest of girls and young women in
science learning and careers. Informal science institutions and Girl Scout
Councils have an important role to play in advancing the interest, understanding
and skills of women in science, and in the proposed project, the WCS has
developed an exciting model that has the potential to be replicated nationwide.