* 9714003
* FSML: A Proposal to Replace the Liquid Scintillation        Counter at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Maureen Keller, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences will replace its aging liquid
scintillation counter with a state of the art instrument capable of counting
dual labelled samples with very low levels of radioactivity. This instrument
will be available for general laboratory use by Bigelow scientists, faculty and
studenrs from the University of New England, Bigelow's affiliate, and by
visiting scientists. The present counter places severe limitations on current
research activities,its age and heavy usage result in frequent down time due to
instrument failure, and its limitations in terms of flexibility, sensitivity and
storage capabilities hamper research efficiency and innovation. Acquisition of
the HP Tricarb 2770A liquid scintillation counter will allow for the first time,
the examine action of dual-labelled samples at very low levels of radioactivity
(at levels incorporated by a single cell),to use a variety of sampling
containers, to store and transfer data in a computer environment, and to
accommodate multiple users simultaneously. These improvements will enhance
greatly on- going research projects at Bigelow and allow the development of new
research initiatives. This will be of use to resident scientists, visiting and
students and will be an additional incentive for increased use of Bigelow
facilities by potential visitors.