* 9714024
* Workshop on Interdisciplinary Macromolecular Science and    Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Samuel Stupp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/1999
* USD 111,103.00

9714024 Stupp In order to take advantage of opportunities offered by
macromolecular science and engineering, it is timely and technologically
important to examine future projects in this broadly cross-cutting area. For
this purpose, a two-day workshop will be conducted at NSF headquarters with the
participation of about 50 scientists and engineers to identify important
research directions and opportunities in interdisciplinary macromolecular
science and engineering. This workshop is organized by a committee of six
individuals representing academic and industrial perspectives on the subject,
and having expertise in areas such as physics, chemistry, biology, and materials
science and engineering of macromolecules. The following five topics have been
identified for study and debate among workshop participants following input from
a broad cross-section of the technical community: 1) novel macromolecular
structures: synthesis and function, 2) innovation in properties of polymeric
materials through processing, 3) the solution of environmental problems through
macromolecular science and engineering, 4) macromolecular science and
engineering at the interface between biological and physical sciences, and 5)
the translation of macromolecular discoveries into technologies. Additional
issues to be studied by the participants include mechanisms that could catalyze
the scientific and technological development of interdisciplinary macromolecular
science and engineering, the industrial and international context, and very
importantly the educational challenges that must be faced. In addition to five
sub groups of 6 to 10 participants to discuss each topic, the workshop would
include six plenary speakers on general and specific issues, including P.G. de
Gennes, a Nobel laureate from France recognized for his seminal theoretical work
in polymer science. Followi ng the workshop, the organizing committee will
report to NSF staff on the recommendations of the entire group and will
subsequently publish a final report. %%% This workshop is funded by the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) of the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS) and is also sponsored by Programs and Divisions in the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG), Biological Sciences (BIO), and Education &
Human Resources (EHR). ***