* 9714410
* The Potential Effect the Inflow Boundary Layer has on       Hurricane Intensity
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1998,09/30/2002
* Gary Barnes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/2002
* USD 144,237.00

9714410&lt;br/&gt;Barnes&lt;br/&gt; The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is
an interagency activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary
to improve the delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program,
the National Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
and the Office of Naval Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research
of high priority to the USWRP. One of the primary goals of the USWRP is to
perform the research necessary to improve track and intensity forecasts of
hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt; It has been known for some time that sensible and latent
heat fluxes from the sea surface are the energy source for hurricanes. Due to
the difficulty, however, of obtaining data in the atmospheric boundary layer of
a hurricane, data is scarce and the processes by which heat and moment fluxes
occur are not well-known. Under this award and in cooperation with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Principal Investigator will conduct
field experiments designed to collect data in the boundary layer of hurricanes.
The experiments will concentrate on the inflow to the hurricane eyewall
utilizing new high resolution dropwindsondes and sensors on a NOAA research
aircraft that measure turbulent-scale fluxes. The experiments will provide an
estimate of the depth and the energy content of the inflow that fuels the
eyewall which is one factor that affects the intensity of the hurricane; they
will also provide estimates of the sensible and latent heat fluxes in the inflow
layer. Inflows with differing histories will be examined to determine how the
inflow responds to passage over land, or warmer or cooler seas. Real time
information can also be transmitted to the National Hurricane Forecast Center
appraising them of the likelihood of a change in the intensity of hurricane
prior to landfall. &lt;br/&gt; Successful completion of this research could lead
to improved methods for predicting the intensity of
hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;