* 9714049
* Structurally Embedded Fiber Optic Thermomechanical Strain   State Sensor
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* James Sirkis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2000
* USD 282,698.00

*** 9714049 Sirkis A structurally embedded fiber optic transducer of 1 cm gage
length will be developed, capable of simultaneously measuring the (1)
temperature, (2)normal strain parallel to the optical fiber axis, (3) secondary
principal strains in the plane perpendicular to the optical fiber axis, and (4)
orientation of the secondary principal plane, inside a structural composite
material. Successful development of the proposed fiber optic sensor technology
will provide experimentalists with a capability that is simply unavailable today
- the ability to measure key components of the strain state inside structural
materials. This proposed transducer is based on cascading (1) an in-line fiber
etalon (ILFE) sensor, (2) a saturated Bragg grating written into a standard low
birefringent (LoBi) optical fiber, and (3) a normal (unsaturated) Bragg grating
written into an elliptical clad, stress-induced high birefringent (1-liBi)
optical fiber. The 11,FE sensor has very small intrinsic temperature
sensitivity, and is sensitive to only the axial strain component in the host
structure. As a result, the ILFE component of the proposed sensor leads to one
of the five requisite independent optical measurements required to solve for the
five sought after Thermo-mechanical field variables (three normal strains,
temperature, and secondary principal direction). The saturated Bragg grating
written in the LoBi-Fiber produces two reflected Bragg wavelengths, thereby
yielding two more independent optical measurements. Finally, the Bragg grating
written into the elliptical clad HiBi optical fiber takes advantage of residual
birefringence coupled with this fiber's anisotropic mechanical response to yield
the final requisite two independent optical measurements. The multiaxial thermo-
mechanical strain sensor will be demodulated using a hybrid coherence
division/wavelength division multiplexing technique coupled with scanning,
dithered Fabry-Perot filter Bragg grating dem odulation and path-matched
differential interferometry with pseudo heterodyne ILFE demodulation. The
thermo-mechanical strains will be deduced from the resulting optical
measurements through the use of composites micromechanics models based on
concentric cylinders modeling techniques and nested multiple inclusions models,
The sensor system will be evaluated through tests of progressively increasing
complexity, starting with uniaxial tension of an unembedded sensor and ending
with the combination of temperature and transverse compression applied to
AS4/3501-6 graphite/epoxy laminates with embedded sensors. The potential uses of
the proposed sensor assembly include: (1) material measurements to aid
constitutive model development; (2) field measurements to verify micromechanics
models; (3) real-time in-situ health monitoring; (4) process monitoring; and (5)
residual stress measurements. This sensor can provide information to engineers
and scientists that is Simply unavailable today, thus enabling the realization
of more cost-effective, safe and highperformance systems.***