* 9714035
* Research Planning Grant:  Implementation of Generalized     Linear Models for Designed Experiments with Nonnormal       Response Variables
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Carole Shlaes, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 03/31/1999
* USD 17,938.00

9714035 Shlaes This grant provides funding for the investigation of statistical
techniques for dealing with nonnormal response variables through the use of
generalized linear models (GLIMs). Almost all of the experimental design
techniques in wide use today are based on the assumptions that the response
variables have errors that are normally distributed with a constant variance.
However, in many real-world and industrial situations, experimental data fails
to meet these assumptions. Examples of nonnormal responses include binomial
responses (1-0 responses, proportion defective data), exponential/Weibull
responses (time to failure and survival times) and Poisson responses (count
data, number of defects). Through the use of a mathematical link function,
generalized linear models (GLIMs) relate the suspected distribution of the
response variable to a linear prediction function. In this grant, techniques for
the implementation of GLIMs in industrial experimentation will be examined.
Specific industrial applications that would benefit from the application of
GLIMs and improved methods for the design of industrial experiments will be
investigated. If successful, the results of this research on GLIMs will lead to
improved statistical techniques for analyzing nonnormal data. In addition,
improved experimental design techniques which exploit the knowledge about the
true underlying distribution of the errors can be developed. Industrial
experimentation using carefully designed statistical test methods is vital to
the optimization of processes, efficient utilization of resources, and
improvement in the quality of products. These techniques will permit more
efficient experimentation maximizing the information gained from a limited
number of experimental trials.