* 9714868
* Dissertation: Acoustic and Articulatory Manifestations of   Consonant Weakening
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Abigail Cohn, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 01/31/2000
* USD 15,776.00

Although consonant weakening or lenition is a common phenomenon, no
comprehensive explanation exists. If weakening is a decrease in the duration and
magnitude of consonant production, as it has recently been described,
quantifying these changes should clarify the phenomenon. Duration is easily
measured with acoustic analysis, but other methods must be employed for
magnitude. This study will use dynamic electropalatography (EPG) to gather data
on the magnitude of linguopalatal contact over time. Stress, position-in-word,
and speech rate will be manipulated to determine their effects on the production
of consonants in American English and Spanish languages with different types and
degrees of phonologized weakening. Differences between phonetic and phonologized
weakening will be assessed and a contact-based metric to differentiate them will
be provided. The possibility that duration and magnitude varying separately~an
account for the range of weakenings for a single segment (e.g. k weakening to
either g or x ) will be explored. This study will provide new insight into the
nature of connected speech processes, add to existing knowledge about speech
rate variations, and demonstrate the importance of prosodic structure to
consonant articulation. Methodologically, it will advance techniques in applying
EPG data to our understanding of acoustic and phonological patterns.