* 9714298
* LEXEN:  Characteristics of Bacteria Native to Extremely     Dilute Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Don Button, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 275,000.00

9714298 Button PROJECT SUMMARY Oligotrophic environments contain nutrient
concentrations that range from near the limits of detection in euphotic waters
to unmeasurably dilute in aerobic unlighted aquatic systems. Large in volume,
these environments contain sufficient bacteria to form a major component of
biomass on earth. Oligobacteria, the dominant pelagic organisms present, are
almost totally unculturable, perhaps because their growth strategies favor
nutrient collection over induction and regulation against excessive transport of
extracellular solutes. Pure cultures of the more numerous and probably more
typical oligobacteria virtually always fail to propagate. Thus the environment
of oligobacteria is extreme because conditions have been impossible to formulate
sufficiently well for dependable growth, a condition stemming from the extremely
small concentrations involved. General strategies for growth in terms of
biochemistry, molecular biology and kinetics are therefore not well understood.
The aim of this effort is to bring bacteria more representative of the
oligotrophic environment into cultivation and report their properties. To do
this, extinction cultures will be prepared from seawater and culturabilities
established. From the number of species detected, estimates of the number of
culturable species in the parent water can be determined. Cultures are
continuously mixed and dialyzed against native seawater for nutrient supply and
waste-product removal. Pure cultures will be selected from these on the basis of
flow cytometry patterns and investigated for basic nutritional properties in
order to produce useful quantities of biomass. The resulting cultures will be
used for more detailed investigations to include i) size, DNA content, and cell
density, ii) phylogenetic location, iii) cytoplasmic and particularly membrane
protein distributions with attention to permeases, and iv) detailed nutri tional
properties including the kinetic constants that specify nutrient uptake. These
data will be used to advance concepts of oligotroph functionality.