* 9714604
* Use of Polishing Process Model as an Example for            Manufacturing System Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Srinivasan Chandrasekar, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2000
* USD 205,919.00

9714604 Chandrasekar Technology implementation in the discrete manufacturing
sector is more difficult than in the continuous process (e.g. chemical, flat
glass) and semiconductor industries, where the availability of scaling laws,
unit process models, and integrated system models has allowed for the rapid
implementation of new technology. In this study, a new approach is developed for
modeling a manufacturing system by starting with detailed physical models of the
unit processes, such as machining and polishing, and integrating them into a
unified system model. This development illustrates an avenue for the discrete
manufacturing industry to achieve many of the capabilities of the continuous
process and semiconductor industries. Models are first developed for an example
unit process, viz. abrasive polishing, which is widely used to produce smooth
surfaces of precision mechanical and electronic components. This is accomplished
through a combined experimental and theoretical study of the mechanics of
polishing. The models have the capability of predicting various outputs of the
polishing process such as surface finish, residual stresses and depth of
plastically deformed layers on polished surfaces; and rate of material removal.
The problem of integrating a collection of unit process models into a unified
model for the entire manufacturing system is next studied. This requires, for
example, that unit operation models be developed to a stage where they can
provide information about process variances and the sources of these variances.
The results of this research enable the development of a unique seminar course
and short monograph that will help advanced undergraduate and graduate students
to compare and contrast process and system modeling issues in the continuous
process, discrete manufacturing and semiconductor industries. ***