* 9714291
* Forecast Sensitivity to Regional and Global Targeting of    the Initial State
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jan Paegle, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 293,658.00

9714291 Paegle The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval Research
are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP. In
this research, the Principal Investigator will investigate the relative
contributions of regional and global-scale initial uncertainties on model
forecasting sensitivity. Several recent studies emphasize benefits of locally
targeted observations, based upon estimates of uncertainty growth produced by
adjoint, "bred mode", and singular vector analyses. Such methods identify
dynamically unstable regions within which details of the local initial state may
have special relevance for subsequent forecast evolution. It is unclear whether
those approaches distinguish forecast sensitivities due to slightly uncertain
specification of the global-scale, background flow. Sample forecasts of the
"superstorm" of 12-14 March 1996 suggest that details of the upstream domain
that includes the initial potential vorticity maxima leading to the storm are
important for a 96 h forecast. Such findings motivate the proposed work which
will estimate uncertainty in specification of the atmospheric state, and will
quantify impact of the uncertainty upon numerical weather prediction as a
function of uncertainty location and scale. The working hypothesis of the
research is that local weather prediction by numerical methods often depends
more sensitively on relatively small uncertainties of the initial global-scale
state than upon uncertainties of the initial regional state. Three separate
global reanalysis products will be compared. The differences of different,
equally credible atmospheric analyses prov ide a measure of current uncertainty
in the initial state, and will be spectrally quantified. The uncertainties thus
estimated will be inserted into the initial states of a global variable
resolution model to determine the scale dependence of subsequent forecast
sensitivity. Sensitivity studies will focus on a number of initial states
selected from Spring and Winter conditions. Initially targeted domains will also
include the Pacific data void. Successful completion of this research
potentially will have important implications for data collection strategies for
operational forecasting. ***