* 9714282
* LEXEN:  Biogenic Fractionations of Transition Metal         Isotopes:  Novel Methods for the Examination of Life in     Extreme Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Ariel Anbar, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 09/30/2000
* USD 270,000.00

Professors Ariel D. Anbar and Kenneth H. Nealson, of the Department of Earth and
Environmental Sciences at the University of Rochester, are supported by the
Division of Chemistry, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, and the Division of Earth Sciences for their studies of the biogenic
fractionation of transition metal isotopes. These studies test the hypothesis
that fractionation of stable isotopes of key metabolic metals occurs during
uptake and metabolism of these metals by microorganisms and that such isotope
fractionation will leave a recognizable signature that will be useful for the
study of life in environments where extreme conditions preclude the application
of other biomarkers. Professors Anbar and Nealson use multiple-collector
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry to characterize the isotopic
compositions of metals isolated from microorganisms sampled in the field and
from microbes cultured under controlled laboratory conditions. Their studies are
focused on the kinetic fractionation of the isotopes of copper and zinc,
expected during the enzyme-catalyzed uptake of these metals, and of iron,
expected during microbially-mediated redox reactions. These biogenic isotope
fractionations are expected to provide information about the presence or absence
of biological activity in general and about specific metabolic processes in
particular. Fractionation of stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur due
to the different reaction rates of compounds containing different isotopes of
these elements have been used for years to obtain information about metabolic
processes in environments not accessible to direct observation. With the support
of the Division of Chemistry, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, and the Division of Earth Sciences, Professors Ariel D. Anbar and
Kenneth H. Nealson, of the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences at the
University of Rochester, are developing techniques to explore the biogenic
fractionation of isotopes of metals which play key roles in metabolic processes.
By analyzing the fractionation of isotopes of copper, zinc, and iron, Professors
Anbar and Nealson obtain information about the presence or absence of biological
activity in general and about specific metabolic processes in particular. These
studies are of particular utility for the study of life in extreme environments,
where extreme conditions preclude the application of other `biomarkers.` Such
environments include modern settings which are physically remote or subject to
extreme environmental conditions and ancient environments which can be studied
only through the geological record.