* 9714758
* Analytical Aspects of Some Non-Linear Mathematical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2003
* Luis Caffarelli, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2003
* USD 323,405.00

9706260 Caffarelli The project involves free boundary problems and optimal
transportation. Free boundary problems arise naturally when a constitutive
relation or a conserved quantity (a temperature, a pressure, a density) changes
discontinuously its behavior across some value of the variables under
consideration. Typical examples are solid-liquid interphases, burnt-unburnt
mixtures in flame propagation, and flow in porous media. Understanding of the
geometry and stability of the solution and its interphase is important to select
and evaluate simulation methods, as well as to understand the models themselves.
The theory of optimal transporation discusses how to transport a variable x from
a state S to a state T in a least expensive fashion (or how nature would do so).
The variable x could represent goods, trainees, information, or, as in the
quasi-geostrophic model, optimal disposition of air masses. The links of these
models to non-linear partial differential equations need much further
exploration. The focus is on several fundamental problems of nonlinear analysis
in two areas: fast and abrupt transitions, allocation and optimal transportation
theory. Fast and abrupt transitions occur in many fields. Typical examples are
the evolution of solid-liquid interphases in melting or solidification, the
propagation of gases or fluids in porous media or the elastic to plastic
transition in some materials in continuum mechanics. In the field of financial
mathematics there is the threshold state of variables after which an option is
executed, a good is restocked, or, in short, when a "discontinuous" decision is
taken. We study the stability of such processes, the way to simulate them
numerically, etc. The second area of interest consists of the equations that
model optimal transportation. This arises for instance when goods must be
delivered from one set of locations (warehouses) to another (distribution
points). Of course we want to do it minimizing transp ortation costs. Not
surprisingly, the basic equations governing this problem reappear in meteorology
(the quasi-geostrophic equations of front formation), where air masses
"transport" themselves optimally, and in the numerical simulation of different
fluid flows (lubrication, bubbles in fluids, etc.). We hope that this approach
will provide a new understanding of the phenomena and better computational
techniques.