* 9714214
* LEXEN:  Collaborative Research:  A Window into the Extreme  Environment of Deep Subsurface Microbial Communities:       Witwatersrand Deep Microbiology Project
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Tullis Onstott, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/1999
* USD 192,527.00

9714214 Onstott Recent investigations have identified microbial communities in
various crustal environments down to 2800 meters below the surface (mbls). Only
a hand full of deep microbial samples from continental crust (&gt;500 mbls.)
exists, however, because coring is expensive. The gold mines of the 2.9 Ga
Witwatersrand Supergroup in South Africa, however, provide a unique opportunity
to study microbial communities at depths ranging from 2000 to 3500 mbls. And
eventually up to 5000 mbls. Reconnaissance samples of a uranium-rich, gold-
bearing, carbonaceous rock and of water from a gallery borehole were collected
for microbial analyses from mined depth of 3200 mbls., where the rock and water
temperatures were 50 to 55(C. Measures were taken to avoid contamination during
mining and sampling. Samples were shipped to the U.S.A. in sterile, anaerobic
canisters on ice, processed under sterile anaerobic conditions and distributed
to other microbiology labs. Microscopic observations indicated the presence of
intact cells in both types of samples. Electron microscopy reveals filamentous
microorganisms in the rock samples. Phospholipid fatty acid and DNA analyses
indicate that the rock samples contain Cyanobacteria and sulfate-reducing
bacteria (SRB). Growth was detected in aerobic and anaerobic enrichments of the
rock samples. The water sample yielded a strain of Thermus that is the first
reported Thermus to reduce Fe (III) and the first facultative, thermophilic Fe
(III) reducing bacteria (IRB). Funds are requested to return to South Africa,
set up a sample-processing laboratory on site, and carry out a three-month field
study to address the following issues raised by this sample reconnaissance: ( To
what extent are rock and water samples contaminated by mining activity and what
sampling strategies must be developed to reduce and quantify this contamination?
Specifically, do the Cyanobacteria represent mining contamination? ( Does the
radiation emanating from the uranium-rich, car bonaceous layer provide a
significant source of energy for indigenous microbial communities? In
particular, does the radiolytic reaction with water generate sufficient oxygen
for the growth of facultative microorganisms like IRB-SA? ( If these microbial
communities have been present in the rock since the time of the last thermal
episode at 2.0 Ga, then does the in situ activity of the SRB and IRB explain the
occurrence of framboidal pyrite and filamentous aggregates of gold? To address
the first question, samples of mining water, borehole water, and filtered air
samples will be collected and analyzed. For the second question, rock samples of
the carbonaceous layer and host rock will be collected with aseptic methods in a
three dimensional grid (3x3x12 meter) during excavation of an access tunnel. To
answer the second and third question, the relationships between the mineralogy
and the bacteria in the rocks will be examined in situ and the capability of the
cultured microorganisms to precipitate minerals at in situ conditions will be
examined. To constrain the habitation time of the microbial community, the
present day and paleo hydrology will be modeled using thermal constraints
provided by borehole temperatures and thermochronometry. Incubations of all
samples will be initiated on site. Off site analyses during the subsequent 21
months will include 1) phospholipid, glycolipid, ether lipid analyses (Univ. of
Tenn.); 2) DNA extraction, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification,
cloning, and sequencing (Pacific Northwest National Laboratories-PNNL); 3)
acridine orange direct counts (AODC), in situ probe, and field emission gun
scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM) (Princeton-Rutgers); 4) chemical and
isotopic analyses (Princeton-Indiana University); 5) fission track apatite
analyses (Princeton-Univ. of Penn.). 6) Phosphorimaging of SRB and uranium
reducing activity (PNNL-Princeton).