* 9714946
* Microstructure-Property Relationships in Sm-Fe-N-Based      Permanent Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 12/31/2001
* USD 327,073.00

9714946 Shield Samarium-iron compounds with interstitial nitrogen (Sm-Fe-N)
comprise a promising class of magnetic materials with properties competitive to
those of Nd-Fe-B permanent magnets. This project seeks to accomplish two
interrelated objectives: (1) to control the microstructure evolution in Sm-Fe-N-
based permanent magnets through processing and alloy development; (2) to
establish relationships between the microstructure and magnetic properties in
Sm-Fe-N-based permanent magnets. Of primary concern is the influence of grain
boundaries, second phases, and grain size on the magnetic properties. To control
microstructure evolution, alloys are designed that effectively enhance the
formation of the samarium-iron compound during rapid solidification processing.
Alloying additions, such as Ti, Zr, Si, V, C, and combinations of these, are
used to alter the solidification behavior of Sm-Fe alloys. The goal is to either
enhance the formation of the Sm-Fe compound at lower solidification rates or to
suppress the formation of crystalline phases altogether. In the latter case the
resultant amorphous materials are crystallized to the Sm-Fe compound. Subsequent
nitrogenation results in the hard magnetic Sm-Fe-N phase. The relationships
between the microstructure and magnetic properties of Sm-Fe-N-based permanent
magnets should be clarified in this project. %%% The most notable advantage of
Sm-Fe-N materials over Nd-Fe-B magnets is the Curie temperature (approximately
150 degrees C higher) allowing applications in more demanding thermal
environments. However, Sm-Fe-N magnets pose many challenges, especially with
regards to intelligent processing and understanding of the microstructure-
property relationships. ***