* 9714563
* U.S.-Russia Cooperative Research:  RA-Ven.NET/Russian       American Virtual Enterprise Network Primary Raven Server    Connection and Development
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Ian-Richard Robinson, Institution for International Manufacturing Research
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

INT-9714563 Jordan This U.S.-Russia Cooperative Project is on "Rav-en.net:
Russian-American Virtual Enterprise Network Primary RAVEN Server Connection and
Development." The principal investigator is Dr. James A. Jordan of the Institute
for International Manufacturing Enterprise Research IIMER , a non-profit
research group in San Luis Obispo, California. The purpose of the ra-ven.net
effort is to implement a practical network mechanism in which to assist in the
initial phase of RAVEN development. RAVEN is a U.S.-Russian cooperative effort
to develop a prototype electronic network that will enable U.S. manufacturers to
access specialized capabilities of the Russian manufacturing base. In a larger
sense, RAVEN will facilitate the development of U.S.-Russian virtual enterprises
as part of the global manufacturing infrastructure. To accomplish this, IIMER
will develop, install, and connect to the Internet a dedicated network server
for RAVEN; develop content associated with the primary network activity related
to WWW, Telnet, FTP, and Index search engine service for RAVEN network
development; maintain and moderate all network activity; assist in the
installation and the connection of 10 Russian counterpart Internet accounts;
compile existing Department of Commerce Bureau of Export Administration and
Defense Nuclear Agency "Russian Business Information" into a network of
searchable and readable form; and submit a final, one year, report of RAVEN
development progress. By creating a central Internet based network for the
development of RAVEN, much more interactivity will be possible, at a minimal
cost and higher efficiency rate, between U.S. and Russian counterparts in the
development of a complete RAVEN program and implementation vehicle. By creating
a central information bank for network communications, index servers, and
program information, it will be possible to attract the attention of a much
larger educational, scientific, and industry base in which to be involved with
the development of RAVEN. This research in computer science fulfills the program
objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Russia to
combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
benefit. *** ??