* 9714370
* A New Spectrum of Hierarchical Storage Architectures for    High Performance Disk I/Os
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Qing Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Yavuz A. Oruc
* 06/30/2002
* USD 359,466.00

This research is investigating the issues related to designs and performance
evaluations of several innovative disk I/O architectures. These architectures
may improve the I/O response time by orders of magnitude over current state-of-
the-art disk architectures for office/engineering workloads. The focus of the
research includes: * Minimization of disk write times by means of disk caching
disk (DCD). This is a technique of using a small disk to cache writes
sequentially, as in a log-structured file system, then using the log to update
the file system on the larger disks. * Using a combination of DRAM and DCD to
replace non-volatile RAM caches that are currently used in RAID systems. * Using
DRAM as a component of the file system to allow fast reads and writes. In this
scheme, a log of files written to RAM will be kept in either NVRAM or on disk,
but only the RAM access will be in the critical path. * Upgrading existing file
servers to emulate DCD using multiple existing disks. These architectures will
be investigated using simulation to compare them to existing architectures under
a wide range of I/O workloads. New analytical models will also be devised and
used in evaluation of architectures. Actual implementations of the DCD
architectures will be carried out using disk partitions as caches on the
computers in the department. Performance measurements will be performed on the
DCD implementations and used to compare with existing disk architectures.