* 9714733
* Dissertation Research:  An Ethnoarchaeological Study of     Enset Cultivation and Plant Use Among the Sheko of Southwest Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Fiona Marshall, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2000
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, MS. Elizabeth Hildebrand will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct anthropological
investigation among the Sheko people of southwestern Ethiopia to study the
methods they employ to cultivate enset and other local crops. Agriculture arose
independently, at roughly the same time in several areas in both the Old and New
World. Regions such as the Andean highlands, Middle America, the Near East and
China are relatively well known to archaeologists because their main
domesticates - potatoes, corn, wheat and rice - form Western dietary staples.
Although few Ethiopian food crops, with the exception of coffee, are well known
outside the immediate region, a number of plants were domesticated and several
play an important local subsistence role there. Enset is a root crop
domesticated in prehistoric times. It contains an edible tuber which grows to
one meter in diameter and an edible stalk. It is eaten widely across Ethiopia
and provides the main source of sustenance for a large population in the
southwestern portion of the country. Throughout most of Ethiopia famers follow a
settled way of life and practice intensive agriculture, planting on terraces
constructed in some case over thousands of years. In this context the Sheko are
highly unusual because they are mobile, plant only small fields and move often.
They also live in an area where undomesticated enset occurs and thus are
probably close to the source of domestication. They also, quite likely, follow
the subsistence strategies of early farmers and thus are of great archaeological
interest. Over the course of her fieldwork MS Hildebrand will collect basic
demographic and social data. She will conduct an intensive study of enset
cultivation and use and also note Sheko farming approaches to other endemic
plant species. She will collect samples of both domesticated and wild plant
species and determine weedy taxa present in agricultural fields and other
humanly altered environments. Since root crops are rarely preserved in the
archaeological record, she will search for associated cultural and biological
indicators of enset cultivation which might be preserved in such a context. The
research is important for several reasons. Anthropologists wish to understand
the processes which led to the domestication of plants and animals because this
transition from hunting and gathering set the stage which led to the development
of complex societies. The Sheko offer an important opportunity for potential
insight into this process. The specific results of her work will also be of
direct interest and use to archaeologists who work in Eastern Africa. The
project will assist in training a promising young scientist.