* 9714425
* Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Paul Dickinson, Hazardous materials Training and Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2001
* USD 2,000,000.00

The vision of the Advanced Technology Environmental Education center (ATEEC) is
to create a national network of community colleges, supported through public and
private partnerships, that prepares and maintains an environmental technology
workforce to address industry's needs and to promote the transfer of secondary
students to higher education. Through an ATEEC National workshop, environmental
technology has been defined as "a career field that utilizes the principles of
science, engineering, communication, and economics to protect and enhance
safety, health, and natural resources." The environmental technology field
encompasses an array of professions, i.e., pollution prevention, water and
wastewater treatment, energy and conservation, and many others. The
interdisciplinary nature of environmental technology programs includes math,
science, sociology, political science, technology, economics, and more. This
field is an excellent mechanism to reach ALL students and particularly those who
may feel threatened by the study of math or science. It is imperative that ALL
students receive core instruction enabling them to become competent in math,
science, and technical skills as they prepare for environmental technology
careers. ATEEC was designed to address the need to build a strong environmental
technology education infrastructure which assists the nation's community
colleges in the development of quality environmental technology education
programs. To achieve this, the Center's mission which incorporates three goals,
is to advance environmental technology education through curriculum development,
professional development, and program improvement in the nation's community
colleges and secondary schools. To build the environmental technology education
infrastructure, ATEEC has utilized the strengths of its partners, the Hazardous
Materials Training and Research Institute (HMTRI), the Partnership for
Environmental Technology Education (PETE), and the University of Northern Iowa's
(U NI) Center for Environmental and Energy Education. To date, more than 40
activities have been completed successfully which substantiate ATEEC as a
national focal point to lead efforts in environmental technology education
program development and improvement. The foundation for the activities which
will carry ATEEC through 2000 is based upon the planning efforts of the National
Visiting Committee, ATEEC partners, and the Center's director. The activities
address needs articulated by education, business and industry representatives.
The team-approach to strategic planning ensures partner buy-in and
responsibility for delivery of high quality programs and services for which
ATEEC has established a national reputation. ATEEC is continuing its original
mission as it progresses toward 2000. Firmly established as a "national" Center,
ATEEC continues to strengthen the necessary infrastructure to support and
complement environmental technology education in secondary schools, community
colleges and four-year colleges. ATEEC enables these institutions to
cooperatively build quality environmental technology programs which embrace a
defined knowledge base emphasizing strong math, science, and technology skills.
ATEEC is an incubator in the truest sense which enables the creation of new
programs and the continuous improvement of existing programs.