* 9714302
* LEXEN:  Pyrite, a Crucial Mineral and Surface for Microbial Life in Extreme Hydrothermal Environments (Collaborative    Research)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2001
* USD 471,324.00

9714302 Luther PROJECT SUMMARY Organisms that thrive in high temperature
(hyperthermophiles) ecosystems such as at terrestrial and deep-sea hydrothermal
vents, have challenged our understanding of the physical and biochemical
constraints on the upper temperature limits for life and stimulated new theories
on how life originated (e.g. Baross and Hoffman, 1985; Pace, 1991). These
hyperthermophiles are the most closely related to the universal ancestor for all
life (from small subunit rRNA and gene duplication data) which supports the
theory that life arose in highly reduced, high temperature environments such as
those encountered at hydrothermal vent systems. Recently scientists proposed a
mechanism for the synthesis of the first molecules for life in which pyrite can
be synthesized abiotically with hydrogen as a product, laying the framework for
the evolution of the first metabolic cycles. The central hypothesis of this
study maintains that the abiotic synthesis of pyrite provides the essential
properties for sequestering the energy sources for chemoautotrophic metabolism
of the deepest lineages of life. Drs. Luther and Reysenbach believe that under
an extreme chemical and physical environment microorganisms can utilize the
resources provided on the pyrite surfaces for sustained metabolism. They also
believe that these organisms will closely represent early life forms that may
have occupied similar extreme habitats. Furthermore, since molecular
phylogenetic evidence exists that the deepest of these thermophilic lineages
inhabit iron and sulfidic-rich environments at deep-sea hydrothermal vents, they
are well-positioned to test these assertions. The objective of this research
are: 1. To establish whether pyrite and the associated adsorbed trace metals and
simple inorganic molecules will mediate the microbial community structure in
high temperature aquatic environments. 2. To determine whether pyrite synthesi s
can be predicted, through the simultaneous measurement of FeS and hydrogen
sulfide. This project clearly addresses most of the primary mandates of the
LExEn research program. In this interdisciplinary study these collaborators will
integrate molecular genetic approaches with in situ geochemistry to study the
diversity, ecology, and evolutionary history of the microorganisms thriving in
extreme habitats where intense redox and temperature gradients exist. This
project is cooperatively supported by the Divisions of Ocean Science and
Chemistry, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate