* 9714292
* LExEn:  Characterization of the Upper Pressure Limits for   Microbial Life
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Douglas Bartlett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 80,628.00

Bartlett 9714292 Many regions of the solar system where life is postulated to
exist, such as the oceans of Europa, are characterized by pressures far greater
than those experienced at Earth's surface. Because pressure exerts a fundamental
influence on the properties and distribution of life, the effects of high
pressure on living systems needs to be understood. Unfortunately, despite the
isolation of high pressure-loving (barophilic) microbes from certain deep-sea
environments, relatively little data exists on the nature of barophily or the
pressure boundaries within which life may exist. The mechanisms and limits of
growth at high pressure are being investigated by using a collection of bacteria
of differing high pressure growth abilities, and by isolating and characterizing
additional barophiles from the environment capable of growing at unprecedented.
pressures. Mutants derived from two genetically manipulatable bacteria,
barotolerant Escherichia coli, and moderately barophilic Photobacterium species
strain SS9, will be obtained following a series of stepwise high pressure
selection regimes under various culture conditions. Genes associated with high
pressure growth will be identified and characterized. In addition, increased
high pressure growth ability will be selectively evolved in the extreme
barophile Shewanella species strain PT99, and "hyper" barophiles will be
selected for, using sediments freshly obtained from a high pressure location
within the Japan Trench. The phylotypes of those isolated microorganisms
displaying greatest high pressure growth capability will be ascertained
following 16S rDNA sequencing.