* 9714687
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Trapped Gases in Firn   and Ice from Antarctic Deep Ice Cores
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,04/30/2002
* Edward Brook, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2002
* USD 246,004.00

This award is for support for a program to make high resolution studies of
variations in the concentration of methane, the oxygenisotope composition of
paleoatmospheric oxygen, and the total gas content of deep Antarctic ice cores.
Studies of the concentration and isotopic composition of air in the firn of the
Antarctic ice sheet will also be continued. One objective of this work is to use
the methane concentration and oxygen-isotope composition of oxygen of air in ice
as time-stratigraphic markers for the precise intercorrelation of Greenland and
Antarctic ice cores as well as the correlation of ice cores to other climatic
records. A second objective is to use variations in the concentration and
interhemispheric gradient of methane measured in Greenland and Antarctic ice
cores to deduce changes in continental climates and biogeochemistry on which the
atmospheric methane distribution depends. A third objective is to use data on
the variability of total gas content in the Siple Dome ice core to reconstruct
aspects of the glacial history of West Antarctica during the last glacial
maximum. The fourth objective is to participate in collaborative studies of firn
air chemistry at Vostok, Siple Dome, and South Pole which will yield much new
information about gas trapping in ice as well as the concentration history and
isotopic composition of greenhouse gases, oxygen, trace biogenic gases and trace
anthropogenic gases during the last 100 years.