* 9714891
* Isolation Enhanced Principal Component Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Janos Gertler, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract - Gertler 9714891 Implicit modeling approaches to fault detection are
data driven and are based on multivariate statistical methods. Principal
component analysis (PCA) has been applied to model normal chemical process
behavior, unusual events are then detected by referencing the observed process
variable against this model. While these approaches are effective at detecting
process faults, they do not specifically address the issue of fault isolation.
Analytical redundancy methods have been created by the electrical engineering
control community, which rely on explicit models of the monitored plant. Based
on the model, consistency (parity) relations are derived which return residuals
indicative of faults. These equations may be viewed as generalizations of
material and energy balance calculations. The parity relations may be so
designed ("structured") that their residuals follow clear patterns in response
to various faults, thus providing a convenient means of fault isolation. The
fundamental results of parity relations have been developed for linear systems,
they may be applicable to nonlinear systems (the category for most chemical
manufacturing facilities). The PI's are planning a combination of the above two
methods, multivariate statistical techniques and model-based monitoring methods,
to isolate faults. They plan to build a structured set of partial PCA models
using the following steps: 1. A full PCA will be performed to determine the
number of relations among the variables; 2. A structure matrix will be designed
utilizing results from the theory of parity relations; and 3. A number of
partial PCA models will be created, according to the selected structure, by
simply omitting variables from the full PCA model.