* 9714056
* Construction of Multi-Purpose Housing at Mount Desert       Island Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,12/31/1999
* David Evans, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1999
* USD 207,286.00

The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (MDIBL) will construct a multi-
use housing facility. MDIBL provides access for visiting Investigators to marine
species for the purpose of investigating mechanisms of basic processes such as
osmoregulation, cell division, reproduction and the function of vertebrate
organs like the kidney, heart and brain; and offers educational programs for
students ranging from high school to postdoctoral. The Laboratory hosts
Investigators and students from the U.S., Canada and Europe who are actively
recruited through a variety of fellowship programs. The ability of MDIBL to
accommodate these diverse groups is currently limited by the quality and
quantity of available housing, in particular housing for Investigators seeking
short stays at the Lab and for students during our peak season. The long-term
goal of the proposed activity is to create a set of at least four housing units
designed to be utilized by students, Investigators or teacher/student groups at
different times of the year. The current application seeks support for the first
of these units. The site proposed for these units was chosen on the basis of a
comprehensive site-planning process undertaken by MDIBL in collaboration with
professional planner and offers privacy and accessibility while minimizing
development costs. The design of the units was chosen to maximize flexibility of
current and future use, economy of construction and harmony with the surrounding
land and community. The unit will be insulated and heated to provide much needed
accommodations in the colder months. The housing unit will benefit both students
and Investigators by providing summer student housing which is safer and more
accommodating and allow MDIBL to house visiting Investigators who come for short
stays to collect samples or attend conferences or short courses.