* 9714628
* Upgrading the University of North Carolina, Asheville's,    UNIX-based UNIDATA Support
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Huo-Jin Huang, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 08/31/1998
* USD 12,202.00

9714628 Heimbach This grant will provide funding to upgrade the University of
North Carolina's Department of Atmospheric Sciences UNIDATA-supported network.
New software, expanded products and increasing applications have rendered part
of the present system obsolete. Presently the department has four Sun
workstations. The existing server (a Sun LX) will be downgraded and a new
server, a Sun Ultra 1-170E along with some peripherals, will be added. The
department will continue the popular PC-McIDAS by replacing the existing two PCs
with high-end Pentiums to allow PC-McIDAS upgrades which are not possible with
the current PCs. This expansion will allow a wider dissemination of the UNIDATA
services which have already been profoundly beneficial to the educational
experiences of the majors, to research and to those enrolled in the department's
support courses. A majority of the department's offerings have been impacted by
the UNIDATA products and three new courses have been developed which are
specifically directed at UNIDATA applications. A freshman-level atmospheric
sciences course is being reorganized to include an interdisciplinary component.
The multidisciplinary aspects of this course will be supported by the proposed
upgrade. This equipment upgrading is essential to continue the department's
rigorous instruction in both major and service courses, as well as to contribute
to research which requires operational meteorological data.