* 9714937
* Combined Automatic Assignment of NMR Spectra and Calculation of Macromolecular Structure by Self-Correcting Distance    Geometry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Werner Braun, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 285,000.00

This project will enhance the stability, reliability and efficiency of a new
computational tool, the self- correcting geometry (SECODG) method for combined
assignment of NMR spectra and 3D structure calculation. The SECODG method
implemented in the DIAMOD/NOAH software package dramatically reduces the time to
generate protein structures from NMR data. Unlike previous distance geometry
methods, which were designed for consistent data sets, the method can generate
accurate structures from sets of constraints that contain errors. This project
will further improve this method to be applicable for larger proteins. Several
tests have demonstrated that the present method can deal with real data and is
significantly faster than manual interactive spectral interpretation methods.
The first test was to compare the results of automatic structure calculation
from NOESY spectra that had been analyzed by earlier manual methods for 6
proteins ranging in size from 40 to 135 amino acids. The automated method
assigned 70-80% of the NOESY cross peaks and the three-dimensional structures
were of similar quality. In a second test, previously uninterpreted NOESY and
TOCSY spectra were used by NOAH/DIAMOD to automatically calculate a 3D structure
bundle for an isoform of crambin. Slight modifications and some manual
assistance were required so that the program could deal with a significant
number of missing chemical shifts. Based on this practical experience, the
method will be improved by optimizing the error-tolerant target function,
incorporating sensitivity tests for constraints, including line shape
information in the peak assignment method and interfacing the program suite with
programs for automated sequential assignment from other groups to develop a
completely automatic computational package for direct interpretation of NMR
spectra. This program package will be a powerful computational tool to speed up
macromolecular structure determination from NMR da ta. Experimentally determined
three-dimensional structures are the basis for designing new drugs and proteins
with improved or new functions. In combination with energy minimization and
Monte Carlo simulations, it will help in designing proteins with a desired
structure and new functional properties.