* 9714559
* Demand for quality-differentiated network services
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 772,156.00

Future growth of Internet and other network services depends upon how these
services are marketed. Two decisions are involved: the division of services into
quality-differentiated market segments, and the pricing structure of each
segment. There is evidence of diversity in user demand for service quality
depending on application, familiarity, and willingness to pay. On the supply
side, network technology now can support a wide range of service quality.
Successful growth therefore requires service providers to offer combinations of
quality and price that match user need. But to do this providers must understand
the structure of user demand. Such understanding is lacking at present. This is
a proposal for a market experiment to estimate the demand for network services.
INDEX---the Internet Demand Experiment---has three objectives: 1. Measurement of
user demand for Internet access as a function of quality of service (QoS),
pricing structure, and application; 2. Demonstration of an end-to-end system
that provides access to a diverse group of users at attractive price-quality
combinations; 3. Development of a prototype system that can be scaled to serve
the demand for remote network access from all Berkeley students, faculty and
staff on a user-financed basis. The experiment will recruit 160 students,
faculty and staff from the Berkeley campus community. Users will select and pay
for network services from a menu of QoS-price offerings. User decisions will be
monitored and the data will be used to estimate their structure of demand. The
experiment will produce a unique set of data that can be analyzed to
characterize individual and aggregate network traffic and to evaluate strategies
for managing network resources to accommodate diverse user needs.