* 9714983
* Krill Life Histories
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Marc Mangel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2002
* USD 229,767.00

Abstract P.I. Marc Mangel OPP97-14983 Antarctic krill represent the largest
harvestable population in the ocean, with annual biomass production about three
times the global fish catch. In addition, most organisms in the Southern Ocean
are one or two trophic levels from krill. At the broadest level, a fundamental
question is: What sustains krill and allows it to be such a phenomenally
successful organism? A secondary question is: What is the effect of krill
harvesting by humans on krill-dependent predators? Although the maximum krill
harvest by humans is small compared to that of other predators, the Convention
for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources explicitly calls for
an ecosystem-based approach in which such indirect effects are considered. Of
particular concern is the potential overlap of the foraging ranges of predators
with the spatial distribution of harvesting activity. The proposed research has
two directions. The first is the continued development of models for krill
predator and krill fishery interactions. The fishery models will be of clear
significance to the Scientific Committee for the Commission for the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and consequently, to the U.S. Antarctic
Program. The model will also examine indirect food web effects at the level of
the individual and the population. The second direction is the development of
life history models for krill, using the methods of dynamic state variable
modeling. These models will address the highly variable developmental patterns
of krill, and therefore have the potential for examining the nature of bimodal
size distributions and age-size relationships, both of which influence small
scale population processes and fishery-predator interactions.