* 9714322
* Birmingham Systemic Change 2000 Project K-5 Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn B. Chval
* 08/31/2002
* USD 2,717,853.00

9714322 Dale The Birmingham Public School System and the University of Alabama
at Birmingham formed a partnership to address the problem of declining
mathematics achievement in the district. This project will provide major staff
development for teachers of grades K-5. The Birmingham K-5 reform plan has four
main elements: 1. The adoption of a high-quality reform-based curriculum series,
Everyday Mathematics. 2. The creation of a mathematics Staff Development Team
composed of classroom teachers, mathematics educators, and mathematicians, 3.
The provision of substantive teacher enhancement for all K-5 teachers in the
system, and 4. The development of a plan for on-going teacher renewal after the
project ends. All 907 of the district's K-5 teachers will participate in an
intensive staff development program that includes summer institutes and academic
year meetings. The Staff Development Team will design and implement the program.
The NSF-funded Bridges to Classroom Mathematics Project will work cooperatively
with the Staff Development Team in designing the program. Additionally, five
Mathematics Resource Teachers will support classroom teachers during
implementation. Parents, teachers, administrators, and the business community
participated in the planning. The project evaluation will include participation
in the core evaluation process, along with all of the other LSC projects.