* 9714998
* The Preparation and Study of Novel Ligand Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Randolph Thummel, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/2001
* USD 305,900.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Randolph P. Thummel, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Houston, investigates the preparation and properties of novel ligand systems.
Professor Thummel explores the stereochemical consequences of unsymmetrical
substitution within bidentate ligands, focusing on the steric and electronic
effects of such substitution in the formation of facial and meridional
diastereomers of tris(bipyridyl) complexes of ruthenium(II). Through the
synthesis of a series of ligands related to 9-(di-2'-pyridyl)methylenefluorene,
designed to undergo rotation about the central pi bond following photoinduced
metal-to-ligand charge transfer and thereby present a barrier to internal return
to the ground state, Professor Thummel is investigating the generation of long-
lived photoexcited states. Related ligands permit assessment of the impact of
ligand oxidation state on electronic communication between two bound metal ions,
while complexes of pyrene-based ligands offer the possibility to observe room
temperature emission. The physical and chemical properties of metal ions may be
altered dramatically by capturing them within a molecular structure designed to
impact chosen properties. Professor Randolph P. Thummel, of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Houston, is supported by the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his investigations of the synthesis and
study of molecules designed to affect the chemical processes resulting from the
interaction of their metal complexes with light. Such photoprocesses lead to the
transfer of an electron from the metal to the supporting molecular structure,
and by designing this structure to undergo a significant change in geometry upon
such electron transfer, Professor Thummel attempts to stabilize the photoinduced
`excited state.` Related studies permit assessment of the effect on the
electronic communication between two metal ions of a change in the nature of a
molecular grouping which bridges them. These studies address fundamental issues
regarding photoinduced electron transfer and are directly related to the
harvesting of energy from sunlight.