* 9714400
* Development of a Digital Imaging Micro-Measurement System   (DIMMS) for the Insitu Measurement of Interphase Properties in Multi-Phase Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Halbert Brinson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 12/31/1999
* USD 29,985.00

9714400 Brinson The objective of this research is to attempt to quantify the
mechanical properties within the interphase interface bonded media. To
accomplish this task will require the measurement of strains within regions
smaller than one micron. As most, if not all, engineering methods to measure
strains are for regions larger than a millimeter, it is clear new approaches
must be taken. It is felt that a new exploratory program based on newly acquired
equipment at UH and a new approach may yield significant results. The award of
an SGER is made to ascertain if proposed new procedures will allow measurement
of strains in submicron regions and, if so, to serve as a beginning for a longer
range program. The effort has a short term and long term goal. The short term
goal is to use high resolution digital imaging together with optical and
scanning electron microscopy to measure deformations and strains in sub-micron
size regions. The long term goal is to develop a method based on a near field
scanning optical microscope (NSOM) to measure deformations in even smaller
regions. A substantial portion of the effort will be to begin the development of
a new analytical approach which will correctly represent material behavior
within such small regions. The approach of necessity will include heterogeneous
and anisoptropic behavior. Indeed, it should be recognized that observation of
materials at such a small scale may not be compatible with current continuum
theories of materials. ***