* 9714605
* Characterization and Connections for Modular Carbon-Glass   Hybrid Composite Tube Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Vistasp Karbhari, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 04/30/2002
* USD 150,000.00

9714605 Seible Advanced composite materials such as carbon, aramid, or glass
fibers in polymer matrices, such as epoxies, vinylesters and polyesters, have
shown outstanding mechanical and chemical characteristics to be of great
interest to civil engineering design and construction. Recent developments in
manufacturing technologies and the need for new and more durable materials for
rehabilitation of existing civil structural systems and renewal requirements of
the aging building and bridge inventory have shown that the light weight of
these polymer matrix composites can be cost-effectively employed, particularly
in the seismic retrofitting of buildings and bridges. A concept which emerges
from this combination of conventional civil construction materials, and for the
civil engineering sector new polymer matrix composites (PMCs), is that of
concrete filled composite tubes (CCTs), where the concrete takes on the
compression force transfer and the carbon shell the functions of (1) formwork
for the concrete, (2) confinement of the concrete, and (3) tension force
transfer in both longitudinal bending and shear. The thin advanced composite
tubes and stabilized against local instabilities by the infill concrete which
can be pressure grouted and contain normal or lightweight aggregates. The
research aims to systematically develop the basis for a new framing system made
of filament wound hybrid glass/carbon tubes and filled on-site fully or
partially with concrete. The research focus will be in three areas namely, (1)
the analytical modeling and characterization of the fully and partially grouted
advanced composite tube system and the proposed connections, (2) development of
optimized hybrid schemes and fabrication techniques, and (3) the experimental
full-scale validation of CCT beams and connections. The analytical models will
be calibrated and verified by the test results and used for subsequent
parametric studies to form the basis for general design model developments for
concrete filled advanced composite tube framing systems. ***