* 9714101
* Iron-Oxide and -Sulfide Mineral Particles as Biomarkers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Peter Buseck, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2001
* USD 293,405.00

This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity supports
research on iron oxide and iron sulfide minerals by Drs. Richard B. Frankel of
California Polytechnic State University, Dennis A. Bazylinski of Iowa State
University, Peter R. Buseck of Arizona State University, and Bruce M. Moskowitz
of the University of Minnesota. This project is funded by the Office of Polar
Programs, the Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. This group of investigators will direct expertise in magnetism,
microbiology, microscopy, and mineralogy to determining the structural,
morphological, surface, chemical, and magnetic features of iron oxides and iron
sulfides that can serve as markers for biogenic origin. Advanced electron
microscopy and magnetic technologies will be used to characterize the samples.
In addition to martian meteorite ALH84001, biogenic iron oxides and iron
sulfides in both magnetotactic bacteria and iron-reducing and sulfate-reducing
bacteria will be characterized. Magnetotactic bacteria and magnetite in pure
culture as well as a variety of uncultured bacteria available in high
concentrations in chemically-stratified, marine or brackish, semi-anaerobic
basins will be sampled. Magnetite and iron sulfides of presumed biogenic origin
in the carbonate inclusions in martian meteorite ALH84001 are critical
components of the evidence cited for the possible existence of past life on
Mars. Alternatively, magnetite in ALH84001 has features that have been cited as
evidence for high-temperature formation of the carbonate. This research will
develop criteria for distinguishing biogenic from non-biogenic iron-containing
minerals in order to develop an improved framework for interpreting the evidence
observed in martian meteorite ALH84001.