* 9714189
* Evaluating the Long Term Effects of Teacher Enhancement
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Douglas Huffman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Conrad G. Katzenmeyer
* 01/31/2003
* USD 509,366.00

9714189 Lawrenz This project proposes to fill the gap in long-term enhancement
evaluation by conducting a multiple method, longitudinal study of a science
teacher enhancement project. This evaluation will examine both the long term
effects of teacher enhancement on an existing cohort of students, and the
subsequent effects of teacher enhancement on new cohorts of students.
Specifically, the project will examine the persistence of a teacher enhancement
project by comparing groups of students whose teachers did and did not
participate in the enhancement project. Two investigations are proposed: 1)
follow cohorts of 9th grade students into 12th grade to compare science
achievement; 2) compare the learning environment and science achievement of
subsequent cohorts of 9th grade students. These two investigations will allow us
to determine the extent to which the teacher enhancement project persisted into
the future. The proposed evaluation will be conducted at five high schools that
participated in the teacher enhancement project. We will collect a comprehensive
variety of data including classroom observations of teachers twice a year,
interviews with teachers and students, interviews with principals, student
written questionnaires, and both hands-on and written assessments of students'
achievement of the NRC science standards. The results of this evaluation will be
used to examine the extent to which NSF funded teacher enhancement can affect
teacher performance and subsequently affect outcomes in science.