* 9714611
* US-India Cooperative Research: A Study of the Land ProcessesAssociated with the Indian Monsoon, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* P.A. Aswatha Narayana, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2000
* USD 9,677.00

9714611 Narayana Description: This award supports collaborative research between
Drs. Sethu Raman and Leonard Pietrafesa of North Carolina State University
(NCSU), Raleigh, and Dr. P.A. Aswatha Narayana of the Indian Institute of
Technology, Madras (IITM), India. These scientists, in collaboration with the
Indian National Institute of Ocean Technology, will study Indian sea breezes,
atmospheric convection along the sea breeze front, and storm surge processes
along the East coast of India. In the first part, the scientists will
investigate the horizontal extent of the sea breezes in relation to land-sea
temperature differences and the ambient wind, as well as the formation of deep
convection along the sea breeze front and its dependence on other factors such
as land use pattern and upper air stability. They will use a hydrostatic
numerical model developed at NCSU and transferred to IITM. This model will be
extended to a 3-dimensional state and used with atmospheric observations in
India that are taken every three hours and that date back for 30 years. The
model may be supplemented with a non-hydrostatic model as needed. In the second
part, the scientists will utilize a storm surge model available at the NIOT and
based on Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) model originally
developed in the United States. They will develop methods to prescribe
meteorological forces that drive the ocean model and will also use a simple
hydrodynamic model developed at NCSU that was successfully used in predicting
the tropical storm surge in North Carolina. Scope: This award allows cooperation
between a US team that is quite active in modeling various atmospheric-sea-land
phenomena, and an Indian team that has excellent analytical capability as well
as access to extensive data sources including governmental organizations that
operate radar, satellite, and other atmospheric and ocean measurement
instrumentation on a continuous basis. The resear ch is of significant
scientific benefit to the US and India, and is of particular importance to the
meteorological activities of the Indian authorities in predicting severe
climatic and weather conditions. The project involves both eminent and young
scientists. ***