* 9714327
* LEXEN: Ecology of Microbial Systems in Extreme Environments: The Role of Nanoflagellates in Cold and Nutrient-Poor      Arctic Freshwaters
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Mitchell Sogin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

In one extreme freshwater environment, a long-term research site in arctic
Alaska, a large amount of information about microbial communities and their
ecology has been accumulated. The least known member of this, and most other
microbial communities, is the single cell eukaryotes. This LExEN project will
investigate the ecology, physiology, and evolution of nanoflagellates, and
important member of the aquatic microbial system. There will be extensive
cooperation with two funded projects, one on freshwater ecology and one on
flagellate evolution. * With the large ecological project this new research will
extend knowledge of nanaflagellates in their natural habitat of arctic lakes and
ponds with an emphasis on their adaptation to cold and freezing conditions. *
Diversity of protists and of their evolutionary relationships will be studies.
In addition, microaerophilic environments will be examined to look for
amitochondriates flagellates, basic knowledge of lineages basal to all other
eukaryotes. LExEN additions to this existing understanding of the microbial
system will focus on the biology and ecology of the nanoflagellates, the main
predator of the aquatic bacteria. Protists from a shallow pond that freezes
solid each year and from a deep arctic lake with a 9-month ice cover will be
intensively sampled during the winter, spring, summer and fall. Results will
include: * The identity of the nanoflagellates present, their seasonal
abundance, distribution, and succession with microscopic and molecular methods
(including probes targeting ribosomal RNA for species in samples from the
field). * The reconstruction from rRNA sequences of the evolutionary
relationships among the flagellates present in these extreme environments
including the microaerophilic layers of sediment. The data base will enable
further research on these virtually unknown organisms. * The physiology of
organisms cultured from this extreme environment with emphasis on the effects of
cold and freezing on their feeding behavior and on their respiration and
survival during starvation. The experiments will examine flagellate adaptations
for survival in cold waters and in frozen sediments.