* 9714390
* Single Molecule Detection and Spectroscopy as a Probe of theLocal Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Daniel Chemla, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 12/31/2001
* USD 462,000.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, the Atomic, Molecular, Optical, and Plasma Physics Program
of the Physics Division, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Chemla will use single-
molecule spectroscopic techniques as well as single- and multi-photon excitation
to explore the photophysical and photochemical properties of single molecules in
aqueous solution and close to metallic interfaces. For single molecules under
water new immobilization schemes will be developed based on previous work on dry
surfaces. The effect of the microscopic structure of surfaces on chemical
reactions close to those surfaces will be examined by way of the fluorescence of
the reporting molecules. Scanning probe techniques will be utilized to explore
the interplay between the relative orientation of a single dipole with respect
to the surface and the elementary excitations of the metal. The effects of
applied electric fields and local field effects will be studied. These studies
are important for understanding the physical and chemical processes involved in
biologically important environments. Such a spectroscopic capability as will be
developed here has a variety of fundamental as well as practical applications,
such as to the development of improved chemical biosensors. It also has
relevance to understanding the surface chemistry and physics of materials on a
molecular level.