* 9714707
* Self-Similar Network Traffic and It's Control
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Kihong Park, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 02/28/2002
* USD 215,000.00

Project Homepage: http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/park/nsf-ncr-9714707.html
Abstract: Recent measurements of local area and wide area traffic have shown
that network traffic is self-similar or fractal, i.e., the measured time series
is bursty across several time scales. This phenomenon has been shown to be
ubiquitous with potentially dire consequences to network performance due to the
scale-invariant nature of burstiness. This project investigates effective
traffic control algorithms, architectures, and mechanisms for facilitating
efficient resource utilization while providing quality of service to real-time
and best-effort traffic streams under self-similar traffic conditions. The
project builds on recent work which characterizes the causal aspects of traffic
self-similarity and shows that scale-invariant burstiness can be highly
detrimental to network performance. In a nutshell, it is shown that self-
similarity of traffic flow is an intrinsic property of networked client/server
systems which communicate files or objects of very large size with nonnegligible
frequency. The latter is known, technically, as the heavy-tailed property of
file or object size distributions which is evidenced in actual distributed
systems including UNIX file systems. On the performance side, it is shown that
conjoint provision of low delay and high throughput is adversely affected by
self-similarity. We follow a three-pronged method of attack for managing self-
similar traffic, the first two based on dynamic control of traffic flow, and the
third being of a structural nature where resources are architected and
apportioned under direct control. The first method, predictive feedback control,
is geared toward exploiting the long-range correlation structure present in
self-similar traffic for congestion control purposes. We identify the on-set of
concentrated periods of either high or low traffic activity - a distinguishing
characteristic of scale-invaria nt burstiness - and adjust the mode of
congestion control appropriately from conservative to aggressive. Being able to
predict the onset of persistent congestion or idleness from fine time scale
observations and utilizing this information effectively are two key issues. The
second method, adaptive forward error correction, is directed at supporting
multimedia traffic with real-time constraints without engaging in expensive
resource reservations. Retransmission of lost information is not a viable
strategy for such traffic classes since lengthy round-trip latencies encountered
in wide area network environments render retransmitted information useless to
time-constrained applications. We formulate and analyze an adaptive packet-level
forward error correction mechanism called AFEC where the degree of redundancy is
controlled as a function of network state, increasing the level of redundancy
when the network is bad and decreasing it when the network is well-behaved. The
control problem is nontrivial due to the fact that increasing the level of
redundancy too much can backfire, further aggrevating congestion and causing the
probability of timely information recovery at the receiver to decrease. We
investigate the conditions under which adaptive forward error correction is
effective when traffic is self-similar. We identify two regimes - packet loss
dominated connections and delay-dominated connections - the former being most
conducive to AFEC-based traffic control whereas the latter is more subtle,
admitting only a limited range of useful redundancy. The third method,
structural resource allocation, seeks to identify the relative utility of the
two principal network resource types - bandwidth and buffer capacity - with
respect to their curtailing effects on self-similarity. We conjecture a highly
skewed trade-off relationship between bandwidth and buffer capacity in favor of
bandwidth whose quantitative form becomes important when computing res ource
reservations for traffic streams with stringent quality of service requirements.
A bandwidth-over-buffer capacity policy also impacts the first two methods in
terms of predictability and packet loss dominatedness/delay dominatedness. The
three methods are expected to complement each other, each focusing on a
different mode for quality of service provision under self-similar traffic
conditions.