* 9714007
* School of Marine Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Kevin Eckelbarger, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/29/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Over the last six years, the University of Maine has made an unprecedented
investment in its marine laboratory, the Darling Marine Center to benefit both
University faculty and visiting researchers and their students. Facility
improvements include many new laboratory and offices spaces, more research
instrumentation, and basic support facilities such as a dining hall and new
classrooms. The inauguration of a Visiting Investigation Program in 1991, the
expansion of educational offerings, and the growth of a large undergraduate
internship program, have resulted in a population explosion that shows no sign
of abating. To set priorities for improvements, the University has involved
visiting investigators and visiting out-of-state colleges in facility planning.
Based on their recommendation, housing has been targeted as the greatest
facility weakness. The Center's housing is primitive, overcrowed, and woefully
inadequate and this deficiency is restricting the growth of both educational and
research programs that impact a growing community of visiting faculty and
students. The University's Department of Environmental Health & Safety has
issued unfavorable reports on the status of much of the Center's housing, mostly
due to inadequate fire protection and ADA- access. Most housing is of cottage
construction and is restricted to summer use. Some housing lacks both heat and
running water. In order to temporarily meet housing demand, every available
space has been converted to bunk space throughout 11 separate building. Due to
the age and condition of many of these structures, modernization would be
largely cost prohibitive. While the Center now has beds for 60 people during the
warm weathers months, year-round housing will currently accommodate only 18
students. The Center's growing educational and Visiting Investigator programs
are being severely hindered by this housing shortage, resulting in schedule
juggling and restrictions on the number of individual s and visiting college
classes that can work on site at any given time. In addition, the dining hall,
built in 1992, was designed to feed 35 people at a time but now must accommodate
twice that number. 20-room dormitory to house visiting faculty and students year
round will be constructed. Two previous FSML facility improvements awards to the
University have been responsible for stimulating the number of visiting
investigators to the Darling Center and making their visits more productive. In
addition, the awards have helped immeasurably to encourage additional
investments by the University and by local, citizens who support the Center
through their private donations.