* 9714870
* Dissertation Research: Socioecology of the Slender Loris    (Loris Tardigradus Iydekkerianus) in Dindigul, South India
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,02/29/2000
* David Rasmussen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/29/2000
* USD 9,462.00

The slender loris is a nocturnal primate of India and Sri Lanka. Diurnal
primates, such as monkeys, apes and lemurs, have served as the primary subjects
for testing hypotheses about the origin and adaptiveness of gregarious living in
primates. Anthropologists have hypothesized that social groups are favored when
primates utilize clumped food resources, such as fruit in a large canopy tree,
or that social grouping is a correlate of primates' delayed life histories
(i.e., slow growth and dependent childhood). Any robust hypotheses intended to
explain primate sociality must be able to account for the specific cases of the
less gregarious nocturnal primates. This study addresses the following general
questions about lorises: 1) What are the social correlates of foraging for
dispersed fruit or insect resources? 2) What are the social correlates of
feeding upon spatially clumped food items? 3) What are the social correlates of
delayed life history? Study methods are designed to statistically isolate and
characterize the contexts in which lorises express social interactions, which in
turn will test social theory developed from the diurnal primates. An additional
significance of this study is that supplemental information obtained about
habitat preferences and behavior will contribute to conservation of the
threatened loris.