* 9714110
* US-India Cooperative Research: Study of Molecular Motions   and Phase Transformations in Atomic-Scale Structures and    Liquid Crystals, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* P. Jain, University of Delhi
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2000
* USD 11,290.00

9714110 Jain Description: This award supports the US-India Cooperative Research:
Study of Molecular Motions and Phase Transformations in Atomic-Scale Structures
and Liquid Crystals. The project is under the direction of S.C. Sharma,
University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and P.C. Jain, University of Delhi (UD).
The researchers will study the effects of molecular structure on phase
transition in liquid crystalline materials and will investigate relationships
between defects and optical properties of surface- aligned liquid crystalline
films. Using techniques sensitive to phase transition, they will measure optical
properties of surface-aligned liquid crystalline thin films. The outcome will be
a better understanding of the processes occurring at the surface and in the
bulk, and their effects on the optical properties of a much broader class of
layered materials. Scope: This collaboration will initiate a new joint research
program between the University of Texas and the University of Delhi. The PIs are
established researchers who have published important results obtained from their
experimental techniques. Both the expertise and facilities available at UTA and
UD are complementary. This project has excellent potential for addressing
important scientific questions and improving the quality of liquid crystalline
films and other materials. The research is mutually beneficial and the support
requested is primarily for travel and per diem. ***