* 9714331
* SGER: Intermediate-level Structural Categories from Visual  Complexity Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Steven Zucker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

This award funds an initial exploration of a theoretical basis for visual image
structure, to aid in supporting queries to image archives. Digital image
archives are proliferating, which raises the question of how to retrieve
specific images from them. However, while queries are naturally posed in high-
level, functional terms, the realizations of such queries are based on low-level
image operators. An intermediate-level theory of visual structure is necessary
to close this gap, which is precisely what this research addresses. Based on an
interpretation of edge elements as tangent estimates, it is derived from
geometric measure and complexity theory. Viewed from below, the theory provides
an organization for edge elements according to dimension. They are either bound
into extended (1-dimensional) groups, into (2-dimensional) structural classes
that abstract different types of texture, or (0-dimensional) orientation
discontinuities. Viewed from above, the representation induces equivalence
classes of structure, such as bounding contours, texture flows for hair and
grass patterns, and ``T''-junctions for points of occlusion. Thus queries
involving forests can be differentiated from those involving fur patterns or
turbulent water, and multiple, overlapping objects can be separated into
components. Furthermore, images and drawings can be segmented from pages of
text.