* 9714565
* Dissertation Research: Interspecific Variation in Radial    Neuron Number in Mammalian Neocortex
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Marc Hauser, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2000
* USD 12,969.00

Unique to mammals and elaborated in Primates (most notably humans), neocortex
is the predominant brain locus for sensory data processing, conscious motor
control, cognition and volitional communication. Its basic constituent is the
cortical column. Classical studies reported the number of neurons in a cortical
column (`radial neuron number`) to be remarkably constant across most species
and neocortical regions, with Primate primary visual cortex containing double
the number of radial neurons found elsewhere. However, recent evidence suggests
reduction in radial neuron number in marine mammals, as well as variation in
radial neuron number in different cortical areas of monkeys, cats, and rats.
This investigation aims (1) to provide `unbiased stereological` measurements of
radial neuron number, neuron size, and cortical thickness across a diverse
sample (15 orders) of mammals, (2) to assess contributions of phylogeny,
ecology, and life history to the observed variation, and (3) to quantify
primary-visual and primary-motor cortex in Primates so as to compare radial
neuron number across species with that in different regions of the same brains.
Neocortical development is directly observable only in species lacking the
variance in radial neuron number characteristic of mammals as a class. Broader
data on radial neuron number will thus provide a more naturalistic context for
interpreting normal developmental and pathological events in `laboratory
models,` with mechanisms implicated in neurological health and disease
presumably recruited during brain evolution to achieve specific adaptive ends.