* 9714923
* Archaeocete Whales of Eocene Tethys: Geochronology,         Paleobiology and Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Philip Gingerich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2003
* USD 240,000.00

9714923 Gingerich The origin and early evolution of whales is one of the most
profound evolutionary transitions that can be studied in the fossil record. The
transition to whales involved a major shift of adaptive zone from life on land
to life in water, with concomitant changes in feeding, hearing cognition, and
locomotion that affected conspicuous features of dental, cranial, endocranial,
and postcranial skeletal morphology. Evidence of change in all of these
characteristics is well preserved in fossils of the extinct Eocene suborder
Archaeoceti, permitting direct investigation in the context of geological time.
Archaeocetes are best known from the Tethys Sea Neo-Tethys separating India and
North Africa from Eurasia during Eocene time. Tethyan whales to be studied here
are found on passive continental margins in a succession of strata of different
lithologies deposited at different points in cycles of sea level change. These
may reflect global change in eustatic sea level, which is the first hypothesis
to be tested here with better foraminiferal control. The origin of whales from
land-mammal ancestors is not a controversial idea, but the evolutionary
trajectory is sometimes conceived proceeding from a wolf-like ancestor through
bear-like, otter-like, and a seal or sea lion-like stages to modern whales. The
second hypothesis to be tested is how realistic such a 'null succession' of
living carnivores is as a model for the actual diversification of early whales
through geological time. Model and paleontological patterns are to be compared
graphically and quantitatively. Finally, evolutionary transitions are often
thought of as simple and straight, at more or less constant rate, and the third
hypothesis to be tested is the simplicity (versus 'bushiness') of the transition
and uniformity of rates during the transition to whales. Methods to be employed
include those of discovery: new Eocene archaeocete whales are to be collected
from eastern Tethyan stratigraphic sequences in Pak istan, and possibly Egypt
and Tunisia because these are countries where shallow marine facies are widely
distributed, well exposed, and known to yield well preserved archaeocete
skeletons. The principal investigator has organized field expeditions in
Pakistan and Egypt over the past 20 years yielding one-third of the documented
generic diversity and the most complete skeletons of archaeocetes found
anywhere. Archaeocetes are diverse morphologically and their study cannot be
advanced without more specimens of such quality. Other methods to be employed
here include 18O isotopic study of ontogenetic and phyletic series to document
adaptation to sea water on both time scales, and newly developed quantitative
graphical methods for illustration and paleobiological interpretation, with
multivariate quantification of 'distance' and rates of change between these to
be developed as part of this research. The proposed research is important
because whales enjoy great public interest and their origin provides an
opportunity to illustrate and explain evolution to a wide audience. The origin
of whales can and should serve as a model for investigation of major
evolutionary transitions in the fossil record in terms of morphological and
temporal intermediates, graphic representation of these, and quantitative
comparison through geological time.