* 9714029
* Tolerance Graph for Tolerance Control in Process Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Hong-Chao Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2001
* USD 217,638.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a theoretical scheme for
automated tolerance control of discrete mechanical part setup planning in
numerically controlled (NC) machining. The proposed tolerance control scheme is
based on graph theory. The features of a part are represented by means of
vertices while the parametric and geometrical tolerances assigned among the
features are represented by edges. The entire design specifications of a part is
represented by a hyper graph or tolerance graph. Hence, an optimal setup
planning problem is transformed into a graph search problem. An optimization
algorithm will be developed based on analysis of the minimum setup errors
according to the respective setup methods. Characteristics of NC machining are
incorporated within the tolerance graph. Finally, the proposed research will be
implemented into a computer program and will be integrated with a computer aided
design system. If successful, this research will yield two major contributions:
(1) It will establish a theoretically sound foundation and scientifically
rigorous base for tolerance control in process planning, and (2) It will develop
a tolerance graphing technique that will eventually replace the limited
tolerance charting technique. With the help of a tolerance graph, planning
related tolerance control problems can be solved effectively. As a result,
precision parts could be produced at reduced cost. The proposed tolerance
control algorithm would provide a practical approach for process design and
analyzing currently existing process plans. Specifically, by using a tolerance
graph, one can (1) select appropriate setups, locating datums, and operation
sequences to minimize tolerance stackup, (2) calculate operational dimensions
and tolerances for machining cuts, and (3) simultaneously deal with tolerances
along all axes. As an additional benefit, this research adopts a science-based
approach to solving tolerance control problems. Science-based approaches are
much more easily computerized to facilitate the realization of computerized
tolerancing.