* 9714014
* High Resoluton Examination of the Intact "Microfossil" -    Mineral Interface of ALH84001 for Evidence of Physical and  Mineralogical Changes Consistent with Microbial Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Jillian Banfield, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 07/31/2000
* USD 70,000.00

This award in the Mars-Rock Special Research Opportunity activity supports
investigation of mineralogical effects of microbial activity by Drs. William W.
Barker and Jillian F. Banfield of the Geology Department, University of
Wisconsin-Madison. The project is funded by the Office of Polar Programs, the
Chemistry Division, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Martian
meteorite ALH84001 will be examined for mineralogical and textural evidence of
biogeochemical silicate mineral alteration. The specific goals of the research
are (1) to search for evidence of long-term interaction between low-temperature
hydrous fluids and mineral surfaces by careful examination of surfaces for
submicroscopic quantities of hydration products, such as clays; and (2) to
examine the structure of the interface between the `nanofossils` and underlying
minerals for evidence of polymer-mediated clay formation, dissolution features
due to exposure to metabolic byproducts, and chemical signatures due to
elemental concentrations associated with the presence of biopolymers. High
resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) and energy-filtered
transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) of ion milled and ultramicrotomed
meteorite samples will be used to examine the minerals at the crack surface for
evidence of low-temperature alteration. Additional information will be gathered
using high-resolution scaning electron microscopy (HRSEM) and other modern
microscopy techniques capable of resolution to the atomic level. These methods
will enable examination of the structure, composition, and mineralogy of the
zone at the interface between the `microfossils` and underlying substrate. If
ALH84001 contained microbes that lived in proximity to mineral surfaces, fine
scale evidence for their interactions may be preserved at the microbe-mineral
interface. Advanced physical and chemical methods will be used to detect
alteration of the mineral surface. Terrestrial models for mineral-organism
interaction will be used to distinguish biologically from inorganically-mediated
alteration as a means of evaluating evidence of early Martian life.