* 9714810
* Investigation of Cloud Entrainment Using a Laboratory Heated-Jet Analogue
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Ajay Prasad, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 01/31/2001
* USD 162,585.00

Abstract/Prasad, 9714810 It is difficult to make good observations in real
clouds. At best, using aircraft, balloons, and radar, researchers have been able
to get a few "snapshots" of what is going on in a limited region of a aq few
clouds at particular instants, but to do so is very costly and difficult. Thus
our knowledge of cloud processes is very spotty and limited. The difficulty of
getting good observations of real clouds has led a number of investigators to
try to get at an understanding of cloud processes by studying analogs of cloud
processes in laboratory simulations using liquids. Although there are some
problems inherent in this approach because of differences between liquids and
air (liquids are generally virtually incompressible, for example), there are
still many questions that may be addressed usefully in this way. One of these is
the question of entrainment of environmental dry air into clouds. This award
supports research using a laboratory analog of a buoyant developing cloud to
address the problem of entrainment. The release of latent heat in a cloud by
condensation will be simulated by injecting heat ohmically, that is, through
heated wires in the fluid flow. The flow fields will be visualized using some of
the most recent advanced techniques, including Laser Induced Fluorescence,
Particle Image Velocimetry, and Particle Image Thermometry. The planned research
is expected to provide new and fresh insights about entrainment, and to lead to
improvements in the characterization of buoyant convection and entrainment in
numerical models of clouds.