* 9714685
* Fair Scheduling and Admission Control for Shared-Channel    Wireless Packet Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 12/31/2001
* USD 260,644.00

Abstract for the web page http://tesla.csl.uiuc.edu/~srikant/~wireless.html Fair
scheduling of delay and rate-sensitive packet flows over a wireless channel is
not addressed effectively by most contemporary wireline fair scheduling
algorithms because of two unique characteristics of wireless media: (a) bursty
channel errors, and (b) location-dependent channel capacity and errors. Besides,
in packet cellular networks, the base station typically performs the task of
packet scheduling for both downlink and uplink flows in a cell; however a base
station has only a limited knowledge of the arrival processes of uplink flows.
Fair scheduling is closely connected to admission control and channel
measurements since these are used to allocate a fraction of the channel's
capacity to each flow based or its Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements. In
this proposal, we will study the problem of admission control and scheduling
together. Most previous work has addressed these two problems separately in the
context of wireline networks, but such an approach is not applicable to wireless
networks. On-line measurements will be used along with admission control,
scheduling and rate adaption to provide good QoS performance. We plan to use on-
line measurements to estimate the parameters of simple stochastic processes
(such as on-off Markov models) describing the channel state. Off-line
measurements would be used to validate and refine our prediction algorithm as
well as to develop a simple model for the channel which can used by the on-line
measurement algorithm. We will also study the impact of fair wireless packet
scheduling on medium access and develop an effective MAC protocol to support
simple rate and delay guarantees. Finally, using existing testbeds, we will
evaluate the algorithms that result from this research project.