* 9714124
* Interval Based Methods for Uncertainty in Computer Aided    Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Rafi Muhanna, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2000
* USD 343,192.00

This grant provides resources for the development of design and analysis tools
that include uncertainties and that will address a variety of manufactured
products. Unlike previous probabilistic methods for treating uncertainties in
design, the developed method will treat uncertainties in terms of possible
values expressed as conventional tolerances. The methods and tools that will be
developed have their foundation in fuzzy set theory, which allows the
formulation to have a strong mathematical base with rigorous analysis of the
developed methods. The work will initially address the treatment of load
uncertainty and loading combinations in problems of static stress analysis of
mechanical components. The methods and software developed will then be expanded
to treat uncertainty of material properties and component geometry. Along with
developing the analysis methods, software tools will be written that are needed
for implementations such as mesh generator for fuzzy geometry. Evaluation of
results of the fuzzy based calculations will be compared to combinatorial
solutions when possible. The methods will then be extended to time dependent
problems. The results of this research will provide both the methods and
software tools to include uncertainties in the stress analysis of components via
conventional tolerances. The expression of uncertainties in terms of tolerances
will allow design engineers to include uncertainties in analysis using a
familiar concept. The methods, while developed explicitly for solid mechanics,
will be applicable to any finite element based engineering analysis (heat
transfer, fluid mechanics, electric and magnetic fields). The software tools
will include methods for solving a sparse, fuzzy based system of equations and
integrating element stiffness matrices and will allow the developed methods to
be incorporated into existing commercial finite element programs. When such
methods are included in commercial analysis and design programs, designers will
be able to routinely consider the effects of uncertainties in geometry,
materials, and environmental loading in design decisions. Hence, the reliability
of product designs using these tools will be improved.