* 9714792
* WGIDPO:  Action-WISE Program for Encouraging Women and Girls in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1998,10/31/2001
* Jack Kovach, Zane State College
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/2001
* USD 818,277.00

Action-WISE Program for Encouraging Women and Girls in Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics---Muskingum Area Technical College, Muskingum College, Zanesville
(Ohio) City School District, and the Wilds, an international wildlife research
and conservation center, will collaborate in an intensive and comprehensive SEM
intervention program for sixth through twelfth grade females. This four-partner
project is an expansion of a pilot project begun two years ago in one of the
district's middle schools. Project objectives include (1) expanding the numbers
and grade levels of students involved from seventh and eight grade participants
in one middle school to sixth through twelfth grade participants district-wide,
(2) strengthening the curriculum and expanding the project calendar, and (3)
developing a strong web of support for young women with an interest in science,
engineering, and mathematics. Activities will encompass the school year and
extend into separate, intensive summer camp sessions for each grade level. Key
offerings of the project are monthly seminars and informal discussions with
women in SEM-related professions, field trips involving hands-on learning
activities, academic instruction in a variety of scientific disciplines, and a
mentorship program with females in SEM- related professions. The project will
serve approximately 280 female students annually. Each grade level component
will be progressively more personalized. Because few of the district's students
have had any exposure to college, every field activity will be tied to a college
visit. Student participants will represent a diverse range of academic ability
and economic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds. Summer components will focus on
environmental science activities which will involve biology, chemistry, physics,
geology, and math. Science, math, and computer laboratories at both colleges,
regional field sites, and the diverse habitats found at the Wilds will provide
exceptional sc ientific exploration opportunities. Female undergraduate science
majors at both college will serve as laboratory assistants and mentors to middle
school and high school participants. A graduate course will be presented
annually to district teachers and administrative personnel to educate them about
gender equity issues concerning women and girls in science. At a recognition
ceremony each spring and at the end of each of the summer sessions, student
participants will report on program activities, introduce video clips of field
experience and seminars, and present individual and group projects. Expected
project outcomes include removing artificial barriers that affect females
entering SEM field, increasing the number of females continuing science
education, and building a solid and sound program which can be replicated in
other school districts.