* 9714177
* Relations Between Ice Nuclei and Ice Formation in Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* David Rogers, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 12/31/2001
* USD 338,736.00

Abstract/David C. Rogers/9714177 Relations between Ice Nuclei and Ice Formation
in Clouds This research will examine the relationship between the aerosol
particles in the atmosphere that initiate nucleation of ice (Imown as Ice
Nuclei, or IN) and the formation of ice crystals in clouds The question of how
ice begins to form in clouds is a long-standing problem in atmospheric science.
The need for research on this topic has been pointed out in scientific reviews
over the past 40 years. To this end, many field studies have been performed
using instrumented aircraft to examine cloud stnucture and microphysics.
Previous attempts to correlate Ice Nulclci and ice crystal concentrations oflen
depended on cloud observations at one location and time, collecting aerosols at
a different location and time, and processing the aerosol collections still
later, at a laboratory. In some cases, measurements addressed temperature
dependencies but did not include equally important variations in humidity.
Problems such as this, together with the wide natural variability of ice
concentrations, have made it difficult to evaluate whether concentrations of ice
nuclei are well correlated with concentrations of ice crystals in a given part
of a cloud. This research embraces a new approach to this question. Simultaneous
observations of aerosols and clouds, in real time, with the capability to select
and adjust the temperature and humidity of IN measurements are now possible with
a new instrument, a fast-response airborne continuous flow difflision chamber
(CFD). Ice nuclei will be measured at the same time and in the same aircraft
making microphysical observations. The temperature and humidity dependence of IN
concentration will be determined, and IN aerosols will be collected for electron
microscope examination to determine size and elemental composition. The work
involves installing instrumentation on research aircraft, obtaining measurements
of aerosols plus cloud microphysical and other prope rties, and performing
analyses and numerical modeling over a three-year period. Observations will be
made in NSF-supported field studies ofwinter storms in the Great Lakes region of
the U.S. and in orographic wave clouds in Colorado and Wyoming. The analyses
will involve comparing IN measurements with aircraft microphysical data.
Numerical process-modeling of ice formation and cloud microphysics will also be
performed to aid the interpretation of these data. The relation between primary
ice nucleation (versus secondary processes) and precipitation formation in
winter storms will be investigated using microphysical and remote-sensing
observations collected by other investigators who are participating in the field
programs.