* 9714080
* MOTI: Cognitive Abilities, Information Processing and       Innovative Effectiveness of Organizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Gerald Gordon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Senich
* 09/30/2000
* USD 299,978.00

9714080 Gordon The objective of this research is to establish a firm link
between the way that individuals with certain cognitive abilities are deployed
in organizations, and to measure the success with which organizations accomplish
technological innovations- The study is intended to be normative for technology
managers hence the primary dependent variables will be those measures of
effectiveness which technology managers use to assess innovative organizational
accomplishment. Recognizing that innovation is not simply the result of an
individual act, but that it is also the result of organizational processes, the
research focuses on the interplay between organizational and individual
variables which are likely to facilitate or inhibit knowledge and information
processing. In particular, factors which facilitate or inhibit the making of
remote associations (the ability to form new and useful concepts from seemingly
unrelated information) will be studied. The assumption is that an individual
makes the remote associations but must be able to draw upon the necessary
information. This information and the motivation to make the appropriate remote
association is largely a result of managerial decisions and organizational
structures. Therefore, on an organizational level, it is important to select
managers as well as researchers who have the ability to identify problems, who
possess the skills to contribute to technological innovation and who can direct
appropriate information. While the focus of the study will be on industrial
research and development, there are analogous implications for the management of
technology by academic, non-profit, and government performers of R&D. The
outcome of the research will be broadly disseminated and the results used to
educate engineers, scientists and managers.