* 9714387
* A Probabilistic Framework for Assessment and Interpretation of Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts from Storm-Scale    Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/2002
* USD 334,169.00

9714387 Foufoula The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval
Research are jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the
USWRP. Over the past decade, a significant efforts have been directed toward
research and data collection initiatives that focus on improving numerical
weather prediction. These investments have been somewhat successful and state-
of-the-art in numerical weather prediction has truly advanced through a deeper
understanding and improved parameterizations of the physical processes involved,
new and better data assimilation techniques, and greatly improved numerical
schemes. Despite this progress, however, precipitation still remains one of the
most difficult variables to predict quantitatively in atmospheric models. Also,
the inherent uncertainty associated with numerical predictions often makes the
interpretation of forecasts difficult and limits their practical utility. The
Principal Investigators have proposed an interdisciplinary approach to the
problem of predicting precipitation on the storm-scale and interpreting the
numerical forecasts. The approach will involve utilization of an advanced
mesoscale meteorological model coupled with advanced statistical techniques. The
Investigators will address the following three objectives, with emphasis on the
use of storm-scale models, initialized using radar and other fine-scale
observations, to generate quantitative precipitation forecasts and associated
ensembles to be used in applications such as hydrologic modeling and flood
prediction. Formulate and study a suite of multiscale statistical measures of
forecast performance which can help to detect and correct deficiencies in
microphysical parameterizations and obtain forecast assessments at application-
appropriate scales, e.g., basin-average rainfall. Develop a probabilistic
framework under which forecast improvements and the limits of predictability of
current numerical weather prediction (NWP) models can be assessed while
explicitly acknowledging forecast uncertainty and dependence on scale. Develop a
probabilistic framework for assessing the practical utility of deterministic
forecasts for risk-based decision making. Successful completion of this research
will potentially open the doors to improved quantitative precipitation
forecasting and better utilization/interpretation of numerical forecasts. ***