* 9714169
* SGER: Pronunciation Modeling for Conversational Speech      Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Sanjeev Khudanpur, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 09/30/1998
* USD 49,998.00

Technological advances in the last few years have brought automatic speech
recognition where it can now be deployed in limited, real-world applications.
However, serious obstacles still remain in satisfactory recognition of
spontaneous speech. Casual dialog exhibits a large amount of variability in the
pronunciation of words. Humans have little difficulty in transcribing such
speech, but automatic transcription suffers badly because of the inability of
recognizers to properly consider nonstandard pronunciations. This must be
addressed to make systems robust to a conversational speaking style. The
investigators propose to examine alternate pronunciations of words in
Switchboard, a large corpus of conversational speech, and develop statistical
models for predicting the variations based on cues in the acoustic, phonemic and
linguistic context of a word. Alternate pronunciations are viewed as
perturbations of the canonical ones and, to predict likely variations, the
researchers propose to use phonemic environment, lexical stress, syllabic
structure, part-of-speech, phrase boundary locations, the realization or
deletion of neighboring phones, etc. They shall apply complementary
nonparametric and parametric techniques for building predictive models with the
goal of improving accuracy in a speech recognition system. This effort addresses
a significant obstacle in automatic recognition of spontaneous speech and, in
the process, gains fundamental understanding of the causes, mechanisms and
extent of pronunciation variability.