* 9714930
* Combustion in the Turbine:  Transonic, Accelerating, Mixing and Reacting Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Feng Liu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/2001
* USD 380,000.00

Abstract - Sirignano This is a theoretical, computational, and experimental
study examining multidimensional, transonic, multicomponent, reacting flows in a
high Reynolds-number range, with emphasis on the coupling between combustion
processes and fluid-dynamic phenomena in an accelerating or decelerating flow.
The impacts on efficiency of the energy conversion, on hydrodynamic stability,
and on the potential formation of oxides of nitrogen are considered. Energy
efficiency is examined in situations in which temperature is limited by material
constraints so that expression of released energy as kinetic energy is
advantageous. Hydrodynamic stability is studied in reacting flows where severe
density stratifications and strong pressure gradients are present. Effects of
reduction of flame temperature in the stream, including potentials for
extinction and reduced nitrogen oxide formation, are analyzed. This is primarily
a study of fundamental issues and broad applications, but one application will
be explored in some detail: combustion in turbine passages in ground-based gas
turbines. This study could potentially lead to new concepts for design of
turbines that are more efficient, more stable, and less polluting than extant
models. Broad applications wherever gas turbines are used would be foreseen,
including electric power generation, aircraft propulsion, and other power
systems.