* 9714082
* FSML: Water Treatment System and Electronic Communication   Capability for the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Taber Allison, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 38,964.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is an independent, nonprofit
field station with no institutional affiliation, which provides facilities for
researches who wish to study high-altitude biology in a field setting.
Researches have come to the RMBL for 69 years, and during that time have
patiently put up with inadequate housing and research facilities. Recent
facilities grants from NSF assisted with construction and renovation of several
buildings. With this project RMBL will provide necessary treatment of its water
supply and proper installation of telecommunications cables to laboratories,
offices and residences. First, though RMBL's water has consistently tested as
high quality, new State Public Health Department regulations require treatment
of all water sources classified as surface water sources. A treatment system
designed by a Water Treatment Engineer needs to be installed. Second, a rural
improvement grant for the local telecommunications company provided service to
RMBL in late 1995. During summer 1996, RMBL staff laid unprotected surface
cables to a number of laboratory and residence buildings, to facilitate
immediate use for that field season. These surface cables need to be encased in
weatherproof protection, buried where necessary, and the network completed
according to a master distribution plan.