* 9714086
* FSML: Planning for Improvements to the Greene Field Station of Carroll College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Susan Lewis, Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1999
* USD 5,965.00

Carroll College established the Greene Field Station in 1069 as an outdoor
laboratory for teaching and research by the students and faculty at Carroll
College. The 60-acre Station is part of a primary environmental corridor in
Waukesha County. Significant ecological resources include a calcareous fen, a
class I trout stream, native wet prairie, and a large cattail marsh. The
diversity of aquatic habitats the Greene Field Station particularly important
for studies of wetland ecology. The Greene Field Station Advisory Committee is
engaged in a strategic planning process to produce a management plan for the
Field Station. The goal is to enhance the effectiveness of the Field Station as
a resource for researches and educators from Carroll and throughout the region.
Carroll College wishes to ensure that this process will maximize input from both
current and prospective of the Field Station. The two strategies to accomplish
this goal are: 1) to convene a conference on Natural Areas Management Planning,
and 2) to solicit critical analysis of the strategic plan through a focus group
of current and potential Field Station users. The Natural Areas Management
Planning Conference will bring together students, faculty, and professionals
from throughout the upper Midwest. At the conference, participants will share
results of research relevant to the management of natural areas. Proceedings
from the conference will be distributed to all conference participants and other
interested parties. Participants will also be engaged in discussions of the
critical elements of natural areas management planning, using the Green Field
Station as a case study. This will provide the Greene Field Station Advisory
Committee with input from a wide variety of experts to ensure a comprehensive
strategic plan for the Field Station. The conference will also increase exposure
of potential users to the Field Station as asignificant regional resource for
education and research. The Fie ld Station Advisory Committee will use input
from the Conference to develop the strategic plan for the Field Station. The
Committee will then circulate the plan to twelve critical readers selected from
current and prospective users of the Field Station. These readers will meet with
the Committee to discuss specific recommendations. Suggested revisions will be
incorporated into the final management plan, which is expected to be completed
by the spring of 2000.