* 9714915
* US-India Cooperative Research: Ultrafast Processes in       Semiconductors, Their Nanostructures and Optoelectronic     Devices, Award In Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,01/31/2002
* A Vengurlekar, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/2002
* USD 13,548.00

9714915 Vengurlekar Description: The research "Ultrafast Processes in
Semiconductors, their Nanostructures and Optoelectronic Devices, Award in Indian
Currency" is a new collaboration linking the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR)in Bombay with the University of New Mexico, the CNRS Laboratoire
de Microstructures et de Microelectronique in France, and Bell Laboratories, New
Jersey. This research in ultrafast optoelectronics developed out of an earlier
collaboration (INT-9022623) between PI Shah and co-PI Arora of TIFR that
established the first and only picosecond spectroscopy laboratory in India. The
scientific focus is: (1) energy relaxation processes and rates in low-
dimensional semiconductors and the effect of relaxation dynamics on the
performance of optoelectronic devices fabricated from such structures; (2)
development of fabrication and characterization techniques for photoconducting
switches and electro-optic samplers, and (3) the use of such optoelectronic
devices for measuring the response of ultrafast electronic devices. Scope: This
award will provide the linkage costs for US and Indian collaborators. The
research, while in the realm of fundamental physics, is in an emerging area that
combines ultrafast optics and electronics. The topic is of considerable current
interest and the devices under study may in the future be integral to all
communication and computer systems. In addition to initiating new scientific
collaborations, this project will contribute toward the ultrafast spectroscopy
laboratory at TIFR becoming a world-class facility. All the experimental work
will be performed at TIFR and will include advanced graduate students and
postdocs. The scientific and technological benefits are mutual and the research
results will be published in international journals. ***