* 9714273
* Dissertation Research:  Social Complexity and Corporate     Group Dynamics:  A Case Study of Corporate Households on theLower Columbia River, on the Southern Northwest Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* John Speth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 11,990.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Speth, MS Elizabeth Sobel will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze archaeological materials which have
been excavated from three sites on the lower Columbia River on the Washington-
Oregon border. These sites span the chronological period from late prehistoric
to early historic times and thus serve to document both pre and post-Colombian
periods. This Northwest area is well known anthropologically for the degree of
cultural complexity achieved by groups which relied solely on hunting and
gathering and lacked domestic plants and animals. This level of complexity is
unique among hunter gatherers and is characteristic of settled agricultural and
pastoral populations. Therefore this region has been focus of sustained
anthropological work. MS Sobel is interested in the social processes which
fostered this development and has turned to a body of theoretical literature
which examines the relationships between corporate groups and broader social
organization. Northwest societies were organized into multifamily units which
inhabited individual long houses. A series of alternative formulations posit
driving forces based on competitive relationships both within and between such
corporate groups. Longhouses often leave a clear archaeological imprint and the
three sites which form the basis for MS Sobel's analysis contain a number of
such units. Working with well controlled museum collections she will examine the
spatial distribution of objects both within and between structures. Abundant,
well preserved remains such as highly prized obsidian (volcanic glass) tools and
other exotics which were traded over long distances allow status relationships
to be determined. Thus it is possible to elucidate hierarchical relationships
and see how these changed over time. This research is important for several
reasons. It addresses an important anthropological question. It makes maximum
use of excavated data and synthesizes it in a form useful to many researchers.
It also will assist in training a promising young scientist.