* 9714698
* Monitoring, Visualization, and Control of High-Speed        Networks with Emphasis on Multi-Layer Protocols and Human-  in-the-Loop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gurudatta Parulkar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,200,059.00

Computer networks (such as the Internet and the Global Information
Infrastructure) have become critical for education, research, business, and
military operations. Recent advances in network infrastructure technology (such
as gigabit Ethernet, ATM and Ipv6) have enabled the development of high
performance local area and wide area networks. Efficient management of these
networks is essential. However, existing algorithmic methods for managing
networks have not matured to the point where performance bottleneck and fault
detection, isolation, correlation, and correction can be automated scalably.
Thus, it is crucial to build efficient and user-friendly network monitoring,
visualization, and control (NMVC) systems. The proposed effort is aimed at the
design, prototype implementation, and demonstration of a highly scalable NMVC
system with advanced algorithmic and human-in-the-loop capability. This
capability allows network administrators to calibrate and fine-tune network and
application parameters in real-time according to observed traffic patterns. The
goal of the NMVC system is to ensure adequate quality of service to network
users, while maintaining high network resource utilization. The proposed system
leverages the following innovations to meet its objectives: * An inexpensive,
yet high performance network monitoring and observation probe that does not
interfere with high speed network traffic. This probe can be programmed to
collect pertinent information at any layer in the protocol hierarchy (including
application-specific information). * An efficient probing mechanism for
endsystems (i.e., workstations and servers) that can collect relevant
performance satistics from both applications and kernel resident protocols (such
as TCP/IP in Unix). The endsystem probes introduce minimum interference with
protocol operation and can be dynamically and remotely invoked and configured
for the information of interest. * A highly flexible and highly efficient
software network man agement agent design that extends the functionality and
scalability of the network probe by filtering data based on programmable
criteria (such as protocol header attributes or application-level frames). This
agent can be configured, installed, and controlled remotely at network nodes by
administrators or automated management applications. * Efficient online event
ordering algorithms that can help synthesize and display a consistent view of
network health, status, and performance using events collected throughout a
large-scale high speed network. * A View Choreographer that allows management
applications and administrators to specify the mapping of network events to
higher-level events and to visualization objects and updates. The Choreographer
uses semantically-guided filtering algorithms to enable low latency updates of
displays that present an accurate real-time snapshot of current network state. *
A visualization system that is highly configurable and can support multiple
simultaneous real-time display views of a large-scale network. * Algorithmic and
interactive steering mechanisms that perform critical network management
functions such as protocol parameter tuning for better end-to-end performance,
bandwidth enforcement, fault detection and recovery, and quality of service
monitoring and control. * A prototype system to be demonstrated on a high speed
IP/ATM testbed running a variety of applications (including multimedia
teleconferencing systems and high speed digital imaging).