* 9714631
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental Determination of      REE-Chloride Complex Stability Constants and Monazite       Solubilities in Hydrothermal Solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Christopher Gammons,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 11/30/2000
* USD 81,536.00

9714631 Gammons Knowledge of the behavior of the rare earth elements (REE) in
high temperature water solutions is required in the following areas: 1)
geochronology (i.e., rock dating); 2) REE ore deposit geology; and 3)
remediation and safe storage of nuclear waste . Unfortunately, there is a lack
of the relevant data required for a better understanding of REE geochemistry. It
is expected that the REE will form a dissolved complex with the chloride ion in
many natural solutions, and it is known that REE phosphate phases (monazite,
xenotime, rhabdophane) are common REE minerals. Thus, the objectives of this
proposal are to: 1) determine the solubility of monazite/xenotime in
hydrothermal solutions up to 350(C; 2) determine the stoichiometries and
stabilities of REE chloride complexes up to 350(C; and 3) apply our experimental
data to problems related to the mobility of REE during water-rock interaction.
The data obtained in this study will resolve discrepant theoretical estimates in
the literature, provide one of the first experimentally derived sets of
thermodynamic data for REE complexes at elevated temperatures, permit
quantitative modeling of the role of REE chloride complexes in REE mobility, and
serve as a basis for improved theoretical predictions of stability constants for
other REE complexes for use until additional experimental data become available.
During the course of this project, one graduate and one undergraduate student
will be trained in hydrothermal experimental techniques, a number of modern
analytical methods, and various aspects of aqueous geochemistry relevant to
studies in economic geology and environmental geochemistry. In addition, a new
experimental geochemistry laboratory will be set up at Montana Tech.