* 9714594
* Red Mud Minimization by Iron Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* John Watson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 08/31/2002
* USD 259,710.00

9714594 Schlesinger The objective of this research is to demonstrate the use of
partial reduction as a means of removing the iron from "red mud", produced in
the purification of aluminum using the Bayer process. Red mud contains high
ferric-oxide, resulting in its name, as well as significant percentages of
alumina, soda, silica, lime and titania, and might prove a valuable source of
these materials. Currently red mud is disposed of at sea or in shallow lagoons
along ocean shores or river banks. Because of the less-hazardous nature of red
mud, little research attention has been given to reducing the volume of disposed
material or the recovery of its constituents. Several characteristics of red mud
make the development of an economically viable treatment process difficult, e.g.
the moisture content, the extremely fine particle size and the refractory nature
of most of its constituents. One of the most challenging aspects lies in finding
a way of separating the iron it contains (in the form of hematite). Several
techniques have been attempted, but they have been unsuccessful because of their
high energy requirements and because they produce a slag which is difficult to
process further. This research is aimed at reducing the hematite to magetite or
wustite, which are ferromagnetic and can be recovered by low-gradient magnetic
separation processes. This would require lower furnace temperatures, reducing
energy costs and minimizing interaction among the other constituents in the mud.
The research program will focus on bench-scale reduction experiments varying the
type of mud, reduction temperature and the choice and amount of reducing agent;
quantitative process mineralogy techniques will be used to assess the degree of
reduction achieved and to generate a characterization profile of U.S. red muds.
A second focus involves demonstrating the use of low-gradient magnetic
separation in recovering iron from the partially reduced materials. Recent
advances in magnetic separation have shown promise in iron recovery from other
fine-grained process wastes and their integration into a red mud treatment
process will help create a viable alternative to present disposal and recovery
techniques. ***