* 9714285
* LExEn:  Fe(III)-and Humics-Reducing Microorganisms in       Extreme Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Derek Lovley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 325,000.00

Lovely DEB-9714285 Fe(III)- and Humics-Reducing Microorganisms in Extreme
Environments. Geochemical signatures potentially attributable to Fe(III)- and
humics-reducing microorganisms have been found in modern and ancient extreme
environments on Earth as well as on Mars. However, there has been little
investigation of Fe(III)- and humics-reducing microorganisms in extreme
environments. The goal of this research is to recover Fe(III)- and humics-
reducing microorganisms from a variety of extreme environments and to study
their metabolism and potential geochemical impacts. A major focus will be on
geothermal environments because they are considered to be analogs for the
environmental conditions that may have supported life on early Earth and
possibly other planets. Other extreme environments that may provide insights
into potential forms of microbial metabolism on other planets such as cold soils
and sediments from polar regions, alkaline and hypersaline environments, as well
as acidic mine drainage will also be studied. These studies are expected to
suggest geochemical and/or biochemical signatures that may be used to evaluate
the previous presence of Fe(III)- and humics-reducing microorganisms in ancient
environments on Earth or other planets. These studies should greatly increase
our understanding of the diversity of microorganisms capable of Fe(III) and
humics reduction and may yield insights into the potential role of Fe(III) and
external organic electron acceptors in the evolution of microbial respiration.
Furthermore, the potential application of Fe(III) and humics reducers for
environmental restoration, the recovery of precious metals, and the production
of valuable minerals suggests that Fe(III) and humics reducers recovered from
extreme environments may have economic value.