* 9714195
* LEXEN:  New Physiological and Phylogenetic Types of         Hyperthermophiles at Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Holger Jannasch, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2000
* USD 286,834.00

One of the most productive and exiting aspects of life at extreme environments
has been the discovery and description of novel metabolic types of
hyperthermophilic archaea and bacteria at deep sea hydrothermal vents. Many of
these extremophiles represented new genera (e.g. Pyrodictium, Methanopyrus.
Staphylothermus, Archaeoglobus) exhibiting types of metabolism and enzymatic
capabilities that were entirely unexpected to occur at high temperatures. A case
in point is the recent isolation of Pyrolobus fumarii with its ability to
ammonify nitrate and to use thiosulfate as well as oxygen at low levels as
electron acceptors. These traits greatly extend the type of microbial
transformations that can be projected to occur at high temperatures of oceanic,
terrestrial or extraterrestrial environments. There is no reason to assume that
this deep sea source of novel extremophiles is exhausted. We will combine new
enrichment/isolation approaches for hyperthermophiles with a
molecular/phylogenetic assessment of their in situ occurrence. To this end we
will use denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) for a visual assessment
of microbial biodiversity, rapid identification and parallel studies of
molecular and cultured isolates. The field work and sample collecting will be
done with the DSRV ALVIN at two most productive and, although in close
proximity, characteristically different hydrothermal vent sites: Guaymas Basin
and 21 √ùN at the East Pacific Rise. Dilution techniques will be applied to
delineate populations densities and habitat ranges in both our cultural and
molecular approaches. We will link the biodiversity aspect to quantification of
different metabolic types of hyperthermophilic organisms along selected redox
and temperature gradients which commonly occur at Guaymas Basin vent sites and
offer small scale analogs of two biospheres normally separated by larger
distances: (1) the oxic or anoxic parts of the surface and subsurface biosphere,
ultimately driven by photosynthesis, and (2) the possibly autonomous anoxic deep
subsurface biosphere. Since the latter may hold organisms mediating
biogeochemical reactions such as methane and sulfide formation and possibly
anaerobic metal oxidations, their potential role in extraterrestrial
environments is particularly intriguing.