* 9714099
* SGER: Netday Impact on School Telecommunications            Infrastructure
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Saul Rockman, ROCKMAN ET AL
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/1998
* USD 49,400.00

Proposal to the National Science Foundation for SGER Funds to Conduct an
Evaluation of Nelday Impact on School Telecommunications Infrastructure.
submitted by ROCKMAN ETAL San Francisco, CA Netday is a widespread grassroots
initiative to help schools connect to the national information infrastructure.
It is a high-tech barn raising where volunteers in partnership with businesses
and other organizations install high- speed data wire in K-12 classrooms. It is
a national, yet distributed effort, begun in California about one year ago.
Unsubstantiated estimates from the Netday organizers suggest that more than
250,000 volunteers installed cable in more than twenty percent of the nation's
classrooms in the California and national Netdays. Netday represents an
important opportunity to bring Internet connectivity to all students but there
are serious policy implications that speak to the nation's goals for creating a
powerful and dynamic telecommunications infrastructure for education. Netday is
a strategic and important piece of the puzzle because it focuses on the local
infrastructure inside the school. In combination with the possibility of reduced
access costs under the Telecommunications Act of 1996, it has the potential for
bringing the Internet to the desktops of millions of students to use for science
and math applications. Netday is defined as a project to install data wire in
classrooms; wiring a school site for a network is a necessary condition to get
all students connected to the Internet. Netday has resulted in many wired
classrooms, however, we know little about the schools' efforts to finish the
task of connecting the schools to the information infrastructure and preparing
teachers to use it effectively. In spite of the significance of this phenomenon
for changing the nature of schooling, almost no reliable data about Netday
exists. We need to know: if this is primarily an event for the well-off suburbs
that has the consequence of increasing the gap between the information haves and
have-nots; if the model of pulling wires to five classrooms and not addressing
the Internet service to the building or the instructional applications of the
Internet limits the impact of the volunteer program; the funding sources for the
other parts of the puzzle and whether these are differentially distributed
according to wealth of the local community; the immediate and long term roles of
volunteers from the community and from businesses in helping schools developed
their infrastructure and change teaching and learning. ROCKMAN ET AL 1