* 9714586
* Adaptive Resource Management for IP/ATM Hybrid Switching    Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/1998,05/31/2002
* San-Qi Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 05/31/2002
* USD 240,000.00

IP traffic is becoming the killer application for ATM networks. One challenge in
current network research is how to effectively transport IP traffic over ATM
networks. IP was independently developed on basis of connectionless model, while
ATM was originally designed for connection-oriented services. IP traffic is
usually switched using packet software-forwarding technology, which is expensive
and has substantially limited forwarding capacity. In contrast, ATM switches are
designed with high transmission bandwidth, but having limited connection setup
processing capacity due to its complex signalling structure developed for
connection-oriented services. The proposed research addresses a fundamental
problem in resource management for hybrid switching systems. Such systems aim at
efficiently transporting layer 3 connectionless IP traffic over layer 2
connection-oriented ATM switching fabrics. The hybrid switching technology is
further classified into flow-driven switching and topology-driven switching. The
idea behind the flow-based hybrid switching is first to decompose individual IP
packet streams into flows and then to classify them into short-lived flows and
long-lived flows. While the short-lived flows are best forwarded by the embedded
software through permanent virtual connections (PVC), the long-lived flows are
more effectively transmitted by hardware through to-be-established switched
virtual connections (SVC). Clearly, the key issue in such a flow-based hybrid
switching system is the design of an on-line flow classification scheme, which
can effectively utilize the constrained system resources to achieve the maximum
throughput performance. In contrast, the topology-driven switching establishes
switch connections based on current network routing information, i.e.,
associated with routing table entries rather than individual flows. Hence, no
software forwarding is required if the arriving packets can be mapped into such
pre-established switched conne ctions. The key issues in such a topology-based
hybrid switching system are related to routing scalability, connection-setup
initiation and traffic merge. The first part of our proposal will consider the
flow classification design in flow-based hybrid switching systems, such as IP
switching and MPOA. Unlike the traditional emphasis on resources such as link
bandwidth and cell buffer size, our proposal focuses on the resources which are
directly associated with packet processing power, signaling capacity and routing
table size. Our study indicates that the presently available {\it static flow
classification} methods have a vital shortcoming in balancing the utilization of
the system's resources. This is due to the various system design strategies for
allocating resources as well as the time varying traffic characteristics. As a
consequence, hybrid switching system can end up operating in a highly unbalanced
mode where some resources are significantly underloaded while others are heavily
overloaded, causing substantial inefficiencies in network performance. We
propose a novel approach for {\it adaptive flow classification} which can
balance the utilization of system resources to match the time varying traffic
characteristics. The proposed flow adaptation is formulated as a stochastic
control problem, where the stochastic control framework can be applied towards
the development of efficient and stable flow adaptation algorithms. Our
preliminary studies for this proposal show the viability of the proposed flow
adaptation for dynamic resource management in hybrid switching system design.
Due to its great impact on system performance, we propose to carry out further
theoretical analysis, algorithm development and simulation study for flow
adaptation mechanisms. The second part of our proposed research will focus on
the development of an unified modeling technique for performance comparison
study between the flow-driven and topology-driven switching tech nologies. One
of the most challenging issues in networking field today is to decide which of
these two switching technologies should be adopted. The success of proposed
research is expected to have a substantial technical impact on the selection of
the next generation switching technologies and also the design and resource
management of such IP/ATM hybrid switching systems. Please visit
http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~sanqi/NSF.html for further information.