* 9714310
* Collaborative Research:  Biogeochemistry of Sublacustrine   Geothermal Vents in Yellowstone Lake, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* James Maki, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 88,745.00

9714310 Maki Yellowstone Lake, WY is situated in the caldera of one of the
largest volcanic eruptions known. Geothermally heated water percolating through
the relic chamber is highly enriched in carbonates, silicates, chloride, and
methane, with some location additionally rich in iron and sulfide. The proposed
interdisciplinary research will provide background necessary to begin modeling
basin-wide fluxes of mineral components to elucidate the contribution of
geothermally altered groundwaters to the biogeochemistry of receiving systems.
The overall objective is to develop a quantitative understanding leading to a
biogeochemical flux and mass balance model for the hydrothermal vent system.
Specific objectives include: (1) determining the importance of vent and fumarole
emanations relative to shallow groundwater and sediment-water flux, (2)
identifying short and long-term variability in submarine vent activity, (3)
assessing the potential geochemical interactions of phosphate and arsenic with
iron during formation of iron oxides formed via vent fluid interactions with
cold lake water, (4) determining the relative importance of abiotic sulfur
oxidation and microbially-mediated sulfur oxidation, (5) determining the
specific contributions of photosynthethic, heterotrophic and chemolithotrophic
biomass production, and (6) analyzing transformations of S by measuring the
stable isotope composition of minerals, organic matter, and micro- and
macroorganisms. This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation, NSF 96-152. The proposed
research is collaborative with R. Cuhel, J. Val Klump, C. Remsen, C. Aguilar,
and R. Paddock of the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee. The project is being
jointly funded by the Divisions of Earth Sciences, Environmental Biology,
Chemistry, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.