* 9714597
* Robust Adaptive Coded Modulation for Time-Varying Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Dennis Goeckel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 12/31/2001
* USD 241,399.00

Recent work has suggested that adaptive signaling has the theoretical promise of
greatly increasing the bandwidth efficiency of digital communication systems
operating over wireless channels. However, the utility of adaptive signaling has
been questioned due to the variation of the wireless channel over time, which
results in a different channel at the time of data transmission than at the time
of channel estimation. Recent results by the PI have shown that these issues
cannot be disregarded; the channel variation greatly alters the nature of the
problem and thus the design of robust adaptive signaling schemes for wireless
channels presents significantly different challenges than the analogous design
problem for wireline channels. Many of these challenges are driven by the
robustness necessary in these algorithms due to uncertainties at the transmitter
about the statistics of the channel fading process. In this project, a
comprehensive study of the design of robust adaptive signaling schemes for time-
varying channels is undertaken. The main portions of this study include: (1) The
design and characterization of robust algorithms that employ a given adaptive
signaling paradigm; (2) The development of adaptive coding paradigms that are
well suited to time-varying channels; and (3) The development of adaptive
hybrid-ARQ schemes, which have the added flexibility of partially guaranteeing
robustness through retransmission. The coupling of this work with the
development of the necessary statistical models, in particular the development
of appropriate classes of autocorrelation functions for the channel fading
processes, will lead to families of adaptive coding strategies that can be
employed in systems operating over time-varying channels with various rates of
channel variation. These results will illustrate both the applications where
adaptive coding is useful and the manner in which it should be employed. The
methods that will be used to obtain these results are drawn from the areas of pr
obability and random processes, communication system theory, and statistical
signal processing. In particular, the results rely heavily on results from
random process theory, the design of coded modulation schemes, and extensions of
results from minimax-robust time series prediction.