* 9720676
* CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-Performance Computing Facility for Experimental Algorithms
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* Robert Snapp, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 11/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9720676 Baruah, Sanjoy K. University of Vermont and State Agricultural College
CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-performance Computing Facility for
Experimental Algorithmics This research instrumentation grant enables research
in several projects: - Computing Euclidean Steiner Minimum Trees,- Research on
Blocking Behavior of Multicast Networks,- Feasibility Analysis via Computation-
Intensive Simulations, - Finite Sample Analyses of Nearest Neighbor Algorithms,
and - Reliability of Large Scale Disk Arrays. To support the aforementioned
projects, the newly-formed Department of Computer Science at the University of
Vermont will purchase high-performance computing equipment. The equipment will
be used in particular for: - Developing efficient algorithms for generating the
shortest network interconnecting a given set of points.- Investigating the
blocking behavior of multicast networks.- Developing simulation algorithms for
the feasibility analysis of hard-real-time application systems.- Developing and
evaluating nearest-neighbor algorithms for pattern recognition.- Exploring
techniques for enhancing the reliability of disk arrays. Each project will
explore the impact of the recent dramatic advances in computing technology upon
algorithm design issues in a particular application domain. New techniques,
methodologies, and algorithms will be designed which make extensive use of
large-scale simulation and/ or combinatorial search. The equipment made
available through this grant will be used to both perform the computational
experiments necessary to guide the research, and to validate the findings thus
obtained.