* 9720151
* How Do Diversity, Distribution and Behavior of Attached     Bacteria Influence Detrital Poc Degradation?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Gill Geesey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 158,023.00

The goal of this research is to determine how the diversity, distribution, and
behavior of attached bacteria influences the pathway of particulate chitin
degradation and the fate of chitin degradation products in a seawater
environment. This research involves fundamental studies on how relationships and
interactions of particle-associated bacteria influence the path by which
detrital particulate organic carbon (POC) and particulate organic nitrogen
(PON), as solid chitin, are degraded and the fate of the degradation products in
the marine environment. The research will explore the patterns and causes of
diversity within and among populations of bacteria that commonly associate with
particulate organic material in the ocean. A molecular approach is proposed, not
to reveal phylogenetic diversity among bacteria, but rather to explore
functional diversity in terms of an important bacterial biodegradative process
in the sea-the solubilization of particulate chitin. Variations in chitinase
gene expression (mRNA synthesis) and chitinase activity (protein synthesis)
within and among bacterial populations will be studied during bacterial cell
attachment to and growth on solid chitin. The results will contribute
significantly to our rudimentary understanding of the molecular, physiological
and behavioral adaptations of marine bacteria as they pass from a free-living
state to a particle-associated existence and back to a free-living state again.
Through this micro-scale investigation of individual cells within
distinguishable, mixed populations we anticipate the discovery of new microbial
associations and processes that will influence the way we view microbial-
mediated carbon and nitrogen flux in the water column of the ocean.