* 9720304
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: An Integrated Approach to Concept Learning in Humans and Machines
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Gerald DeJong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 09/30/2002
* USD 775,000.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
Initiative. Concepts are essential for intelligent thought and action. The goal
of the project is an integrated view of concept learning in humans and machines.
The primary focus will be combining psychological experimentation with
artificial intelligence modeling to examine the interaction of world knowledge
and empirical information during concept learning. The representation of
concepts consists of feature regularities observed in the instances and of
features inferred from world knowledge. However, current theories focus on only
one type of feature and do not consider how learning each might affect the
other. Additional work will examine how the use of concepts (such as those used
for problem solving) may affect learning, how prior knowledge may be
restructured to accommodate new information, and how concepts may change with
age and experience. Computational learning theory will be adapted to provide a
mathematical characterization of the learning process. The view of concept
learning that results from this work will be integrated in that it will (a)
investigate and account for a wide variety of concept learning results that are
often studied separately, and (b) pool the research strengths of psychology,
artificial intelligence machine learning, and computational learning theory. The
first goal will place greater constraints on theoretical accounts, suggest new
possibilities, and help to decide among competing explanations. The second goal
will lead to a theory that is psychologically and computationally plausible, yet
sufficiently rigorous to be analyzed with the mathematical tools of
computational learning theory. Such a theory will contribute to the generation
of new knowledge by broadening the understanding of concept learning in each of
the fields, and by promoting new research issues and approaches in each field
through interdisciplinary work.