* 9720143
* Galanin in the Neuroendocrine Reproductive Axis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Donald Clifton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 283,174.00

PI: Robert A. Steiner IBN: 9720143 Reproduction in mammals is governed by a
hormonal communication system linking the brain and pituitary gland to the
gonads. The brain is responsible for integrating hormonal signals (e.g.,
estrogen) from the ovaries and testes and directing the secretion of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from cells in the brain. These cells, in
turn, serve as the final common pathway for the control of gonadotropin
secretion from the pituitary gland. The overall goal of our research is to
understand how these brain cells work to coordinate the functions of the
reproductive system. The specific objective of this proposal is to learn more
about the physiological significance of a small molecule, called galanin, and
its receptor in the regulation of reproduction in the female rat. It has been
shown by previous research that galanin plays a crucial role in the regulation
of hormone secretion from the brain and pituitary; however, we have only a
limited understanding of precise mechanisms by which galanin actually works.
Galanin-containing cells are widely dispersed throughout the brain, including
the forebrain and hindbrain, and galanin works together with other important
signaling molecules (e.g., norepinephrine, NE, and GnRH) to exert its action.
With probes that allow detection of messenger RNAs coding for galanin and its
receptors coupled with a precise chemical analysis of the brain, experiments
have been designed first, to identify the target cells for galanin's action in
the brain; second, to reveal the functional significance of galanin produced in
the hindbrain for the control of reproductive hormone secretion from the
pituitary gland; and third, to learn more about the interactions of galanin and
other important molecules in mice bearing genetically altered brain chemistry.
The results of the studies outlined in this proposal should help us to
understand more about the basic cellular and molecular mechanisms governing
reproduction and other important physiologi cal functions in mammals.