* 9720675
* Minimum Distance Methods for Models with Cointegration in   Time Series and Short Panels
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Graham Elliott, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2000
* USD 47,708.00

9720675 Elliott The objective of this project is to develop minimum distance
methods for inference in cointegrated time series regressions and short panel
data models. Cointegrated models have found particular favor among applied
researchers because of their direct relationship with economic theory, i.e.,
distinguishing between long-run and short-run dynamics. Minimum distance methods
appear to provide ideal methods for estimating and conducting inference on these
models. This is very useful as current methods of estimation of cointegrating
models have proven quite difficult to extend in directions that are useful to
applied econometricians. Methods are often special to the problems of
cointegration per se or result in complicated computational methods. In most
situations closed form solutions are available for estimation when minimum
distance methods are applied. These methods are very simple and well understood
enabling fairly simple extension of methods for estimation of cointegrated
models in directions that should prove useful in applied work. The particular
extensions envisaged for time series models are estimation when there are
restrictions on the cointegrating vectors (linear or nonlinear, within or across
equation), the presence of stationary variables, and the presence of
heteroskedasticity. In the panel models, the project will be to provide and
evaluate estimators and rules for inference in short time dimension panel data
sets when observations on many individuals are available. The focus of this
model is to incorporate as much heterogeneity across individuals as possible.
These methods will be extended also in the same direction as the time series
models. ??