* 9720607
* POWRE:  New Numerical Algorithms for Particle Transport and Integral Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1998,12/16/1998
* Suely Oliveira, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/16/1998
* USD 48,572.00

This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research
and Education (POWRE) program as a Visiting Professorship Activity. This
proposal is for a visiting assistant professor position at the University of
Iowa. Under this award, the PI will spend six months at the University of Iowa
next Spring and Summer. The host institution will provide financial support for
some of the PI's salary, and she is requesting half of her current salary from
NSF POWRE funds. The invitation for this visit is important for the PI because
there she can extend her current research through collaboration and discussions
with well-known scientists in the areas of numerical analysis, computer science,
and astronomy. The PI's areas of research are Numerical Methods for Particle
Transport Problems and Numerical Methods for Large-Scale Eigenvalue Problems.
Particle and radiation transport problems arise in many astronomical phenomena,
such as the solar wind, radiation in the outer layers of the sun, and the
behavior of dust clouds and nebulae illuminated by stars. (Dust clouds are
considered to be the birth-place of stars.) Eigenvalue problems enter into
particle transport problems as a way of solving criticality problems; that is,
determining for what parameters there can be a self-sustaining reaction. This is
of crucial importance in the areas of nuclear reactor design, and also in the
initiation of nuclear activity in stars. The PI has developed new algorithms
(sequential and parallel) for solving transport equations and eigenvalue
problems. Transport equations are integro-differential equations, and the study
of these equations can be fruitfully extended by deeper understanding of how the
integral and differential terms interact. However, the new applications areas
will lead to new equations, and to significantly new methods and ideas. The
astronomical applications incorporate a number of new phenomena such as reaction
terms, and strong interactions between the particles (or radiation) and the
medium through which the particles move. The anticipated outcome from this
project will be a deeper understanding of the mathematics arising in
differential-integral equations which are related to transport phenoma, better
sequential and parallel algorithms for equations in the related applications
areas, and improvement of techniques available to astronomers for simulating and
studying the activity of stars and the sun.