* 9720651
* Oklahoma EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
* O/D,EPS
* 02/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Nancy Dixon, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Fae Korsmo
* 04/30/2002
* USD 3,500,000.00

9720651 Williams The EPSCoR program has served as a major stimulus to
improvements in the competitiveness of Oklahoma researchers and the status of
university science and technology research in Oklahoma. The state and the three
comprehensive universities (The University of Oklahoma and its Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma State University, and The University of Tulsa) have
demonstrated a commitment to develop their research bases and to improve the
quality of their science, mathematics, and engineering research. Oklahoma EPSCoR
will focus on three Science and Technology Centers: the Oklahoma Biotechnology
Network; the Center for Environmental Applications of the Oklahoma Mesonet; and
the Center for Photonic and Electronic Materials and Devices. The Oklahoma
Biotechnology Network will stress technical support for core facilities,
technical workshops as a primary outreach mechanism, and selected new
initiatives in bioinformatics, mass spectrometry, and DNA chip technology. The
Center for Environmental Applications of the Oklahoma Mesonet, a network of 114
automated environmental monitoring sites across Oklahoma that relay data via
radio links to a central location, will stress accessibility and usability of
Mesonet data, add Mesonet stations and sensors around the Norman Landfill, and
will develop an aerobiology sensor network in western Oklahoma. The Center for
Photonic and Electronic Materials and Devices will stress pre-competitive
applied research projects to establish linkages with private sector companies
and will provide support to research facilities and for selected equipment
upgrades. The goal of the Cooperative Agreement is to make the three Centers
self-sufficient and to graduate them from EPSCoR support by the end of the award
period. This will be accomplished by providing support to the underlying
research infrastructure in the Centers, through selective funding for new
initiatives, and through support for research outreach and project developme nt.
These initiatives will be directed towards securing non-EPSCoR support for the
research projects and research infrastructure from federal, state, institution,
and private sources. A co-funding initiative in high capacity computer
networking will support ongoing efforts and new initiatives to expand Oklahoma's
capabilities in networking. The Centers and Network goals are complemented by:
support for research outreach and proposal development; technology showcases to
bring together university researchers and the private sector; programs to
promote public and legislative awareness of university research; a new Faculty
Fellows program for senior research faculty to interact with state leaders; and,
human resources programs including two Women in Science conferences and an
entrepreneurship program.