* 9720374
* Learning, Visualization, and the Analysis of Large-scale    Multiple-media Data
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Stephen Fienberg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2001
* USD 825,000.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
Initiative, with funds partially provided by the MPS/OMA office. Scientific and
engineering data now come in large amounts and in new forms. Although the
problem of analyzing and learning from purely numerical data has been heavily
studied, we currently lack principled methods for analyzing the multiple-media
data sets that form the basis of many modern empirical studies. These modern
data sets contain a mixture of numerical features, symbolic logic descriptions,
images, text, sound, and other media. This project offers an interdisciplinary
research effort to create the statistical foundations and practical machine
learning algorithms needed to take advantage of the growing number of such
multiple-media data sets. The research plan is to develop new approaches to this
problem by working with several large-scale multiple-media databases of
significant scientific and societal importance. This research will provide the
theoretical foundations and practical algorithms for analyzing multiple-media
data in a broad range of application domains. For example, many medical
institutions now collect detailed patient records that can be analyzed to
predict treatment outcomes for future patients. These medical records are
typically multiple-media records consisting of numerical features (e.g.,
temperature), symbolic features (e.g., gender), images (e.g., x-rays), other
instrument data (e.g., EKG), text (e.g., physicians' notes), and other data.
Current data analysis algorithms simply ignore most of these available features,
because we lack well-understood methods for analyzing such multiple-media data.
The current research seeks to develop new approaches that will be able to
utilize the full information collected in such data sets. The goal is to extend
the foundations of data interpretation that form the basis for many experimental
sciences and engineering disciplines.