* 9720593
* POWRE:  Application of Econometrics and Game Theory to the  Study of Democratic Consolidation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1998,11/09/1998
* Gretchen Casper, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 11/09/1998
* USD 84,663.00

This project seeks to understand why democracy survives in `least likely cases`
and why it sometimes fails in `most likely cases.` The end result of this
project will be a more complete and scientifically grounded understanding of
democratic consolidation and collapse. The explanation that it offers will be
based on an explicit test of contending theories, including a reexamination of
classic works in the field and attention to recent scholarship, as well as the
application of econometrics and game-theoretic models. The empirical test of
these theories will entail a comparative study of a number of cases selected on
the basis of theoretical consideration and representing several geographical
regions of the world. Thus the project will not only add to the current work
being done in democratization, but also help us answer the more general question
of why democracies survive in some countries but not others. This POWRE award
will give the investigator the opportunity to visit California Institute of
Technology for twelve months. This Visiting Professorship will allow for
significant professional growth. She will take advantage of Caltech's national
prominence in econometrics and game theory by spending the year retooling in
advanced methodological skills. In addition to retooling, she will conduct
research and consult with Caltech faculty to scientifically analyze democratic
consolidation. This experience will enhance the analytic sophistication of her
research and possibly lead to her promotion to Full Professor at Texas A&amp;M
University. The completion of her research on a topic with broader applicability
than her work to date will also increase her visibility as a political scientist
to the discipline nationally. %╣&gt;Á¢ /&gt;┤ ┴╣%% Á&gt;©/&gt;│Á ?┐╝
┐&gt;┤Á╝¢¥/&gt;┤╣&gt;À ?Â ¢║/¥╣/% │?À&gt;╣¥╣?&gt; /&gt;┤ └╣¢┐/% &gt;/└╣À/¥╣?&gt;
╣&gt; /ÀÁ&gt;¥¢ ▓?¥© /╝¥╣Â╣│╣/% /&gt;┤ &gt;/¥┐╝/%