* 9720205
* Efficient In-Situ and Reduced Chemistry Algorithms for      Chemical Process Flow Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,04/20/1999
* Rodney Fox, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 04/20/1999
* USD 170,484.00

The principal objectives of this project are the development and implementation
of efficient in-situ and reduced chemistry algorithms for detailed chemical
process flow simulation. The current trend in flow simulation in the chemical
process industries is towards the application of computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) to obtain a more complete descriptions of the flow field and chemical
species distribution inside chemical reactors. For chemically reacting flows,
treatment of the chemical source terms resulting from complex kinetic schemes
(i.e. greater than 10 to 20 species) is often the most computationally intensive
part of a flow simulation. Considerable gains in computational efficiency are
thus possible by exploiting two common features of complex kinetic schemes,
namely, the large separation in chemical time scales (relative to flow time
scales), and the compactness of the "accessed region" (i.e., the compositions
that actually occur in a particular simulation). Two methodologies that make use
of these features will be investigated. The first, in-situ adaptive tabulation
(ISAT), is applicable to moderately large kinetic schemes (around 20 chemical
species) and, due to its flexibility of implementation, should be powerful for
chemical process flow simulations. The second, intrinsic low-dimensional
manifold (ILDM) method, is applicable to larger kinetic schemes (provided that
the majority of the chemical time scales are smaller than the flow time scales),
but computationally more difficult to implement since it requires retabulation
after each change in the kinetic scheme or flow parameters. In order to overcome
the shortcomings of each individual algorithm, implementations of a combined
ILDM-ISAT algorithm will be explored. The algorithms will be implemented in an
existing full probability density function (PDF) code designed for turbulent
reacting flow simulation. Full pdf simulations of two industrial chemical
reaction schemes (thermochlorination of methane and free-radical poly merization
of ethylene) will be carried out in order to validate and document the
efficiency of the algorithms under a wide range of actual plant reactor
conditions.