* 9720354
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: A Next-Generation         Intelligent Learning Environment for Statistical Reasoning
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/2001
* USD 698,404.00

9720354 Lovett This project is being funded by the Learning and Intelligent
Systems (LIS) Initiative, including support from the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences. This
project will develop the three core components of an innovative, intelligent
learning environment for teaching statistical reasoning. It is aimed at directly
facilitating students' ability to transfer what they have learned to situations
outside the original learning context. The three components are (1) a computer
interface that helps students develop a general understanding, (2) a detailed
specification of the knowledge required to apply statistical reasoning
effectively, and (3) new computational and statistical techniques for assessing
the accuracy and generality of students' knowledge and then generating
appropriate remediation. This project entails a unique collaboration among
cognitive psychologists, statisticians, and computer scientists. This project
will lead to fundamental advances on several fronts. First, the interface
provides a new learning tool that will be used by every humanities and social
sciences student at Carnegie Mellon University and will be disseminated to other
colleges. Second, because the interface is designed to apply the principles
revealed by recent cognitive psychology research, it offers a test of these
principles' effectiveness in practice. Third, developing a detailed
specification of the knowledge required for statistical reasoning will yield new
insights that can inform statistics instruction and cognitive theories. Fourth,
the techniques for assessing students' knowledge develop new ways of using the
information recorded by computerized learning environments. Fifth, the rich data
collected on students' transfer throughout this project will lead to a deeper
understanding of how, when, and why transfer occurs. Statistical reasoning is
the domain for this project because (a) effective transfer is critical here--
stude nts must apply the skills they have learned across a wide range of issues
and content areas, and (b) students often have great difficulty transferring
these skills.