* 9720668
* A vBNS Connection for the University of Missouri-           Columbia
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* William Mitchell, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory E Monaco
* 02/28/2002
* USD 406,800.00

This award is made under the high performance connections portion of NCRI's
"Connections to the Internet" announcement, NSF 96-64. It provides partial
support for a connection to enhance and accommodate the research needs for the
University of Missouri-Columbia (MU) by establishing a connection to the Very
High Performance Backbone Network Service (vBNS) via the MCI POP in Downers
Grove, IL. Projects in this proposal include: Missouri Intelligent Networked
Information System (MINIS), MU/NASA Regional Applications Center (MURAC), The
Classroom of the 21st Century (Class21), Collaborative Information Spreadsheet
of Geospatial Information (CISS), Interactive Shared Journal System (ISJS),
Distributed Genome Database Browsing and Analysis Facility (DGDB), and
Intelligent Multiagent Systems for Networked Scientific Computing (IMSN). MINIS
explores the integration of computational intelligence methodologies and
networked information. MURAC involves the realtime collection and processing of
GEOS-8/9 remote sensing satellite hyper-image data data for distributed access
by researchers in weather, environmental and agribusiness joint projects.
Class21 involves the construction of a learning environment to permit project
oriented collaboration by students in a shared information space. CISS involves
the access and manipulation of geospatial information in a collaborative
environment by widely dispersed researchers. ISJS involves the development of
software to support new forms of teaching and learning. DGDB provides a seamless
integration of genome databases to facilitate access and analysis by biomedical
researchers. IMSN involves the creation of a problem solving environment for
scientific computing applications. With this high performance network
capability, MU will expand current research and collaboration with both academic
institutions and federal laboratories. Collaborating institutions for this
project include: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, NCSA, NAS A
Goddard, NASA Ames, JPL, Washington University-St. Louis, Monsanto Corporation,
Ohio State University, Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center, San Diego Supercomputer
Center, National Institutes of Health, and Purdue University.