* 9720423
* The Living Curriculum Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Louis Gomez, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2001
* USD 495,777.00

9720423 Gomez The Living Curriculum Project (LCP) seeks to address the problems
posed by the enactment of reform in local school communities. In particular, it
responds to the problem of implementation. Reformers have recognized that
curricular innovations are "brittle" they are interpreted as rigid
prescriptions, and are thus likely to break when implemented in local contexts.
Brittleness arises from a faulty design model which holds that once designed
correctly, innovations can be adopted by teachers as-is . The goal of LCP is to
make flexible curricula which stand up to indeed are improved by the process of
local adaptation. The contents of the curriculum are living in that they are
subject to growth and adaptation. School communities will not simply "implement"
the curriculum in LCP, they will interact with materials, change them to fit
context, document those changes for others' uses, and contribute their own
content to the evolving curriculum database. LCP seeks to engage school
communities in reflective learning and sharing about practice through the
enactment, adaptation, and redesign of curricular materials. We will begin with
four reform-oriented, Internet-based science curricula developed by the NSF-
funded CoVis Project and develop two new units for our research and development
concerning the "living curriculum" concept. Work on LCP will begin with an
examination of local capacity to enact reform curricula such as those of the
CoVis Project. We begin with the view that local capacity to enact reform is a
function of a school community's ability to act as a learning organization. To
reform is to learn, for at the heart of reform lies change, and at the heart of
change lies learning. The goal of our initial work on LCP will thus be to
understand how school communities build capacity for reform. Then, based on that
understanding, we will design an information architecture which presents
curricula to school communities as artifacts around which they can reflect and
learn. Our conj ecture is that curricula should be presented to school
communities as opportunities to learn through enactment, reflection, and
adaptation. Through this process school communities can learn about the reform
and build practice suited to their local needs. We believe that a key resource
for learning through curriculum enactment is design ratior~ effective
communication of the rationale that underlies a curriculum's design. LCP will
emphasize making the design rationale of curriculum apparent to school
communities. We conjecture that design rationale will provide school communities
with substance around which to reflect, and enable them to develop a generative
perspective for local use. As they enact curriculum, they will be provided with
opportunity to reflect upon, discuss and learn about the design rationale of the
curriculum. Such understanding should help school communities to tailor
curricula in useful ways. If they understand the principles of the design, their
ability to adapt the curricula in ways consistent with the spirit of that design
will be enhanced. Built on an understanding of capacity building and
incorporating design rationale, we will create the Learning Communities
Knowledge Resource (LCKR); a technological infrastructure around which living
curricula can be built and through which school communities can reflect, learn,
and co-construct local practice. LCKR is a curriculum media-base of multimedia
information indexed around task models of end users. Teachers might interact
with it around the collection of resources for classroom instruction, while
administrators interact with it to learning how to evaluate teaching practice in
project-based classrooms, and parents interact with it to understand what their
students do in school. The LCKR should provide a space for the range of
constituents in school communities to interact and reflect practice. The path
described for the research and development of the capacity framework, as well as
flexible curricula with readily accessible design rationale provided to school
communities through LCKR will enable us to produce truly generative living
curricula. Living curricula will be flexibly designed to help school communities
become co-designers of classroom practice. They will adapt and grow through
enactment in variable contexts.