* 9720333
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Neurophysiological,       Computational, and Educational Studies of Sequence Learning and Cognitive Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Elizabeth Spelke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2002
* USD 624,979.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
Initiative. The project aims to advance understanding of how the brain generates
intelligent behavior by examining the capacity to think about sequences of
events. Whether cooking an elaborate meal or merely dialing a phone number,
multiple events in a specific temporal order must be kept in mind, in a form of
working memory that helps in planning complex thoughts and actions. This problem
will be studied in the project through an interdisciplinary approach. To
directly probe brain mechanisms, neurophysiological experiments will be
performed on awake behaving animals. Computer-based experiments with young
children will be used to discover how children learn sequential behaviors and to
test how to optimize such learning. Behavioral studies will be done on how human
infants learn sequences. Cognitive and neural modeling will be used to discover
brain designs and mechanisms to link the animal neurophysiological data to the
human cognitive data. This interdisciplinary approach promises to produce
insights that are beyond the scope of any single approach. Conducting
experiments in two different animal species (monkeys and rats), in human
infants, and in young children will permit identification of intelligent
mechanisms that are preserved across different species. The animal studies will
analyse the activity of large groups of single neurons to study how multiple
neurons interact to generate intelligent behaviors. Neural modeling will probe
the laws that govern these behaviors, and will make predictions that link brain
to behavior. Through these analyses of how we learn and remember sequences of
events, a foundation will be built for studying the neural basis of high-level
cognitive operations such as planning and reasoning; for developing better
educational software; and for applying models towards the solution of
outstanding technological problems that require algorithms which emulate human
intelligence.