* 9720444
* POWRE:  Optimization and Characterization of Chloroplast    Translation In Vitro
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Margaret Hollingsworth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2001
* USD 79,793.00

9720444 Hollingsworth Regulation at the translational level is a key contol
point in the expression of many choroplast genes. Such regulation is typically
mediated through RNA-protein interactions at the 5' untranslated region of an
mRNA. This laboratory has previously shown that specific RNA-protein
interactions occur at the 5' untranslated regions of chloroplast-encoded ATP
synthase genes. Proposals to analyze the effects of these interactions on
translation in vitro have been stymied by reviewers' concerns about the
technical challenges present by chloroplast translation extracts. The goal of
this research is to answer those concerns by analyzing and optimizing a recently
reported protocol for preparing chloroplast translation extracts. The project
has two primary objectives: The first objective is to optimize the translation
assay to expand the repertoire of transcripts that can be efficiently
translated. Two transcripts with several orders of magnitude difference in
translation efficiencies in vitro will be used as substrates for these
experiments. Analysis of the effects of cis-acting sequences on translation will
be initiated using chimerics of the two original substrates. The second
objective of this research is to expand the applicability of the extract
preparation of protocol. Experiments will be performed to expand the protocol
from chloroplasts of tobacco to chloroplasts from other research-intensive
species, including spinach and Arabidopsis. This project will be supported
through the POWRE program. It will determine the feasibility of a new line of
inquiry that should expand the applicability of the in vitro chloroplast
translation to inquiries examining translational regulation of chloroplast-
encoded ATPase genes. %%% This project examines the regulation of protein
synthesis in chloroplasts by using an experimental system in which an RNA
transcript from a specific chloroplast gene is added to an extract from tobacco
chloroplasts. The RNA is used as a template for protei n synthesis. This allows
features of the RNA that might affect the efficiency or regulation of
chloroplast protein synthesis to be studied.