* 9720383
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Center for Learning       Technologies in Urban Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Ronald Marx, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2002
* USD 4,999,314.00

9720383 Gomez This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent
Systems (LIS) Initiative. The Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools
will help urban school communities integrate advanced technologies for teaching
and learning with their education reform plans. The goal of the Center is to
help these technologies become pervasive in science curricula and routine
components of the learning experience. The Center is a partnership among the
Chicago and Detroit Public Schools, and education and technology researchers at
Northwestern University and the University of Michigan. The Center's premise is
that urban schools represent a challenging and important setting for shaping and
assessing new organizational and teaching practices supported by technology, and
the technologies that optimize such support. Schools in Chicago and Detroit are
currently developing and implementing new curriculum frameworks, new standards
and practices for professional development, and new community-based structures
that support teaching and learning in classrooms. The Center will capitalize on
these efforts and on research at Northwestern University and the University of
Michigan to develop models of science learning based on science practice,
modeling and simulation, scientific visualization, and tools for computer-
supported collaboration that can enrich urban schools. The Center will encourage
schools to create challenging implementations for learning technologies, and
support the schools in such endeavors.. Teams of teachers and researchers will
work to understand how to make new technologies work in urban and non-urban
communities across the nation. The result of the Center's efforts will be new
technologies, and improved school organizations that are better structured to
facilitate the adoption of new technology and rigorous, new science curricula.