* 9720353
* Learning and Adaptation in the Primate Oculomotor System: A Neuromorphic Analog VLSI Model
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Ernst Niebur, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 09/30/2001
* USD 724,187.00

9720353 Niebur The ability to learn and to adapt to a changing environment is
one of the fundamental characteristics of life itself. The purpose of the
proposed work is to develop, implement and test adaptation mechanisms which are
modeled after their biological counterparts. The centerpoint of the project is
the development of adaptive "neuromorphic" VLSI (Very-Large-Scale-Integrated)
devices. Neuromorphic devices are similar to common computer chips but they are
designed and operated in somewhat different regimes (analog variables instead of
digital, subthreshold voltages instead of suprathreshold, and parallel
processing instead of serial) which gives them properties much more similar to
those of nerve cells than can be claimed of standard computer chips. While
neuromorphic circuits have been designed and fabricated for about a decade, this
work is one of the first to systematically incorporate learning and adaptation
into that technology. This is accomplished by making use of recently developed
design techniques (''floating gates'') which for the first time allow storage of
learned values for periods of time (years) similar to the lifetimes of retention
mechanisms encountered in animals and humans. Furthermore, while most of the
previous work was concerned with the processing of sensory information (good
examples being the "silicon retina" and "silicon cochlea"), this project also
includes motor control and thus closes the behavioral loop, from sensory input
to motor output which then again influences sensory input. The adaptive
neuromorphic devices are integrated in a realistic model of the eye-movement
control of primates (monkeys and humans), which is one of the best understood
biological sensorimotor systems. Different mechanisms of adaptation and learning
have been studied in monkeys and humans and the performance of the adaptive
control system is evaluated by comparing with experimental data. The development
of a hardware model for eye movements promises significant insights into the
function of an important sensorimotor control system. Understanding human (and
primate) eye control in the real world and how it adapts to changing situations
may lead to the development of practical tools, for instance, for target
detection and pursuit. More importantly, however, synthesizing a complex
behavior will help us understand this and other behavioral patterns to a degree
which is impossible to achieve with analytical methods alone.