* 9720357
* Knowledge Based Action Planning and Control Problems in     Engineering and Biology
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Philip Ulinski, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2001
* USD 706,400.00

9753096 PI : Broadbridge Institution : Trinity College Microstructural, Optical
and Electrical Properties of Thin Film Silica Aerogels as a Function of
Processing Method Silica aerogels, prepared by sol-gel processing, are highly
porous (typically > 75%) materials with unique morphology, resulting in
exceptional thermal, acoustic, mechanical and electrical properties. While bulk
aerogels have been studied extensively, thin film aerogels have not been studied
to any significant extent, and promise significant impact in a number of
electrical and thermal applications. In this study, Prof. Broadbridge will focus
on the application of thin-film silica aerogels as low-k interlayer dielectrics
with potential utilisation in intergrated circuit technology. The PI will engage
in a collaborative research endeavor at Trinity College and Brown University.
Funding provided will impact students at Trinity College, exposing
undergraduates to the challenges of state-of-the-art engineering research
endeavors. This funding is also expected to provide Dr. Broadbridge with
opportunity to forge a long-lasting research relationship with Brown University,
thereby allowing her to establish a significant integrated research and
education program. This project is being funded through the Learning and
Intelligent Systems (LIS) Initiative, with funds partially provided by the
MPS/OMA office.