* 9720395
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Animated Pedagogical      Agents for Constructivist Learning Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Sharolyn Converse, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2001
* USD 600,472.00

9720395 Lester, James C. North Carolina State University Learning and
Intelligent Systems: Animated Pedagogical Agent for Constructivist Learning
Environments Constructivist learning environments facilitate discovery-based
learning through creative problem-solving experiences. To do so, they should
provide scaffolding in the form of highly contextualized problem-solving advice
that is customized to each learner. Perhaps the most intriguing vehicle for
providing such dynamically individualized scaffolding is the technology of
animated pedagogical agents. Featured prominently in learning environments, they
couple key feedback functionalities with a strong, lifelike visual presence. The
objectives of the proposed research are two-fold:(1)Creating a new generation of
intelligent constructivist learning environments with animated pedagogical
agents; and(2)Providing a comprehensive, data-rich account of the cognitive
processes and results of interacting with constructivist learning environments
with animated pedagogical agents. Employing a broad array of quantitative and
qualitative measure of learning, the large multidisciplinary research team is
working closely with students and teachers in a local school system to conduct
extensive empirical studies of learners' interactions with these environments.
This work makes significant contributions to the growing body of research that
blends technology,cognitive science,and learning and teaching. First,it creates
a rich constructivist frame work for learning-by-designing that couples
exploratory learning with strong scaffolded support. Second, by focusing on
analyses of the cognitive changes that learners undergo,it identifies precisely
which technologies and conditions contribute most to effective learning.Third,
because it employs a participatory design process that facilitates the
technology's incorporation into school settings in authentic ways,it is expected
that it will have a direct and significant impact on classroom experience well
into the 21st century.