* 9720479
* The Role of Vision in Cichlid Mate Choice and Speciation: Integration of Biology, Chemistry and Physics in Research and in the Classroom
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Karen Carleton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 03/31/2001
* USD 122,579.00

Significant advances in the primary scientific disciplines have blurred the
boundaries between biology, chemistry, and physics. During this visiting
professorship, Dr. Carleton will build on her chemical and physical expertise by
gaining new biological capabilities. By acquiring college-level teaching
experience and establishing an interdisciplinary research program, she will make
the transition from industry to academia to work at this exciting scientific
interface. Dr. Carleton will develop a new course in introductory physics,
teaching physical concepts entirely through biological examples. The course will
focus on physical concepts most relevant to understanding biological organisms
and most likely to engage biology students. Dr. Carleton also will carry out
research on the visual system of cichlid fishes from Lake Malawi, Africa. These
fishes have undergone an extraordinarily rapid radiation, which is thought to
have been driven by sexual selection. While visual communication plays a key
role in cichlid mate choice, little is known about the spectral characteristics
of the visual signals (male color patterns) or their reception (female visual
spectral sensitivities). The goals of the research are to interrelate the visual
capabilities, the color patterns, and the photic environment to assess what role
mate choice has played in generating the spectacular diversity of cichlid
fishes.