* 9720345
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Developmental Motor       Control in Real and Artificial Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Andrew Barto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir J. Lumelsky
* 08/31/2001
* USD 624,051.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
initiative. A key aim of this initiative is to understand how highly complex
intelligent systems could arise from simple initial knowledge through
interactions with the environment. The best real-world example of such a system
is the human infant who progresses from relatively simple abilities at birth to
quite sophisticated abilities by two-years-of-age. This research focuses on the
development of reaching by infants because (a) only rudimentary reaching ability
is present at birth; (b) older infants use their arms in a sophisticated way to
exploit and explore the world; and (c) the problems facing the infant are
similar to those an artificial system would face. The project brings together
two computer scientists who are experts on learning control algorithms and
neural networks, and two psychologists who are experts on the behavioral and
neural aspects of infant reaching, to investigate and test various algorithms by
which infants might gain control over their arms. The proposed research focuses
on the control strategies that infants use in executing reaches, how infants
develop appropriate and adaptive modes of reaching, the mechanisms by which
infants improve their ability to reach with age, the role of sensory information
in controlling the reach, and how such knowledge might be stored in
psychologically appropriate and computationally powerful ways. Preliminary
results suggest that computational models that are appropriate for modeling the
development of human reaching are different in significant ways from traditional
computational models. Understanding the mechanisms by which intelligence can
develop through learning can have significant impact in many scientific and
engineering domains because the ability to build such systems would be simpler
and faster than engineering a system with the intelligence specified by the
engineer and because systems based on interactive learning could rapidly adapt
to changing environmental conditions.