* 9720508
* POWRE:  Positive Human/Machine Interaction Through Music
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Judy Franklin, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 06/30/1999
* USD 65,000.00

9720508 Franklin, Judy A. Mount Holyoke College POWRE: Positive Human Machine
Interaction through Music This award supports an exploration into enabling
machines to learn to interact with humans via music. Jazz improvisation is a
domain for multi-scale on-line learning systems that requires continuous
improvement of interactive performance during learning. Learning takes place at
multiple levels and may have poorly defined, changing goal/critic functions. Yet
the domain problems have straightforward numerical representations. It is a
popular, deep source of human interaction. Reinforcement learning (RL) is well
suited. RL is easily used within a numerical context, within a hierarchical
structure. A two-level structure is proposed. One RL node creates melody. A high
level node learns to "mix" three melody sources: the first RL node, the melody
from the human, and a third node that knows about jazz scales. Significantly, RL
algorithms can use direct feedback (the improvisation fits rules of jazz) and
"indirect" feedback (energy in the human's musical reply increases, human rates
it highly, audience claps). The goals are to understand how to obtain
reinforcement from a human, to facilitate improving human/machine discourse.
Results are relevant to other kinds of discourse. The PI will start a strong
research program and continue collaborations with cognitive scientists
interested in how humans learn to improvise (in the jazz and more general
sense).