* 9720574
* POWRE:  Integration of Artificial Intelligence Techniques   into a Global Cloud Mask Generation System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Antonette Logar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 12/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9720574 Logar In this project, artificial intelligence techniques, specifically
neural networks and fuzzy logic, will be applied to the problem of generating a
global cloud mask. This system will be able to distinguish cloud from non-cloud
pixels in satellite imagery and will be used by the EOS project located in
Huntsville, Alabama. The presence of clouds, which is an important factor in
studying global climate shifts, must be correlated over time, for the entire
earth, on a daily basis. The amount of data which must be analyzed precludes the
use of a human expert to determine the percentage of cloud cover in these
scenes. The method for accomplishing this task will be to improve upon and
extend previous work in four areas: feature selection, the use of thresholds,
the impact of adding layers to the structure, and pixel unmixing. Initial
efforts have been made to incorporate a fuzzy logic component into the selection
criteria, but a larger data set is needed to adequately test the effectiveness
of the method. One of the difficulties faced when classifying satellite data is
that of mixed pixels, that is, a single pixel which contains multiple classes.
The possibility of using a neural network for this type of problem has recently
been suggested and will be investigated both for the cloud classification
project and on data supplied by remote sensing groups working on the ocean color
problem. This project is supported by the POWRE program, which will allow the PI
to spend a sabbatical at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, where she will
be able to interact with experts in the area of remote sensing and will have
easy access to satellite data. This will provide a new research direction for
the PI and her students, and increase the visibility of women at the South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology.