* 9720674
* National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research (NLANR):National Center for Network Engineering (NCNE)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gregory E Monaco
* 12/31/2002
* USD 4,243,657.00

ABSTRACT: NCR9720674 National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
(NLANR): National Center for Network Engineering (NCNE) In 1995, NSF awarded a
cooperative agreement for a National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
(NLANR) providing for engineering, technical support and coordination of the
vBNS connections at the supercomputing centers. The purposes of this NLANR team
activity were (i) to provide sufficient testing, utilization and measurement of
the NSFvBNS to insure that its overall performance was at acceptable levels,
(ii) to facilitate the experiments to be performed on the NSFvBNS, and (iii) to
provide for the coordination of support activities among the centers. It also
provided limited engineering and technical support for general use of the
NSFvBNS and provided for the coordination of such activities and facilitated the
development at the supercomputing centers of a skilled and distributed network
engineering team with a thorough knowledge of the NSFvBNS and its performance
capabilities and use for high performance applications. The recently initiated
expansion of the NSFvBNS to encourage its use as a "leading edge but stable"
platform to enable the development and use of high performance applications by
the broader academic research community requires that the original NLANR
activities be significantly expanded to encompass support for new users, sites
and applications as well as continued measurement and testing of an expanded
network. The need for this expansion has defined the NLANR activity into
separate awards for three functional areas: the NLANR: Distributed Applications
Support Team (DAST), located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaigne,
aimed at assisting the end users of high-performance applications in maximizing
the performance of their applications; the NLANR: National Center for Network
Engineering (NCNE), located at Carnegie-Mellon University, aimed at assisting
high performance connections campuses in optimizing their network engine ering
and connectivity; and the NLANR: Measurement and Operational Analysis Team
(MOAT), located at the University of California, San, Diego, aimed at measuring
and optimizing performance and use of the NSFvBNS and interconnected networks.
The three efforts will continue to be be closely coodinated with each other and
with the NSFvBNS. The agreement provides for the NLANR: National Center for
Network Engineering (NCNE) which builds on the previous NLANR activity and the
experience of Carnegie Mellon University's network engineering personnel at the
Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center in analyzing and supporting the problems and
peculiarities associated with high performance networking activities. NCNE will
place network engineers in direct contact with campus networking personnel at
High Performance Connections inatitutions andwill host workshops to facilitate
the transfer of expertise supporting high performance networking to service
organizations at those institutions. NCNE establishes a central help desk for
High Performance Connection award sites to support and assist campus and other
local service organizations in the resolution of network engineering problems
related to campus networks, their connections to the vBNS and other engineering
issues relevant to networks associated with the High Performance Connections
program.