* 9720432
* POWRE:  Attitude-Behavior Relationships in Dyads
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Marcia Finkelstein, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 03/31/2000
* USD 49,989.00

The goal of this study is to increase our understanding of the connection
between attitudes and behaviors in social dyads. The behaviors to be examined
are judgments about sexual intercourse and condom use. A methodology called
`policy capturing` will be used that allows an assessment of the relative
influence of partners' attitudes on decision-making. Preliminary data suggest a
model in which behavior is determined by the relative strength of `self` and
`other` attitude components. The experiments seek to test and expand this model.
Experiment 1 examines the effect on the relative influence of the self and the
other of two variables: the importance of the other and the importance of the
behavior. Experiment 2 explores the relative influence on behavior of the
cognitive and affective attitudes of the self and the other. The experiment also
asks whether relative influence is moderated by time constraints on decision-
making. Disparities between attitudes toward condoms and their use are
frequently noted for heterosexual young adults, the population that will be
studied. As a group young adults appreciate the importance of condoms in
preventing HIV but continue to engage in unprotected sex. The study tests the
hypothesis that some apparent discrepancies between attitudes and behavior occur
when the attitudes of the partner, rather than one's own feelings and beliefs,
guide decision-making. In such instances, the impact of the partner on behavior
may be unaccompanied by any change in attitude. Thus the study diverges from
traditional work in persuasion by examining the ability of others to influence
behavior independent of any attitude change. This research represents a profound
shift in research for the investigator. She was trained as a sensory
psychologist and from 1976 through 1995 worked in the area of visual
psychophysics. The POWRE award will have a major impact on her ability to
conduct research and to develop related courses in social psychology. She will
also be able to begin training undergraduate and graduate students in this area.
Thus support will enhance her value both to her department and to her newly-
chosen field.