* 9720359
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: CIRCLE: Center for        Interdisciplinary Research on Constructive Learning         Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1997,12/31/2003
* John Anderson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2003
* USD 4,997,797.00

9720359 Kurt Van Lehn University of Pittsburgh CIRCLE: Center for
Interdisciplinary Research on Constructive Learning Environments The Center has
three main goals. First, the Center seeks to understand an extremely effective
pedagogy, human tutoring. This will be achieved by using protocol analysis, eye
tracking and controlled experiments to study human tutors and contrast them to
existing computer tutors. The overarching hypothesis is that students learn best
when they construct knowledge for themselves. The second goal of the Center is
to build and test new generation of computer tutoring systems that encourage
students to construct the target knowledge instead of telling it to them. The
student's self-construction may need to be delicately guided via prompting,
Socratic questioning or other means, This goal will be achieved by adding
advanced planning and natural language components to existing intelligent
tutoring systems and testing the new tutors in collaborating schools. The
Center's third goal is to help integrate this new technology into existing
educational practices. This goal will be achieved by working with practitioners
and schools throughout the development process, by upgrading tutors that are
already in use by thousands of students, and by forming partnerships with other
projects, centers and industries. Achieving the three Center goals will impact
multiple disciplines. Understanding why human tutors are so effective should
have a significant impact on the psychology of learning. Computer science will
be advanced by developing systems that can reactively plan natural language
hints and questions that get a student to learn. Education will be improved as
the Center's constructivist technology and instructional methods prove to be
effective in actual use and become widely available.