* 9720363
* Learning and Intelligent Systems:Inquiry-Based Science      Education: Cognitive Measures and Systems Support
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Neil Stillings, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,092,499.00

9720363 Stillings This project is being funded through the Learning and
Intelligent Systems (LIS) Initiative. to study tutorial interaction and learning
outcomes in a feasible model of college-level inquiry-oriented instruction, as
it is implemented in the Hampshire College science curriculum. This research
will occur during the first two years. It will be conducted by Neil Stillings,
Lawrence Winship, and a post-doctoral fellow in cognition and education, with
the assistance of undergraduate research assistants and an outside educational
research consultant. We will extend current intelligent multimedia tutoring
technology to support college-level inquiry-oriented instruction. This research
will involve the development of new software architectures to support inquiry in
simulation environments and in integrated, computer-controlled laboratory
environments. It will be conducted by Lee Spector, Beverly Woolf, Steven
Weisler, and a post-doctoral fellow in computer science, with some additional
involvement from Neil Stillings and Lawrence Winship. We will demonstrate our
extensions of educational software technology by developing three college-level
inquiry-oriented software packages in the biological and cognitive sciences. Our
plan is to produce one application in the language sciences, one in the
environmental sciences, and one in human biology. These applications will be
classroom-ready and suitable for use outside the research context. The primary
developers will be Lee Spector, Steven Weisler, a post-doctoral fellow in
computer science, a professional programmer, and graduate assistants in computer
science. They will work with faculty members in the appropriate disciplines. The
original plan was to develop six applications rather than three. The budget has
been reduced accordingly. At least two of the software applications will be
tested at Hampshire, and at least one of them will be revised to reflect the
testing results. The classroom testing involves an important feature of the
proposed software architectures, which will have built-in educational and
psychological measurement capabilities. The primary researchers for the software
testing phase of the project are Neil Stillings, Beverly Woolf, the post-
doctoral fellow in cognition and education, and an outside educational
consultant. The original proposal also involved the introduction and testing of
software at the University of Massachusetts. That aspect of the proposal has
been dropped and the budget reduced accordingly.