* 9720309
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Agile Procedural Learning Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Michael Branicky, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 06/30/2001
* USD 775,000.00

Studies of learning indicate that one can define two broad categories:
declarative learning (e.g., verbal statements of fact) and procedural learning
(e.g., how to ride a bicycle). This research aims to clarify principles of
procedural learning, and thus have an impact on understanding how to train
people or machines to accomplish complex sensorimotor tasks in changing
environments. The researcher's goal is to combine studies on animals and robots
in order to explore a biologically-inspired architecture for agile procedural
learning systems (APLS). Existing agile procedural learning systems include
humans and animals. Even simpler animals, such as insects or mollusks, show a
remarkable agility in solving survival problems. After encountering novel
terrain, or novel food, these animals can adjust patterns of body or ingestive
movements to handle the new situation rapidly. Example engineering systems that
would benefit from a theory of agile procedural learning include robots and
manufacturing workcells. In particular, considering the application domain of
agile manufacturing. The key requirement of an agile manufacturing workcell is
that it be capable of flexibly and rapidly adjusting to changing assembly line
demands, perceived errors, and new tasks. Though manipulators have gotten more
dextrous and sensors more accurate, though processors have gotten faster, memory
cheaper, and software easier to write and maintain, truly agile engineering
systems that learn and exhibit intelligent behavior have not been demonstrated.
The substrate is not lacking; a theoretical approach yielding engineering
principles is needed. Top-down (cognitive) and bottom-up (reactive) approaches
to learning and intelligent systems (LIS) have yielded successes, but only for
highly-complex programs performing high-level tasks in highly-structured
environments and for simple agents performing low-level tasks in mildly-changing
environments, respectively. In contrast, agile procedural learning systems
possess a middle-level competence between reactive behavior and cognitive
skills. They are complex, constrained, and must work in environments whose
structure changes. Thus, the problem of agile procedural learning confronts the
investigators directly with building a theory of LIS that bridges the gap
between the traditional "top down" and "bottom up" approaches. The missing
"middle out" theory the investigators propose will be pursued with the following
approach: (1) identify principles used in existing agile procedural teaming
systems; (2) develop models and mathematical tools that bridge the gap between
"top-down" and "bottom-up" methods; and (3) transfer these findings to
engineering practice. More specifically, they will explore the following
biologically-inspired architecture as a means of solving the problem of agile
procedural learning: plastic local reflex circuitry coordinated and comodulated
by higher-level state- and environment-dependent circuits. The investigators
research effort has three core thrusts: (1) they will pursue experimental
studies in simpler animals that are capable of procedural learning to determine
how this architecture is actually used for learning tasks; (2) they will develop
models and mathematical tools that formalize these findings, make an integrative
symbolic-reactive theory possible, and improve understanding of the influence
that learning and environment have on the dynamics of intelligent autonomous
agents; and (3) they will incorporate both into animal-like robots and an agile
manufacturing workcell the middle-out theory and architecture, evaluating their
utility in producing learning and intelligent behavior, measured by improved
performance. The middle-out approach generates overarching scientific questions
about low-level sensorimotor learning and higher-order learning that can only be
answered using an interdisciplinary approach. Overlapping task teams
interlinking these efforts will synergistically improve each of them.