* 9720341
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Modeling Learning to      Reason with Cases in Engineering Ethics: A Test Domain for  Intelligent Assistance
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Johanna Moore, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2002
* USD 524,916.00

9720341 Ashley A clinical ethicist, cognitive psychologist, law
professor/computer scientist, and computer scientist/linguist team up to examine
how students reason with and learn from case-based texts in the context of a
two-term required graduate engineering ethics course. Taught by the clinical
ethicist, the course is structured so that students regularly discuss and
resolve cases as they are introduced to ethical reasoning and a set of
methodological tools developed to aid in the resolution of ethical dilemmas. The
overall goal of this research is to help students learn to identify ethical
components in practical engineering problems and to enhance their ability to
apply the methodological tools and justifications as they resolve the dilemmas.
More specifically, the project goals are to (1) examine how engineering students
adapt conceptual tools for ethical reasoning as they are introduced to, discuss,
and resolve dilemmas presented in the case-based texts; (2) descriptively model
this process using a Web-browser-compatible automated drafting environment (ADE)
as a data gathering tool; (3) examine how ADE's on-line data base of case-based
texts, conveniently accessible in ADE's Web-browser-like drafting environment,
can assist this process; (4) explore how to use computational models of the
underlying case-based reasoning to enable ADE to provide intelligent assistance
in aspects of the process; and (S) evaluate how having access to ADE compliments
or interferes with students' developing ability to identify, articulate, analyze
and resolve ethical problems. The resulting methodological tool, ADE provides
convenient access, for both teacher and student, to an on-line database of
textual materials such as methodologies and cases outlined in the required
course texts, mid-level principles, professional codes of engineering ethics,
decisions of a professional association ethics review board and an existing on-
line repository of engi neering ethics cases and commentary. ADE acts like an
intelligent assistant engaging students in a dialectical process. It provides an
"argument worksheet", a checklist to help the student analyze an ethical
problem, case-based access to information for constructing the arguments, and
feedback. ADE is evaluated empirically in terms of a cognitive model to be
developed in an empirical investigation of case-based learning to solve ill-
defined problems. Building ADE also contributes to three main research areas in
Artificial Intelligence, Case-Based Reasoning, and Intelligent Tutoring: 1. Case
representation and relevance assessment, 2. Planning ethical arguments and
explaining those plans, and 3. Recognizing students' solution plans.