* 9720314
* Learning and Intelligent Systems:  Simulating Tutors with   Natural Dialog and Pedagogical Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Arthur Graesser, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 900,000.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
Initiative. The long-term practical objective of the research is to develop a
fully automated computer tutor. The tutor would be able to (a) extract meaning
from the contributions that the student types into a keyboard and (b) formulate
dialog contributions with pedagogical value and conversational appropriateness.
The tutor's discourse moves include: pumping, prompting, hinting, questioning,
answering, summarizing, splicing in correct information, providing immediate
feedback, and rewording student contributions. The dialog contributions of the
tutor would be in different formats and media: printed text, synthesized speech,
simulated facial movements, graphic displays, and animation. Such an achievement
will require an interdisciplinary integration of theory and empirical research
from the fields of cognitive psychology, discourse processing, computational
linguistics, artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, and education.
The tutoring topics will be in the domains of computer literacy and introductory
medicine. Previous attempts to develop a fully automated tutor have been
seriously challenged by some technical and theoretical barriers. These include
(a) the problem of interpreting natural language when it is not well-formed
semantically and grammatically, (b) the problem of world knowledge being
immense, open-ended and incomplete, and (c) the lack of research on human
tutorial dialog. Recent advances have dramatically reduced these barriers, so it
is time to revisit the mission of developing an automated tutor. According to
the recent research on human tutoring, a key feature of effective tutoring lies
in generating discourse contributions that assist learners in actively
constructing explanations, elaborations, and mental models of the material. The
proposed research will advance scientific understanding of how a tutor can
manage a smooth, polite dialog that promotes deep learning of the material.