* 9720606
* POWRE:  Novel Spectroscopic Methods for Assessing           Peptide-Lipid Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Regina Murphy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/1999
* USD 80,000.00

9720606 Murphy There are several compelling medical and biotechnological reasons
motivating the development of new methods to probe the mechanisms and kinetics
of complex systems involving self-associating peptides and lipid bilayers. Key
questions include: how many peptides associate together to form a pore? does
peptide-peptide association occur prior to, coincident with, or subsequent to
peptide-lipid association? must the peptide be in a specific aggregational state
in order to interact with the lipid bilayer? This research plan proposes to
investigate the feasibility of developing two new methods to probe these kinds
of questions. Research objective 1 is to establish whether static light
scattering methods can be applied to evaluate the number and association state
of peptides embedded in membranes. The pH-sensitive pore-forming peptide GALA
and an antibody-GALA derivative, mixed with phosphatidylcholine large
unilamellar vesicles, was chosen as the model system for this investigation.
Standard static light scattering methods yield information on molecular weight
and size of particles in solution, and requires that scattering data be
collected on both the sample of interest and the buffer. This approach will be
modified by collecting four sets of scattering data: peptide alone, liposomes
alone, buffer alone, and peptide-liposome mixture. By subtracting out in turn
the scattering from peptide alone, liposomes alone, or buffer alone from the
scattering of the peptide-liposome mixture, it may be possible to infer the
extent of peptide association in the liposome and the total number of peptides
per liposome. Research objective 2 is to investigate the feasibility of using
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy to explore the importance of
peptide association state in modulating peptide-lipid association. The model
system for this investigation will be beta-amyloid peptide monomer and fibrils
associating with monolayers of negatively-charged pho spholipids and
phospholipid- ganglioside mixtures, SPR is used most frequently to measure
binding kinetics of ligands to immobilized receptors. In a modification of this,
the immobilized receptors can be replaced by a self-assembled oriented lipid
monolayer. A commonly cited difficulty with SPR is that the rates of association
can be mass transport, rather than kinetically, limited. The feasibility of
turning this difficulty into an asset will be investigated. Since fibrils have
significantly slower diffusivities than monomeric peptides, measurement of the
mass transport rate should indicate whether the predominant species associating
with the lipid layer is monomeric or aggregated. ***