* 9720134
* (WEAVE)  Changing Seasons?  Detecting and Understanding     Climate Change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,09/30/2003
* Rajagopalan Balaji, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2003
* USD 261,211.00

9720134 Lall Recent research suggests that the seasonal patterns of continental
U.S. temperature, precipitation and streamflow have been changing over the last
century. The peak temperature and precipitation may have shifted forward by 10
to 90 days in a calendar year in high latitudes. Snow melt runoff may also be
occurring earlier in the year. At interannual or interdecadal time scales, there
is evidence of delay/advance of seasons related to El Nino events. Such trends
have implications for projections of the timing and magnitude of regional
agrarian and urban water and energy demand, water supply, reservoir operation,
agricultural practice, ecologic productivity, critical periods and risks of
environmental impacts on surface waters and air quality and the consequent
economic impacts. The interpretation of warming or rainfall trends attributed to
particular months or seasons is also called into question. The objectives of the
proposed research are to: Identify spatially coherent patterns for changes in
the seasonality of precipitation, temperature and streamflow in N. America using
nearly century long instrumental hydroclimate records. Relate shifts in
seasonality to anthropogenic factors (e.g., greenhouse gases, urbanization),
latitude, continentality (i.e., distance from ocean), and orography. Explore
connections between the seasonality trends and trends in atmospheric circulation
(as indicated by sea level pressure changes) for a dynamical understanding of
the changing climate. Explore the use of General Circulation Models to explain
the trends in terms of natural variability of the climate system or greenhouse
forcing. These objectives will be addressed by assembling a comprehensive data
base of daily/monthly precipitation, temperature, streamflow and sea level
pressure data for regions ranging from the continental U.S. to the N. Hemisphere
and the analysis of these data using nonparametric statistical methods to assess
seasonality and its shifts, spatial coherenc e and space-time structure of the
variations, and to develop and explore empirical hypotheses relating ocean-
atmosphere circulation to the trends in precipitation, temperature and
streamflow.