* 9720320
* Learning and Intelligent Systems:  Adaptive Cortical        Computation in the Visual Domain:  Integrated Approach UsingMulti-Unit Recording, Network Theory, &amp; Experiments in O
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Michael Tarr, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 09/30/2001
* USD 722,920.00

IBN-9720320 PI: ANDERSON This project is being funded through the Learning &amp;
Intelligent Systems Initiative. This study investigates functional interactions
among groups of neurons (nerve cells) in the brain. The cerebral cortex of the
brain is a dynamic ensemble of groups of neurons with activities that coalesce
and dissolve in the performance of particular tasks. A computational model
called 'network of networks' describes the operation of computations based on
neurons interacting in intermediate groupings, in the size range between single
neurons (only one computing element) and entire brain regions (to hundreds of
millions of computing elements). In the intermediate scale groupings, the model
makes predictions about the behavior of both its component single neurons and
the overall nature of the cortical computation, manifested as behavior and
perception. Experimental tests utilize the mammalian visual system because so
much is known about cortical processing of visual information at the level of
single neurons, and also there is a large body of related experimental results
for visual perception. There are three inter-related parts to this project. 1)
Computer simulations and mathematical analysis further develop the 'network of
networks' model itself. 2) Simultaneous activity of multiple neurons in visual
areas are recorded physiologically to examine long-range transfer of information
across visual cortex, of the type suggested by the model. 3) Analyses of
previously obtained psychophysical behavioral data from human subjects are
combined with computer simulations to try to understand the surprising
effectiveness of silhouettes in object recognition, and to provide a test system
for the network model. Results will have an impact because of the importance of
linking cognition with neuroscience to understand mechanisms that underlie
learning and perception, and because understanding how the brain handles complex
computations will provide insights for the design of artificia l recognition and
decision-making systems.