* 9720708
* US-South Africa Workshop: Intelligent Systems in Power      Electronics, Pretoria, South Africa, July 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Thomas Habetler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/2000
* USD 30,000.00

9720708 Habetler This award provides support for eight US investigators to
participate in a US-South Africa Workshop on Intelligent Systems in Power
Electronics, Pretoria, South Africa, July 1998. The US organizer is Professor
Thomas G. Habetler of the School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, and Professor Ron Harley, Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Natal, Durban, South Africa. The workshop will be held during and
immediately following the FEPPCON (IEEE Future of Electronic Power Processing
and Conversion) conference, which itself follows the IEEE International
Symposium on Industrial Electronics. The US-South Africa workshop will focus on
trends in intelligent systems, algorithms and their implementation, hardware
considerations, applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in power
electronics (PE), and future applications. The purpose of the workshop is to
bring together US and South African researchers in the AI and PE fields to plot
out a map of the important steps to take in this evolving technology.
Intelligent systems incorporating AI allows one to transfer human knowledge and
skills to computers or other types of hardware. AI also enables a hardware or
computer system to use algorithms to train itself to a level that a human cannot
achieve in terms of complexity and speed of decision making. AI researchers
traditionally study new algorithms and often have expertise in mathematics and
the theory of algorithm development and performance. AI has been successfully
applied to pattern recognition, time series prediction, and system
identification and control. All of these functions are crucial in the operation
of advanced PE system controllers. PE researchers traditionally study the
devices, circuit topologies, and control algorithms that make up power
processing equipment. The award is supported jointly by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Electrical and Communications
Systems. ***