* 9720635
* Fluorine-Containing Electrophilic and Nucleophilic Transfer Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Jean'ne Shreeve, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 01/31/2002
* USD 314,300.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research in the laboratories of Professor Jean'ne Shreeve at the
University of Idaho. Shreeve has proposed to develop a new class of per- and
poly-fluoroalkyl electrophilic transfer agents based upon simple inorganic
molecules. The proposal clearly outlines a variety of synthetic routes for the
preparation of these reagents. Although a variety of perfluoroalkyl transfer
agents are known, these reagents often require the use of tedious synthetic
methodologies or possess a limited scope of applicability. The new reagents to
be developed are expected to offer the advantages of being applicable to the
derivatization of a variety of template molecules and being stable in the
presence of nucleophiles and under photolytic conditions. Additional studies
will include the nucleophilic transfer of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl groups from
the corresponding per- and poly-fluoroalkylated silanes. The incorporation of
fluorine or fluorine-containing groups into molecules has a marked effect upon
the chemical and physical properties of the parent molecule. These changes
result in increased lipophilicity and improved hydrolytic and thermal stability.
As a result, the demand for such compounds by the pharmaceutical, medical and
polymer industries continues to grow. The reagents developed in this program are
expected to result in the more efficacious and economical production of
fluorine-containing compounds.