* 9720433
* Miracle, An Environment for Teaching Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1999
* George Springer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 09/30/1999
* USD 55,043.00

Programming is problem solving! The essence of solving a problem on the computer
is the production of a viable solution algorithm. This is then followed by a
routine and often tedious translation of the algorithm into machine recognizable
instructions. The project goal is to teach students to program in some popular
languages, without becoming entangled in a web of syntactic complications. The
project will develop a programming environment called "Miracle," in which high-
level goal-oriented tools circumvent the unnecessary tedium of translation.
Students can then focus on developing problem-solving skills and programming
logic, while Miracle will generate the desired code for them once they have
produced the algorithm. Although syntax is a useful skill for professional
programmers, it is not the most important skill for most students who only need
some idea about programming as part of their general "computer fluency." A
prototype of the programming environment Miracle has been built, which
translates the student's pseudocode into a JavaScript code and allows the
student to get his/her results. This prototype is not nearly powerful enough nor
general enough. In this project, the prototype will be enhanced (1) to handle
more sophisticated programming logic and (2) to offer, in addition to
JavaScript, a variety of target languages, such as Visual Basic and Java. The
advantages of this approach to teaching programming to students not majoring in
computer science are (1) the problem-solving and analytic reasoning skills of
students are sharpened because more time can be spent on these aspects of the
course than on syntactic structure, and (2) students have the satisfaction of
knowing that they can solve their problems and produce code in many popular
programming languages using Miracle.