* 9720541
* POWRE:  The Hazardousness of Place:  Modeling Risk          Vulnerability
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Burrell Montz, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 12/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

With rare exceptions, hazards research has focused primarily on individual
hazards at particular locations, an approach that does not fully explain the
risks that exist in an area. This project is aimed at moving away from these
single hazard analyses to a multiple hazard perspective that looks at the
hazardousness of a place. Such a perspective will include both linked and
independent events and will serve to develop an approach based on: 1) an
examination of the functional relationships that best represent the linkages and
probabilities of events; and 2) an examination of the functional relationships
between probability of occurrence and levels of vulnerability as they are
manifested through damage/loss potentials for discrete areas. Using Tampa Bay,
Florida as the research area, data on the spatial extent of events, variables on
the physical and built environments, as well as social characteristics, will be
incorporated in a GIS-based model. Once these data are geocoded, models from the
literature will be adapted to evaluate independent and linked events and to
define variations in vulnerability. Specifically, analysis will center on
calibrating, testing, and refining these models using an integrated assessment
approach with embedded submodels, influence diagrams, and functional
dependencies drawn from the literature, from existing models, and from known
relationships. Because of the nature of hazards data, sensitivity analyses will
be undertaken to determine which variables contribute most to the uncertainty
inherent in the models. This research breaks new ground by incorporating into
the analysis of hazardousness those events that are linked to other events and
the probability of occurrence of one or more events. As such, this exploratory
methodological effort represents an important advance in our ability to model
the relationships among and between hazards. This POWRE award makes it possible
for the investigator to build on earlier research that dealt with development
and testing of a methodology for determining the composite probability of
occurrence of several independent hazards in a community. At that time, linked
hazards were considered conceptually, but there was insufficient time to develop
that strand of research because of its exploratory nature. Work by the
investigator since then has indicated that this line of inquiry holds promise,
but a concentrated effort is required to carry it out. This award makes it
possible for her to move ahead. The investigator will be developing her
technical expertise in modeling and methodological development at the University
of South Florida. This area of research holds great promise for future research
as human interventions and climate change add further complexities to our
understanding of natural hazards. Thus, the award will serve to enhance the
investigator's reputation as a leader in the area of natural hazards research.