* 9720490
* POWRE:  Statistcs: Research, Education and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Deborah Nolan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2000
* USD 75,000.00

This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research
and Education (POWRE) program as a Research/Educational Enhancement Project. The
investigator proposes a research and education plan that: draws on the wealth of
interdisciplinary applications of statistics; contributes to advances in model
selection and resampling methodologies; and utilizes the new capabilities for
developing computing environments and courseware. Statistical applications are
making greater use of flexible, computationally--intensive modeling procedures.
As a result, the issue of selecting appropriate models is an important one. The
investigator plans to extend methods of model selection to robust regression,
including least absolute deviation regression. These alternatives to least
squares regression are very popular when the data come from heavy tailed
distributions and when there are outliers. In the area of education, the
investigator plans to integrate statistical theory and practice in a way not
commonly encountered in undergraduate courses -- through in-depth case studies
or labs. The labs raise interesting scientific questions that highlight the
interdisciplinary framework in which statistics has developed; they employ new
statistical methodologies, such as resampling methods and model selection
techniques; and they are to be presented in an interactive programming
environment. The investigator also plans to bring her technical skills in high--
dimensional modeling to bear on an area of statistical application -- modeling
growth of roots in the study of plants. Biologists are interested in learning
about the effects of various environmental conditions on biosynthesis rates in
growing plant tissues. Developing a model for the velocity of growth and for the
elemental growth rate using innovative nonparametric methodology would be very
helpful in analyzing experimental outcomes.