* 9720410
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Learning in Complex       Environments by Natural and Artificial Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Philip Kellman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 09/30/2002
* USD 751,000.00

This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
Initiative. The focus is on learning as it occurs in complex environments, where
the data have rich and potentially confusing structures. Nine investigators in
five different disciplines - biology, chemistry, linguistics, psychology, and
high school teaching of mathematics and science - will mount a collaborative,
multi-level experimental and theoretical analysis of the mind's learning
structures. The work integrates research on formal analyses of learnability, the
evolution of complex natural and artificial adapative systems, the genetics of
memory, the mind's ability to keep track of language learning data, perceptual
learning of complex displays like equations and molecular models, and the
creation of integrative math and science modules for use with interactive
learning technologies. The unifying theme running through all of the projects,
and across every level of analysis, is the interaction between the structure of
the brain's learning mechanisms, and the structure of the data that support
learning. Two related leitmotives cut across the planned work. First, the
project itself is conceived of as a complex, interdisciplinary learning
environment for people ranging from high school students and science teachers in
the Los Angeles community, to senior faculty at UCLA. Second, the research
efforts interact with and inform advancements in the rapidly evolving
technologies for learning, instruction, genetic screening, and the development
of artificial systems.