* 9720411
* Late Cenozoic Volcanism in Marie Byrd Land:  Assessing      Petrogenetic and Eruptive Mechanisms by Comparitive Studies of Analogs
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Wesley Le Masurier, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 11/30/1999
* USD 45,745.00

9720411 LeMasurier The volcanoes of Marie Byrd Land lie along the Pacific coast
of Antarctica between 110 degrees and 140 degrees west longitude, and are part
of the circum-Pacific ORing of Fire.O They have formed during the past 30
million years (Ma); but each has had an individual lifetime of less than 3 Ma,
and they are made up of a wide variety of rock types. Unlike volcanoes elsewhere
in the Ring of Fire, which have formed as a result of plate collision, Marie
Byrd Land volcanoes have formed in a OriftO environment where the earthOs crust
has been stretching, fracturing, and slowly rising to form a large dome that is
now about 300 miles in diameter and 9,000 feet above sea level at its crest.
Older volcanoes are found near the center of the dome, and as the dome grew,
volcanic activity shifted toward the edge of the dome, where the now active
volcanoes are located. The origin of these volcanoes thus appears to involve an
interplay between melting, that produces the original lava far below the crust,
and deformation within the crust, that seems to control what happens to the lava
on its way to the surface. When the lava reaches the surface, and is erupted
under the West Antarctic ice sheet, it produces hydrovolcanic deposits that
provide a record of how the size of the ice sheet varied before climate was
influenced by human activity. At Mt. Takahe these rocks appear to record
multiple fluctuations in ice level, through a range of at least 1,000 ft. within
the past 300,000 years, suggesting that the ice sheet responds readily to
climatic change. A similar response to greenhouse warming could, conceivably,
lead to a 20 foot rise in sea level. This award, funded by the Office of Polar
Programs at the National Science Foundation, supports work that will focus on
the following questions: (1) What has caused melting at roughly 70-90 miles
depth to produce basalt lava, and how have uplift and stretching been related to
this process? (2) What processes h ave caused the basalt to change composition
as it rises to the surface, producing the variety among volcanoes in Marie Byrd
Land? (3) What can we learn from hydrovolcanic deposits about the history of the
ice sheet and its vulnerability to greenhouse warming? This award supports a
comparative petrological study to understand the volcanic rocks of Marie Byrd
Land in the context of similar volcanic provinces elsewhere in the world that
exhibit different styles or stages of development. This award supports
comparative studies of three such regions: (1) The volcanoes of Victoria Land,
about 1000 miles west of Marie Byrd Land, in a part of the West Antarctic rift
that has had a somewhat different history of deformation and volcanism. (2) The
60-65 million year old volcanoes in NW Scotland, which have been eroded deeply
enough to expose subsurface volcanic conduits. (3) Volcanoes produced by
subglacial eruptions in Iceland, including the active volcano Grimsvotn, which
has produced hydrovolcanic deposits like those at Mt. Takahe during its recent
eruptions under the glacier Vatanajokull. These studies are important because
they will contribute to an understanding of (1) how the interplay between deep
internal processes and crustal deformation within Earth can control the
development of volcanoes in a rift environment, and (2) how the past behavior of
the West Antarctic ice sheet can be used as a key to its future stability.