* 9720384
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Center for Innovative     Learning Technologies
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Barbara Means, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2002
* USD 5,837,473.00

9720384 SRI International Roy D. Pea Learning and Intelligent Systems: Center
for Innovative Learning Technologies The Center for Innovative Technologies
(CILT) stimulates the development and implementation of important, technology-
enabled solutions to critical problems in K-14 science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology learning. Four institutions-SRI International; the
University of California at Berkeley; Vanderbilt University; and the Concord
Consortium-provide Center leadership and infrastructure. "Theme teams" conduct
the Center's research, development, and implementation activities. Participants
drawn both from the founding organizations and from elsewhere will represent the
best possible mix of expertise. Theme teams will include computer scientists and
engineers; experts in science, mathematics and engineering instruction, policy,
and research; and industry leaders. Participants will work together in national
workshops and on-line discussions to review their research results, identify
critical challenges and potential breakthroughs in their theme area, and select
prototype collaborative projects for CILT sponsorship. These prototype projects
serve as"seed" efforts that,can transform the use of learning technologies in
education. The Center's initial themes are Virtual Learning Communities;
Visualization and Modeling; Low-Cost, Ubiquitous Computing; and Assessment. CILT
provides the infrastructure for synthesizing learning technology R&D and
implementation lessons across projects, stimulating multidisciplinary
collaboration and rapid innovation, and fostering communication among technology
supports for mathematics and science learning. CILT will train postdoctoral
scholars from multiple disciplines to lead the field of learning technologies in
the future.