* 9720475
* POWRE:  Global Gaze:  Earth Observing Satellites and the    Changing International Knowledge Structure
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Karen Litfin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 12/31/1998
* USD 44,427.00

The investigator will undertake qualitative empirical research into the impact
of remote-sensing satellites on the global knowledge structure, defined in terms
of the distribution of power, rule-making, and authority. For some,
globalization and the so-called information revolution are propelling the world
into a `post-internationalist` era in which `sovereignty-free` non-state actors
challenge the state's power and authority. For others, recent technological
changes present no constitutive threat to the state-centric international
system. This project will address the question of whether technological
revolutions are precipitating a transformation in the structures of world
politics by focusing on a difficult case: Earth observing satellites. Earth
observing satellites, representing both a primary medium for surveillance and a
key information technology, offer an excellent arena for exploring the global
knowledge structure. They offer if not a least-likely case, then a not-so-
obvious test case for the post-internationalist thesis since, to a greater
extent than other information technologies, their roots are solidly in the
domain of the scientific state. The proposed hypothesis is that the information
revolution is precipitating political transformation, and that developments in
satellite remote sensing will provide confirming evidence for this shift.
Confirmation of the post-internationalist thesis for the strong case of earth-
observing satellites would be especially compelling. This POWRE grant will
provide support for a Visiting Professorship at The George Washington
University's Space Policy Institute. The Institute is unique for its
interdisciplinary research and teaching faculty devoted entirely to issues of
space policy and technology, including satellite-based remote sensing. NSF
funding will do a great deal to enhance the investigator's overall research
agenda and specific standing in her upcoming tenure review. Her project has the
potential for an important impact both in academia and in wider audiences.