* 9720712
* Rapid Fertility Changes in Bangladesh:  An Economic and     Ethnographic Study
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Patricia Johnson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2000
* USD 96,224.00

This project studies the rapid change in fertility that has occurred in
Bangladesh over the past 20 years. The standard demographic theory of population
decline says that people have fewer children when their economic situation
improves. In this case the economic situation has not improved, yet the
population has limited growth through the increasing use of contraceptives. This
project will test hypotheses to explain variation in contraceptive use among
rural, underprivileged people near Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh. The
project will develop an instrument for assessing economic well-being that is
more sensitive to local understandings of poverty and wealth. Focusing on
contrasts between couples who use contraceptives and those who do not, the
project will employ a mix of qualitative ethnographic methods and quantitative
data to provide a picture of local reproductive choice. On the theoretical
level, it will be a model to advance the combination of ethnography and local
contextual knowledge with extensive, statistically representative survey-based
knowledge. On a practical level, it will provide useful information to family
planning policy development in Bangladesh, the world's most densely populated
country. The new knowledge from this project should be significant in light of
the continuing global problem of overpopulation.