* 9720305
* Learning and Intelligent Systems: Intelligent Visual        Grouping: Basic Mechanisms, Models, and Applications
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2002
* USD 875,000.00

IBN-9720305 PI: SHAPLEY This project is being funded through the Learning &amp;
Intelligent Systems Initiative. The questions involve vision and learning in the
central nervous system. The project investigates how the brain represents and
processes perceptual information, and the adaptive changes that occur when the
system learns and improves its performance. Here the visual system is used as a
gateway into the workings of the brain, employing methods from psychophysics,
neurophysiology, mathematics and engineering. The work focuses on visual
grouping, which is the ability of the visual system to link together local
elements of the visual image into coherent wholes. Grouping is one of the most
fundamental aspects of human vision, and the goal of this work is to obtain a
theory of visual grouping that will explain the physiological and psychophysical
data, and lead to new technological ideas to be applied in intelligent
artificial systems. Results will be important because understanding the
computations in the brain that produce grouping would be a leap forward in our
understanding of brain function, and of any systems that can adapt to
experience. This work will therefore have an impact in designing learning
materials and in the optimal methods of presenting information, and in the
design of the next generation of computer vision systems and intelligent control
systems. This project is supported in part by the NSF Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical
Sciences.