* 9720699
* Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Nonlinear       Optics, Mathematics and Electrical Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* John Shaw, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2000
* USD 74,998.00

This is a research proposal with an educational emphasis under the
Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences program. The principle
investigator will spend the 1998-99 academic year (and summer, 1998) in the
Electrical Engineering department at Virginia Tech University learning the
fundamentals of communications network theory and building a research program in
nonlinear fiber optics for communications. The PI plans specifically to study
spectral approaches to the nonlinear Schrodinger equation, which models pulse
propagation in communications fibers. He proposes consideration of the equation
both numerically and through extended multiple scales methods, both of which are
in the spectral domain rather than the time domain. The resulting asymptotic
analysis, with accompanying numerical component, would be extremely valuable to
communications engineers in their efforts to simulate pulse transmission in
fibers where nonlinear effects are significant. The resulting analysis would
also be of keen interest to researchers and teachers of mathematics. The PI
therefore expects to be involved in the creation of new mathematical ideas to
meet the needs of emerging technology. The investigator plans to share his
findings with his mathematical colleagues through seminars, colloquia,
conferences and publications. He proposes to involve students in his findings
through masters thesis level work and through undergraduate research projects.
In addition to faculty colleagues and graduate students, the PI also plans to
make the mathematical aspects of fiber communications more accessible to
undergraduate mathematics major through his department's Undergraduate Research
Program. This is an active program in undergraduate research in mathematics
which has been in existence since the spring semester of 1995. (see the web site
at http://www.math.vt.edu/UR_brochure/URbrochure.html) This IGMS project is
jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary A ctivities (OMA) and
the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).