* 9720684
* Economic and Environmental Risk Perceptions in Transitional Societies: Survey Research
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Krassimira Paskaleva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2002
* USD 233,425.00

The severity of environmental and economic problems in Eastern Europe following
the fall of communism in 1989 provides a useful laboratory for examining the
relationship between perceptions of environmental risks and economic
opportunities. Environmental activism appeared to be a driving force behind
economic and political change in Eastern Europe, yet in the mid-1990s
environmentalism appeared to have lost considerable political momentum,
suggesting that the relationships among environmentalism, economic factors, and
political change are more complex than previously thought. This study proposes
that the relationship between risk perception and environmental policy is
influenced by perceptions of the nature of the environmental problem(s) and
economic factors, and by the political and policy context. These influences on
risk perception and environmental policy in both developed and transitional
societies are poorly understood. In this study, a detailed survey of risk
perceptions in a heavily stressed region of Bulgaria -- the Burgas area, which
has suffered considerable environmental damage from the Neftochim petrochemical
plant, as well as from heavy pesticide and fertilizer use in the area -- will be
used to test a model in which perceptions of riskiness and intentions to act to
reduce a risk are the result of two attributes of the risk: (1) perceptions of
exposure to the risk, and (2) perceptions of costs and benefits to individuals
and to society from the hazard; these attributes are moderated by (a) knowledge
and beliefs about the hazard underlying the risk (i.e., mental models), (b)
beliefs about the ability of individuals or of groups or organizations to reduce
or increase the risk, and (c) uncertainty about the risk. Bulgaria is a prime
example of countries in which the tradeoffs between the economy and the
environment are highly salient. And while specifics of attitudes are likely to
differ from, for example, those found in the U.S., the general structure of risk
attitudes has been found to be similar to that in other countries. As
illustrated by the scope of current U.S. and international environmental aid to
Eastern Europe, the global community does not want developing countries to
neglect the environment in their pursuit of economic growth. This project will
contribute to our ability to accomplish this. In short, this project will
investigate the interplay of environmental concerns, economic factors, and
attitudes about politics and legal protections in order to improve our
understanding of citizens' concerns, and to enhance our ability to balance
environmental considerations with other objectives. S u m m a r y I n f o r m a
t i o n ( ++++++++++++ 8 Û ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ + _ Ûª▓ ÑOh ª'
+'ª▒0 Ý + Õ $ H l + ¢ ╗ D h + R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT