* 9721441
* Unitary Representations of Reductive Groups
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1998,07/31/2004
* David Vogan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 616,149.00

Abstract of "Unitary representations of reductive groups." The philosophy of
coadjoint orbits of Kirillov and Kostant predicts that most irreducible unitary
representations of reductive Lie groups should arise by (parabolic or
cohomological) induction from the (still undefined) unipotent representations.
Each reductive group should have just finitely many unipotent representations,
and these should be related to the (finitely many) nilpotent orbits of the
coadjoint representation. This proposal has two parts. The first (partly joint
with Susana Salamanca-Riba) concerns a precise version of the Kirillov-Kostant
prediction. The goal is to characterize nicely a small set of unitary
representations with the property that every unitary representation can be
obtained from it by induction. (The set will include all unipotent
representations, and also various complementary series.) The second (partly
joint with William Graham) concerns an idea for constructing unipotent
representations. More than fifty years ago, I. M. Gelfand set forth a program of
abstract harmonic analysis, a very general way to study mathematical problems
with symmetry. Such problems appear in physics, and in almost every part of
mathematics. One of the most fundamental examples arises in connection with
musical sounds. In that case the symmetry is passage through time: any two times
are indistinguishable in terms of what kinds of sounds can appear. Gelfand's
harmonic analysis amounts to decomposing a sound into the "pure tones" produced
by a tuning fork (which change in an extremely simple way with the passage of
time). Gelfand showed that a similar analysis was possible in the presence of
more complicated symmetry. The role of the pure tones is played by "irreducible
unitary representations." This project continues work done by many people on
irreducible unitary representations. The central idea is this. The formal
definition of an irreducible unitary representation involves linear a lgebra and
Euclidean geometry, in the form of what are called Hilbert spaces and unitary
operators. These are exactly the objects needed to formulate quantum mechanics.
In physics, quantum mechanical systems arise from Newtonian ones by an
(imperfectly understood) process known as quantization. An idea going back to
Kirillov and Kostant in the 1960s is that irreducible unitary representations
should also arise by "quantization" of some simple "Newtonian" analogues. These
Newtonian analogues are fairly well understood, but the problem of quantizing
them is difficult. On the other hand, similar quantization problems appear in
many parts of mathematics and physics, so there is no shortage of examples to
consider and ideas to try.