* 9721378
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Civil Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2004
* John Stormont, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 04/30/2004
* USD 359,046.00

Proposal No.: 9721378 PI: Stormont University: U of New Mexico ABSTRACT Eight
undergraduate students from the Rocky Mountain and Southwest Regions of the
United States will participate in a nine-week, comprehensive research experience
at the University of New Mexico during the summer of 1998. In the summer of
1998, in accordance with his/her interests, each student will participate as a
team member in one of the following projects: 1) conduct nondestructive
evaluation of structures; 2) investigate new waste containment technologies
using geosynthetic materials; 3) perform research in the area of construction
management,, 4) construct small scale models of hydraulic structures and test
these models in an open channel flow facility; 5) use an Environmental Scanning
Electron Microscope to investigate degradation of structures; 6) use Geographic
Information Systems to model contaminant transport; 7) develop an object-
oriented computational mechanics toolkit; and 8) development of practical new
techniques for the remediation of polluted ground water. More than half of the
students will be selected from applicants at institutions other than UNM,
especially those without active research programs. Women, minority, and
handicapped applicants, and other groups generally underrepresented in
engineering particularly will be recruited. The students will become familiar
with their projects through early contact with the research faculty. Each
student can expect to learn to work independently over the course of the summer,
while participating in a loosely knit group of graduate and undergraduate
students. He/she will also attend weekly group meetings, present a final seminar
on the research, and assist in writing a publication describing the work. The
Department of Civil Engineering at UNM was a recipient of NSF-REU site awards in
1990 through 1997. We enjoyed very productive summers all eight years, with a
total of 83 students participating in various research projects. Over the eight
ye ars we have made offers to approximately 105 students, and ultimately 83
students accepted our offers. More than two times as many qualified students are
applying for the program as are accepted, thus providing a good level of
competition which enables us to make offers to the most highly qualified
students. Approximately two thirds of our participants have been minorities
and/or women.