* 9721375
* Research Experiences in Biological Materials, Composite     Materials, and Automotive Safety
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Kenneth Kline, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 05/31/2004
* USD 436,116.00

Proposal No.: 9721375 PI: Kline University: Wayne State University ABSTRACT This
REU project is designed as a two year, continuous program to expose junior and
senior engineering students to mechanical engineering research in both a
university and an industrial setting. The overall goal is to increase the number
of students who continue on to graduate study following the completion of their
engineering degree, especially for female and minority students. Six students
each year will be accepted to the program, and recruitment efforts will be
directed at local community colleges and universities with limited research
opportunities for undergraduates as well as Wayne State. During their first
year, participating students will spend one summer (full-time) and two semesters
(10 hours/week) becoming acquainted with the research activities within either
the Bioengineering Center or the Advanced Composites Research Laboratory, or
both, of Wayne State University. They will be introduced to the techniques used
within these laboratories and will begin to develop an independent project to be
completed during their second year of participation. For the summer between
their junior and senior years, students will work in an industrial internship
conducting research in a more applied setting. These internships will be matched
with the students' overall interests and typically draw on the skills learned
during their first year of participation. During the second year of the program,
each student will work (20 hours/week) to complete an independent research
project and present the results of their research at a regional conference. All
research activities are supplemented by a program on oral and written
communication skills. In addition, during the winter semester each second year
student will develop a teaching module directed at middle and high school
students based on their research and results. These teaching modules will be
presented to secondary school students invited from the Detro it Public School
District. The students and their teachers, with coaching from the university
students, will then develop lesson plans and materials based on the lectures
which they have heard so that the material can be presented to their peers
within the Detroit Public School system. The goals of this portion of the
program are to introduce secondary school students to engineering research,
provide role models for them in the field of engineering most of the
participants in this REU program have been female or members of minority groups,
and have the participating secondary school students act as ambassadors of
science and engineering to their peers within the school district.