* 9721436
* Computational Problems in Biomedical Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Lothar Reichel, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

The design of successful numerical methods for image processing and other
biomedical applications require a thorough understanding of the underlying
problems and of the desired solutions, as well as of the instrumentation for
data collection and the computational environment. This proposal seeks support
for the PI to spend his sabbatical year, and part of the summers attached to it
at the Biomedical Engineering department at Case Western Reserve University. J.
Duerk and D. Wilson will serve as hosts to the PI during his stay. A year of
full time immersion in the biomedical environment at CWRU will give the PI an
opportunity to strengthen and broaden his image processing knowledge and to view
the field from the engineering perspective. He will also acquire significant
insight in various biomedical engineering applications whose solution is
computationally challenging. The PI's expertise on numerical methods for large-
scale computations and the recent applications to the restoration of images will
make it possible to begin interacting with faculty and students in the hosting
department from the start, thus allowing him to take advantage of all learning
opportunities. It is envisioned that this interaction will develop into a solid
and fruitful cooperation on the development of better numerical methods for
novel medical applications, e.g., interventional MRI for a new less invasive
cancer treatment. The new knowledge and skills will significantly broaden the
PI's expertise and will open new avenues for his future research. Upon returning
to his home institution, where there is neither an engineering school nor a
medical school, he will divulge his new knowledge of medical imaging and of the
engineering perspective on it by directing the work of Masters and PhD students,
designing new, interdisciplinary courses and giving a series of lectures and
seminars. Upon return to his department the PI will be able to -introduce
applications from biomedical enginee ring in graduate and undergraduate courses
on numerical analysis and scientific computing -assign computational problems
arising in biomedical engineering for Ph.D. and Masters theses, possibly in
collaboration with members of the Department for Biomedical Engineering at CWRU.
This should yield thesis topics that students would find interesting and
attractive, as well as make the students more attractive on the job market
-organize seminars on computational problems in biomedical engineering, and if
there is interest, develop courses on "Computational Problems in Biomedical
Engineering" -serve as liaison between his department and the Department of
Biomedical Engineering at CWRU. This IGMS project is jointly supported by the
MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS).