* 9721361
* Scalable Sparse Solvers
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Padma Raghavan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Charles H. Koelbel
* 02/28/2001
* USD 183,644.00

The efficient solution of large, sparse linear systems on high-performance
multiprocessors continues to be the subject of research. There is no single
method that is consistently superior across application domains and computing
platforms. For example, for linear systems associated with the numerical
solutions of elliptic partial differential equations, domain decomposition
methods provide a naturally parallel, efficient formulation. However, domain-
decomposition relies on close tie-ins to partial-differential-equation
discretization and mesh formulation. Consequently, it is not suitable as a
general-purpose "black-box" sparse solver given only the sparse matrix and no
other information. Both Krylov subspace iterative (KSP) solvers and direct
solvers can be used as "black-box" solver. But, once again, both classes of
methods have serious limitations. Direct solvers (based on some form of matrix
factorization) are not memory scalable; memory requirement grows nonlinearly
with problem size when original zeroes fill-in. KSP iterative solvers avoid the
memory problem but their convergence can be very slow or fail altogether
depending on the spectral properties of the sparse matrix. Robust, scalable
sparse solver, suitable for a variety of large-scale applications on high-
performance multiprocessors, require a spectrum of methods that range from pure
iterative to pure direct methods. This project will develop parallel,
"flexible," hybrid solvers based on KSP with matrix factorization
preconditioners. The hybrid solvers developed will combine the inherent
scalability and parallelism of KSP iterative solvers with robust preconditioners
obtained using data-structures, algorithms and graph-techniques from sparse
direct solver. The project will work on two fronts: (1) developing scalable,
hybrid solvers by extending current technology, i.e., incomplete factorization
preconditioners, and , (2) developing new improved "structurally enhanced"
matrix factor preconditioners by using a combination of structural and numerical
information.