* 9721402
* Investigations in Mixed Integer Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 118,710.00

A primary focus of this research is to develop effective computational methods
for mixed integer programs. A nonlinear interior-point based branch-and-bound
solver will be developed, emphasizing effective implementation of the nonlinear
subproblem solver within the tree search environment, and its practicality in
solving real-world instances. Parallelism will be exploited to take advantage of
concurrent computing and to enhance the solver's capability for solving these
NP-hard problems. Another focus of this research is to explore new applications
of mixed integer programming. As applications provide invaluable insight and
motivation for advancing the frontiers of an evolving discipline, the work will,
in part, focus on structures arising from practical applications. The first
problem arises from the computationally intensive area of statistical
classification, which has close connections with machine learning, neural
networks and pattern recognition. This work will build on previous work
involving a classification model formulated initially as a nonlinear MIP. The
novel aspects of the model are that it allows a level of control on
misclassification probabilities and allows entities to be classified into a
reserved judgment region. Such an approach is well-suited for applications in
which misclassification can have dire consequences (e.g., medical diagnosis).
Variations in the basic model will be explored in an attempt to uncover a
version that is both computationally tractable for large scale problems, and
effective in generating rules that yield accurate classification. A second
application concerns treatment planning optimization for brachytherapy --- a
type of radiation therapy that involves implanting radioactive sources (seeds)
in or near tumors. The optimal placement and dosage of the radioactive seeds in
brachytherapy is a challenging problem. A novel mixed integer programming model
has been developed, and the focus now lies in developing effective co
mputational strategies based on the polyhedral structure of the model. Clinical
computational tests will be performed using data from prostate cancer cases. The
resulting optimization solver will be designed, along with graphical evaluation
tools, for real-time use in the operating room.