* 9721444
* Theory of Electrons in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Lu Sham, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/2002
* USD 375,000.00

9721444 Sham This is a renewal grant to fund a broad program of theoretical
research on the electronic properties of condensed matter systems. A fundamental
digital electronic device involves two states of the system. In a quantum system
there is also the additional information of the phase difference of the wave
functions for the two states. This additional quantum property is called the
coherence. The importance of a coherent quantum device lies not just in the
addition of one more piece of information, but in the propagation of the
properties in a chain of such devices. For example, if each unit device is a
logic gate, then the chain forms a quantum computer. Coherence dynamics is much
studied in quantum optics. A logic gate using a trapped ion or an atom passing
through an optical cavity has been demonstrated to work, but a long chain of
such devices is impractical. A semiconductor heterostructure seems to be a more
practical medium for a coherent quantum device. A theory of the physical
processes which occur in the operation of a coherent semiconductor device
constitutes the first research area. The issues germane to a quantum device are
(1) addressing, (2) interaction, and (3) the various times in the process:
onset, recovery, decoherence. The problem with applying the optically excited
coherence to semiconductors is that the coherence lasts no more than a few
picoseconds, and only at low temperatures. Neither condition enhances the
prospects for a device. Ways of transferring the coherence to spin states with
much longer decoherence time will be studied. Kikkawa et al. have found that
doping of a quantum well and strong optical excitation make the optically
excited spin memory several nanoseconds long, which persists even at room
temperature. One possible explanation to be investigated is the polarization of
the electron sea (from doping) by the optically excited electrons with a common
spin direction. The Coulomb interaction effect create s a collective spin which
is then not easy to perturb. The next step is to explore what interaction
mechanism can be utilized for quantum coherence control. An electron optically
excited leaves behind a hole. It has been suggested that such electron-hole
coherence may exist in nature without laser excitation and that the collective
action of many pairs may form a strongly correlated semiconductor. The second
research area is to explore properties of such semiconductors and to look for
likely materials. Of various classes of such correlated semiconductors, the most
interesting possibility is electronic ferroelectrics. Large dielectric constants
in a few samarium compunds are an encouaging sign. The electronic ferroelectrics
would be more versatile than the conventional ferroelectrics for device purposes
and the understanding of their strong electron correlation would be a piece of
important basic physics. The third topic, related to the first one, is the
theory of electrons carrying spins from a ferromagnet to a semiconductor. This
is of relevance to the development of spin- dependent electronic devices, which
would integrate magnetic devices with electronics. %%% This is a broad
theoretical project to study the properties of semiconductor devices as
components of quantum computers and other quantum devices. The properties
necessary for new and novel states in matter will be explored and relevant
materials identified. In particular, novel semiconductors will be investigated.
***