* 9721428
* Computational Geometry, Robotics and Geographic Information Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Lewis Siegel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2000
* USD 74,999.00

This proposal requests funding for 12 months of a three-year project in which
the Principal Investigator will augment his skills in geometry by adding
expertise in computational geometry and by studying applications to geographic
information systems, robotics and astrophysics. At the same time he will create
two new graduate courses for students in mathematics, computer science and
environmental science to be offered in the Department of Mathematics at Duke.
These courses will be coordinated with other courses in Computer Science and the
Nicholas School of the Environment and will help train students to participate
in seminars and research projects of Duke's Center for Computational Geometry.
(The Principal Investigator is co-director of the center with his sponsors in
computer science.) In addition to developing these new courses, the Principal
Investigator will begin to train Ph.D. students to work on applied problems in
coordination with the center. During summer, 1998, the Principal Investigator
will work full time in the CS Department at Duke developing the first new
graduate course and studying applications to robotics. In academic year 98-99,
he will spend 50% of his time in CS working on collaborative research projects
with his co-sponsors in CS. The other 50% of his time will be in the Department
of Mathematics where he will serve as department chair and teach the first
course in the fall. Then in summer of 1999 he will work full time in CS and in
the SOE, developing the second course and broadening his knowledge to include
GIS. This work is part of a broader effort by the Department of Mathematics at
Duke to expand the training of its graduate students by focusing more on
computation and applications. This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences (DMS).