* 9721416
* Interdisciplinary Research and Education:                   Statistics/Chemical Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Wojbor Woyczynski, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/1999
* USD 79,996.00

An interdisciplinary research and education project between the Statistics
Department at the CWRU College of Arts and Sciences, and the Chemical
Engineering Department at the CWRU Case School of Engineering is being proposed.
Its principal component is Professor Woyczynski's residence in the Chemical
Engineering Department during his 1998/99 sabbatical, with Professor J. Adin
Mann playing the role of a host. This residence will be a part of, and will help
to jump start a broader collaborative effort in research and education being
developed by Professor Woyczynski on the Statistics side, and Professors Jay
Mann, John Angus and Phil Morrison on the Chemical Engineering side. Professor
Woyczynski's expected duties will include three components: (a) A joint research
program to help in the development of a virtual integrated prototyping and
synchroneous manufacturing/control of vapor/plasma deposition processes for thin
and thick films of wide band gap semiconductors, such as gallium nitride and
diamond. The proposed control design will be model-based, and the main effort
will be directed at a detailed study of the required interfacial growth models.
(b) Design of undegraduate statistics courses to fit chemical engineering needs,
including creation of interactive, Mathematica-based, chemical engineering-
oriented computer packages, to complement the about-to-be-published text
"Introductory Statistics and Random Phenomena: Uncertainty, Complexity, and
Chaotic Behavior in Engineering and Science" (joint with M. Denker, Birkhauser,
1998, 505 pp.). (c) Creation of a framework for joint recruitment, supervision,
and job placement of statistics and chemical engineering graduate and, more
generally, materials science, students; initiation of the writing process of a
graduate text on random media for that population. The PI's expectation is that
his residence at the Chemical Engineering Department will produce lasting impact
on the research and educational en vironment at CWRU and beyond, including:
-Development of new statistical and mathematical tools needed in the virtual
integrated prototyping of thin films. Without such tools the optimization of
such processes does not seem to be feasible; -Direct application of these tools
to the practical issues related to the design of plasma reactors for vapor
deposition of such films, including development of industrial-strength software
for that purpose. The latter will be done jointly with industrial software
vendors, such as ControlSoft Inc., of Cleveland, Ohio, and CFD Research Corp. of
Huntsville, AL, that collaborate with the Chemical Engineering department.
-Development and fine tuning of statistics courses well adapted to the needs of
undergraduate students majoring in materials sciences and engineering. The hope
is that this will increase the attractiveness and relevance (as measured by
enrollment) of such courses. The publication of the Uncertainty book should have
an impact on the way statistics is taught to engineering and science students
nationwide. -Creation of an interdisciplinary environment for graduate students
would attract new types of students to the program, but more importantly, would
improve the marketability of new Ph.D.'s and their flexibility in the job
market. The PI plans to apply the acquired expertise to broaden experience and
career options of the students by: - Developing and fine-tuning statistics
courses to fit the needs of chemical engineering and other materials sciences
undergraduate students. - Developing chemical engineering oriented packages and
modules for the Uncertainty book. -Writing a graduate level book on random
media. -Developing a formal framework for joint advisorship and rotation of
Ph.D. level students between the Statistics and Chemical Engineering
Departments. -To widen the employment opportunities for undergraduate students
with interdisciplinary training, special co-op programs will be pu rsued with
selected industrial companies that indicated interest in broadly educated
statistics and engineering students. This IGMS project is jointly supported by
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS).