* 9721447
* Further Investigation of the Impacts of Cold Load Pickup on Design and Operation of Electric Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 08/31/2002
* USD 192,470.00

ECS-9721447 Pahwa Restoration of power after an extended outage in a
distribution system results in load much higher than normal load due to cold
load pickup. In addition to initial transients, the load during cold load pickup
has an enduring component that can be 2 to 5 times normal load and may last for
several hours. The enduring component is mainly due to loss of diversity in the
cycling type of loads, such as air conditioners, refrigerator etc. Since
utilities would like to utilize the existing assets to the maximum extent, cold
load pickup is an important issue in design and operation of distribution
systems. The PI received funding for a project (Award Number 9311257) in 1994
from the National Science Foundation to investigate the impacts of cold load
pickup on distribution systems from both operation and from design points of
view. Techniques for determination of the optimal sequence of sections for step-
by-step restoration of distribution systems were investigated. Also, system
design to determine the optimal number of sectionalizers and the optimal size of
substation transformer needed for the system was investigated. Three journal
papers and three conference papers were published based on the research. The
research also formed partial dissertation of one Ph.D. student and full Ph.D.
dissertation of another student. This proposal is being submitted to request
funding for further investigation of the impacts of cold load pickup on
distribution systems. Specifically, the research will address 1) modification of
the transformer loading model, 2) further investigation of the optimal
restoration sequence, 3) inclusion of better models for cost of transformers and
cost of interruption in the optimization problem, 4) inclusion of voltage drop
and feeder capacity constraints in the optimization problem, and 5) issues
related to estimation of the cold load pickup model parameters. The proposed
research lays a foundation for integration of distribution automation into
design of distribution systems. So far distribution automation has mostly been
discussed from the point of view of system operation. However, as a result of
distribution automation, new methods of designing distribution systems will be
needed. The new designs should utilize automation effectively and at the same
time keep the system cost low. As the penetration of distribution automation
increases, the new design procedures will become an integral part of
distribution system design. These issues will gather more attention in the
future due to the changes that are taking place presently in the utility
business. These changes will result in the restructured utility environment
under which the distribution companies will be required to manage their assets
more efficiently and effectively. The proposed project will offer a novel
opportunity for a graduate student to pursue the Ph.D. degree and receive
training in the field of distribution systems as well as in various mathematical
and computational techniques. The results of this research also will be
extremely useful for the PI for integration into research-based courses.