* 9721424
* System Identification and Nonlinear Wave Equations for the  Modeling of Soil Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* John Trefny, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2001
* USD 40,773.00

Of importance to geotechnical and structural engineers, and for nondestructive
evaluation in general, is the ability to estimate soil properties and structural
properties, respectively, without intruding into the medium. This project
involves using time series analysis on data that has traveled through the earth
or through a structure to determine physical properties of the medium. System
identification techniques will be used to model the system. The main research
effort will be the mapping from the system identification coefficients to the
physical parameters of a more realistic physical model than has been previously
employed. A model that takes into account distributed mass on a discrete level
(not just lumped mass) and damping due to friction (not just viscous damping)
will be employed. Plane wave solutions will be considered to determine the
mapping from the SI coefficients to the physical parameters. There are
interesting mathematical questions in determining the existence of plane wave
solutions, the numerical computation of such plane wave solutions, the effects
of lattice induced anisotropy due to the discrete nature of the distributed
mass, and alternatives to the ARMA model for system identification. The PI will
work at the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University
of California, Berkeley, collaborating with Professor Steven D. Glaser.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).