* 9721452
* Seismic Retrofit of Suspension Bridges in the Central and Eastern U.S. Using Distributed Supplemental Damping
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/2002
* USD 156,993.00

Almost all of the suspension bridges in the central and eastern U.S. (CEUS) were
built long before seismic design concepts were understood and widely practiced.
These bridges carry extremely high volumes of traffic, often in densely
populated urban areas. Seismic demands on these bridges often exceed the
capacities of the nonductile members. There is a need to retrofit these brides
to ensure survival during and after seismic events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to evaluate the use of distributed supplemental
damping in the retrofit of suspension bridges in the central and eastern
portions of the United States. Supplemental damping is a type of passive control
in which damping devices are incorporated into the structural system.
Distributed damping refers to the placement of these devices evenly throughout
the structure. Preliminary investigations of the system suggest that large
reductions in response are possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program of
research shall consist of numerous activities intended to fulfill the above
mentioned research objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; O Collection and evaluation
of strong motion records typical of sites in the CEUS.&lt;br/&gt; O Re-
processing of collected records to recover long period content.&lt;br/&gt; O
Extensive analytical modeling of typical suspension bridges.&lt;br/&gt; O
Determination of most effective distribution of damping elements.&lt;br/&gt; O
Evaluation of different damper types and characteristics.&lt;br/&gt; O
Investigation into the reduction or elimination of stiffness from the stiffening
truss&lt;br/&gt; system and its side effects.&lt;br/&gt; O Constructability and
cost investigations of the proposed retrofit
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of the research could include reduction of
loss of life and economic losses following a major seismic event, improved
design of isolation systems, longer and lighter future suspension bridges, and
greater awareness of the seismic risks in the CEUS.&lt;br/&gt;