* 9722857
* Dissertation Research: Economics Behavior and Resource Use  in Amazonian Peru
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Allen Johnson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
UCLA studying the changing patterns of resource consumption and land use among
the Machiguenga Indians of the southeastern Peruvian Amazon. During the past 30
years missionaries, NGOs and government agents have sedentized and centralized
the previously semi-nomadic subsistence-focused Machiguenga into small villages
with increasing market integration. The student will draw upon theories from
experimental economics to advance our understanding of the transmission and
decision-making processes that produce socio-cultural change. Methodologically,
the student will administer laboratory style tests aimed at gathering data on
how the Indians reason and respond under various economic circumstances. This
data will be comparable to data gathered from people in fully commercialized
developed societies, such as the US. Second, through detailed ethnographic
investigation, the student will explore current patterns of resource use and
labor allocation with a focus on cultural transmission. This research is
important because it will advance our understanding of how humans make economic
decisions in diverse contexts. By systematically comparing how cultural patterns
relate to individualized decision models as opposed to differential transmission
of ideas in this relatively non-market, non-capitalist context, the project
advance our understanding of the fundamentals of human economic behavior.