* 9722889
* Protein Quality Control in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Ardythe McCracken, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 07/31/2002
* USD 695,810.00

9722889 McCracken Eukaryotic cells have an intracellular protein degradation
process that removes aberrant and unassembled proteins from the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). This ER-Associated protein Degradation pathway (ERAD) is highly
selective for specific soluble and integral membrane proteins, while the
majority or ER resident and secreted proteins are quite stable. Evidence that
the ER chaperone calnexin has a role in ERAD indicates that molecular chaperones
are required for this remarkable substrate selectivity, yet the mechanism of
chaperone action in this context is unclear. Furthermore, although previous
studies suggested that ERAD was a novel intracellular proteolytic process
involving unidentified ER- localized proteases, a recent and unexpected finding
has made it clear that the quality control of proteins in the ER includes the
export of aberrant and unassembled proteins to the cytosol for degradation. The
mechanism of retrograde protein transport across the ER membrane, and the role
of molecular chaperones in this process, are the major questions addressed by
the research proposed here. The specific aims are to: 1, determine which
molecular chaperones are required for ERAD and investigate the mechanism of
substrate selectivity and targeting; 2, verify whether the protein translocation
channel, Sec61p, known to be the route through which nascent proteins enter the
ER, is indeed also responsible for the retrograde translocation of a soluble
yeast ERAD substrate; and 3, to identify new proteins involved in ERAD through
molecular cloning of the wild-type alleles of ERAD-defective genes. These
studies will be facilitated by a cell free system that has been developed that
allows the dissection of ERAD at the molecular level, and by ERAD-defective
yeast mutants that have already been isolated. Together, these advances provide
a unique opportunity to combine biochemical and genetic approaches to elucidate
the components and the molecular mechanisms a nd regulation of ERAD. The first
two aims will be accomplished using the reconstituted in vitro assay and
chemical crosslinking to reveal direct and temporal associations between the
ERAD substrate, the molecular chaperones, and a protein component of the
translocation complex. It is anticipated that these studies will raise new
questions regarding the identity an role of yet-unidentified factors involved in
ERAD. To accomplish the third aim, the mutants will each by studied by the in
vitro assay to determine whether a given mutant strain is defective in substrate
selectivity, transport of ERAD substrate to the cytosol, targeting of substrate
to the cytosolic proteasome, or proteolysis. In addition, the wild type alleles
of the defective ERAD genes will be cloned to identify new proteins involved in
ERAD. Cells have quality-control processes in place to ensure that newly-
synthesized proteins are structurally correct so that they will function
properly. Many proteins are synthesized for either export (secretion) or use in
specialized intracellular compartments such as the lysosome; such proteins are
sequestered early in their synthesis into a subcellular compartment known as the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The quality control system within the ER which is
responsible for degradation of ER-associated aberrant proteins has been given
the acronym "ERAD." It has long been assumed that when proteins in the ER are
recognized as aberrant, the degradation of those proteins takes place within the
ER. Drs. McCracken and Brodsky, the Principal and co-Principal Investigators of
this project, have recently made the unexpected discovery that proteins
recognized as aberrant in the ER are actually translocated back into the cytosol
(possibly through the same pore in the membrane through which they were brought
in originally) and degraded via proteolytic machinery in the cytosol known as
proteasomes. The combined biochemical and molecular genetic approach proposed in
t his project will lead to an understanding of how this process actually works.
***