* 9722828
* Aggressive Chemical Mimicry of Prey Pheromones
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Kenneth Haynes, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 06/30/2002
* USD 158,500.00

9722828 Aggressive Chemical Mimicry of Prey Pheromones Evolutionary
specialization of a predator on a few prey species has potential advantages and
disadvantages. Such a predator can evolve to become highly efficient at finding,
handling, and utilizing its prey, but the predator becomes dependent on
availability of these particular prey, which could be costly in years of prey
scarcity. The bolas spider Mastophora hutchinsoni is an extremely specialized
predator. The adult female emits chemical attractants that mimic the sex
pheromones of its moth prey, a form of aggressive chemical mimicry. The spider
exploits the inherent mate-finding behavior of its victims, which are male
moths. When prey approach the spider, it strikes them with a sticky ball at the
end of a short thread. This capture device, called a bolas, represents a highly
reduced web that the spider swings with one of its forelegs. Two moth species,
one active early at night and the other late at night, account for more than 90%
of this predator's prey; only two other moth species are ever captured. To
attract mates, female moths of the two principal prey species release blends of
chemical compounds that do not overlap in their components. The spider could
produce a master blend of all these components, but preliminary results indicate
this would make the attractant much less efficient in luring one of the spider's
two principal prey species. If the spider could adjust its attractant blend to
predictable and unpredictable variation in prey abundance, it would be a much
more efficient predator and could minimize a major disadvantage of prey
specialization. In this research, we propose to use a combination of chemical,
electrophysiological, and behavioral approaches to determine if this bolas
spider shows flexibility in its behavior or mimetic signal to improve its
hunting effectiveness. Specific questions to be addressed include the following:
(1) Does the spider's emitted signal change over the cou rse of a night to
correspond with the predictably different diel patterns of sexual activity of
its principal prey species? (2) Does the emitted signal vary seasonally to
correspond with predictable changes in abundance of its prey species? (3) Do
hunting tactics and the emitted signal vary plastically with unpredictable prey
availability? Studies of this system will lead to an understanding of tradeoffs
involved in the evolution of exploitaiton of chemical communication and the role
of behavioral plasticity in minimizing the costs of specialization.