* 9722356
* Career:  Molecular Mechanisms for Nonrandom Distribution of Mutations Resulting from DNA Damage
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Linda Bloom, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/2000
* USD 284,214.00

9722356 Bloom The goal of this CAREER plan is to establish a competitive
research program while at the same time creating a stimulating learning
environment for students in both the research lab and the classroom. Research is
aimed at defining the role that local DNA sequence context plays in the
efficiency of repair of damaged DNA bases and in the frequency of mutations
resulting from unrepaired damage. The long term objective is to elucidate
molecular mechanisms governing the formation of mutations in DNA which influence
protein-DNA interactions. The premise is based on the nonrandom distribution of
mutations throughout a genome, which may be explained by differences in local
DNA structure and stability. Local DNA sequence may determine the distribution
of mutations in a genome by affecting the efficiency of the DNA-repair enzymes
at specific sites. The efficiency of excision of the damaged base,
ethenoadenine, by human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase (AAG) is examined by a
novel fluorescence-based assay, measuring the kinetics of base excision of
ethenoadenine by AAG in real time. Escherichia coli uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG)
which has a narrow substrate specificity is included for comparison. The
influence of local DNA sequence context on mutations due to DNA synthesis errors
at template ethenoadenine sites by DNA polymerase III (pol III) and by DNA
polymerase delta (pol delta), replicative polymerases of E. coli and eukaryotes,
respectively, are studied in order to test whether ethenoadenine may have
different miscoding potentials. The educational activities center around
integrating research, learning and effective teaching. The overall theme is to
use research and discovery as tools to stimulate learning and reinforce concepts
taught in the classroom. This is done by including undergraduate and graduate
students in accomplishing research objectives and by revising an advanced
undergraduate biochemistry lab curriculum to incorporate a more "research-like"
approach that facilita tes discovery based learning. Additional participation is
also attempted in two multidisciplinary graduate research training programs,
which are designed to provide students with broad educational scopes and to
encourage them to go beyond traditional boundaries of a given discipline in
their approach to research problems and goals. This type of training is
essential for preparing students for a wide range of career opportunities and
changing job markets. %%% The goal of this career plan is to establish a
competitive research program while integrating classroom teaching and laboratory
research into a stimulating learning environment. Research activities are aimed
at defining the role of DNA structure in the formation of mutations, since such
events have been found to occur at different frequencies at different genomic
sites. Mutations at some sites may be beneficial by increasing genetic diversity
while at other sites may adversely affect the survival of an organism. Different
DNA sequences and structures exert different masking effects for enzymes
(glycosylases) to recognize and repair damages. DNA replicating enzymes, the
polymerases may also function inaccurately at certain sites. This study should
provide fundamental information on how mutations occur in the genome.
Educational activities center around using this research and discovery as tools
to stimulate learning and to reinforce concepts. This will be accomplished by
including both undergraduate and graduate students in research, and by P.I.'s
participation in the revision of an undergraduate biochemistry laboratory
curriculum that facilitates discovery based learning, and in two
multidisciplinary research training programs. ***