* 9722862
* Theory and Algorithms for X-Ray Fiber Diffraction of        Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2003
* Rick Millane, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald F. Guala
* 07/31/2003
* USD 331,265.00

The investigator and his colleagues are developing new theory and computational
algorithms to improve and extend current methods for analysis of biological
macromolecules and their assemblies by x-ray diffraction analysis. The new
algorithms specifically target problems where the molecules are, or can be,
oriented, but not crystallized. The number of such systems is large; including
nucleic acids, muscle proteins, viruses, bacteriophages and some membrane
proteins. These new algorithms will extend current methods to systems that are
currently inaccessible, and will reduce the time and cost involved in such
studies. The structural information obtained from such studies contributes to
our understanding or the structure-function relationships in such systems. The
manipulation of biological molecules and processes is fundamental to the
prevention and treatment of disease, and to the development of new, and
environmentally friendly, biomaterials. Success depends, however, on a detailed
understanding of the structure of the molecules at the atomic level, and
relationships to their behavior and properties. This project is concerned with
new computational methods for studying the atomic structures of certain
biological molecules using x-ray diffraction analysis. The approach is a
synthesis of techniques from mathematics and modern computing, to model and
analyze biological systems. The new algorithms being developed will broaden the
scope, and improve the efficiency, of such investigations.