* 9722865
* Experimental Influences on Perceptual, Communicative, and   Neural Capacities
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Andrew King, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/1999
* USD 93,789.00

9722865 West/King The aim of the proposed research is to explore the role of
different kinds of sensory experience on the ontogeny of avian communication,
with a focus on reproductive skills and underlying neuroanatomical structures.
Three objectives are outlined, using an avian model. First, the influence of
adult stimulation on juvenile learners will be examined in a series of
longitudinal studies. Measures of the effects of experience include vocal
growth, vocal imitation, use of vocal signals, visual attention, and
reproductive skills. Second, characteristics of female perception will be
studied with special emphasis on modifiability of female mating preferences. New
evidence suggests contextual influences on female preferences. Measures of
preference include female responsiveness to auditory playback and female
discrimination of potential mates. Finally, neural studies of the avian
forebrain are planned to exploit new findings on females' use of song nuclei and
males' use of a visual thalamic nucleus. The results of the proposed work should
advance knowledge of the nature of developmental organization of vocal and
perceptual learning and the integration of behavioral and neural plasticity.
Finally, the neural analyses should broaden our understanding of the role of
forebrain structures by revealing interdependencies between patterns of neural
growth and availability of relevant ecological experience.