* 9722844
* Neural Network Observers for Tracking Synchronous Machine   Parameters and Incipient Failure Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Gerald Heydt, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* James Momoh
* 09/30/2001
* USD 239,546.00

ECS-9722844 Keyhani The Ohio - State University, Arizona State University and
Arizona Public Service Company propose to undertake a collaborative research
effort in development of technology for on-line parameter identification and
incipient failure detection of synchronous generators. The procedure will be
based on the development of neural network based observers to track the machine
damper currents, parameters, field winding to-stator turns ratio in dynamic
disturbances and identify the signatures of the machine parameters, the machine
neutral current and torque angle. The impact of on-line parameter tracking and
signature identification of the generator key indicators will have significant
impact on-line incipient failure detection and identification of field winding
degradation. For example, the economic cost of a forced outage of The Arizona
Public Service company Four-Corner unit is approximately two hundred thousand
dollars a day. The on-line detection of incipient failure will facilitate the
orderly shutdown of generators for repair. It is expected that the project will
impact the original maintenance scheduling, of large synchronous generators.
Furthermore, in the next decades, the power systems of the United States will
face bottlenecks of bulk power transfer capabilities because of the virtual
absence of new transmission. The increased utilization of existing facilities to
cop with growing magnitude of bulk power transfers and third-party access will
require a closer look at system stability requirements. The tracking of the
machine parameters will facilitate more accurate stability studies. Therefore,
the economic impact of the proposed research is quite significant in permitting
operation of power systems much closer to the stability limit by increasing the
transfer capabilities and postponing the need for new construction