* 9722732
* Bridging Arithmatic and Algebra:  Exploring How Children    Understand Changes on Equal Amounts
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Analucia Schliemann, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/1999
* USD 97,672.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Bridging Arithmetic to Algebra: Exploring how children
understand equal changes to equal amounts When, after years of arithmetic
problem solving, students are introduced to algebra, the meaning of equivalence,
operations, and equations undergoes a paradigm shift. Instead of one-way
transformations to find an answer, mathematical operations are meant to describe
logical relations among elements (quantities or variables). Given the gulf
between arithmetic and algebra, it is no surprise that students have enmrmous
difficulties in algebraic problem solving. Such difficulties seem to justify
that instruction on algebra should only start when children are about 12 years
old. Only then are they required to leave aside the direct arithmetical path and
to focus, instead, on the extraction and representation of relevant mathematical
relations. The contrast between children's difficulties with algebra in high
school and some successful attempts to teach algebra at earlier grades suggest
that it is time to consider deep changes in the elementary mathematics
curriculum including the possibility of having children discussing,
understanding, and dealing with algebraic concepts and relations much earlier
than usual. But such changes demand careful analysis of children's understanding
about the logico- mathematical relations implicit in algebraic rules, of their
own ways of approaching and representing algebra problems in different contexts,
and of the most adequate instructional models for initiating algebra
instruction. This project is a preliminary investigation of seven to eleven
year-old children's understanding of basic relations involved in dealing with
equations in different contexts. A total of 120 upper middle-class 7 to 11 year-
old Brazilian children participated in the study. Each child individually
participated in two of a total of four tasks, each one containing 16 different
items. Each task referred to one of the four following contexts: (a) equivalence
between weights on a two-pan balance scale, (b) equivalence between quantities
of discrete concrete objects, (c) equivalence between quantities expressed in
verbal problems, and (d) equivalence between the two sides of written equations.
For each item an equality was established and the child was asked whether or not
the equality would remain if similar or dissimilar transformations were to take
place on each of the two compared amounts. They were also asked to justifty
their answers and to use whatever tools and representations they judged
necessary to solve the problems. The analysis of data already collected will
provide a starting point for a future analysis of how American children from
different backgrounds understand and deal with similar problems. With this study
we hope raise new questions and to frame new hypotheses for research concerning
the development of algebra activities in the elementary mathematics curriculum.
NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)