* 9722060
* Quantum and Topological Gravities, Folding Problems         and Matrix Models
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Philippe DiFrancesco, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Winston Roberts
* 07/31/2000
* USD 90,000.00

The PI's main research interests lie at the (less and less clearly defined)
border between mathematics and theoretical physics. Physics provides an ever-
evolving source of inspiration and intuition for the formulation of mathematical
problems. The two subjects currently pursued are both inspired by surface
physics, namely the description of the behavior of two-dimensional objects, such
as membranes, or interfaces between different media, with possible applications
to biology (membrane in a solvent, protein folding). Remarkably, new
mathematical tools needed to develop our understanding of surface physics have
emerged in the very different context of string theory, which aims at a unified
description of the matter and space interactions in the universe. Surfaces
emerge in this framework as the trajectories of loop-like particles (strings).
The research is principally concerned with (1) The physical and mathematical
aspects of discrete two- dimensional quantum gravity, a simple model of string
theory, in which discretized surfaces resembling fishing nets are generated by a
powerful tool: the random matrix models and (2) The various combinatorial and
algebraic problems linked to the concept of folding in surface and polymer
physics. In particular, the PI will investigate possible crumpling or folding
transitions of surfaces when physical parameters such as temperature or bending
rigidity are varied.