* 9722886
* CONFERENCE:  Mechanisms of Secretion, Woods Hole, MA,       September 4-6, 1997
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Thomas Martin, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 07/31/1998
* USD 11,610.00

IBN-9722886 Mechanisms of Secretion (Conference) PI: Thomas F.J. Martin,
University of Wisconsin co-PI: George J. Augustine, Duke University This
application seeks funding for an international research conference on Mechanisms
of Secretion. Function in the nervous and endocrine systems requires chemical
communication between cells. Neurotransmitters bridge the gap between nerve
cells whereas protein hormones delivered to the bloodstream trigger
physiological processes in various tissues. Both types of chemical signals are
released from cells by a similar process that involves the fusion of secretory
vesicles with the plasma membrane. Understanding this process of membrane fusion
and its regulation is the focus of much active research. Dramatic progress over
the last 3-4 years led to the identification of several proteins that are
required for neurotransmitter release. The discovery that very similar proteins
are involved in many other intracellular membrane fusion events indicates that
common principles govern membrane fusion. The goal of this conference is to
bring together scientists at the cutting edge of this research for a lively and
timely exchange of ideas on the recently- emergent general principles in
membrane fusion, and to promote a translation of insights from biochemical,
molecular and genetic research to understanding physiological mechanisms. The
conference is sponsored by the Society for General Physiologists and will be
held September 4-6, 1997 in Woods Hole, MA at the Marine Biological Laboratory
as a small meeting (~250 participants). In addition to 20 speakers in 5 sessions
plus a keynote speaker, posters will be presented at 3 sessions, and 8 short
talks will be programmed in 2 New Ideas sessions. Accomodation awards to 10 grad
students/postdocs will encourage participation by young scientists. Sessions
will cover: second messenger regulation of secretion, proteins involved in
secretion, vesicle pools in secretion, membrane fusion mechanisms and
endocytosis. Dr. James Rothman will deliver the keynote address on "Mechanisms
and machinery of intracellular protein transport."