* 9722735
* U.S.-Ecuador Cooperative Research;  Cooperative Polyandry   in the Galapagos Hawk-Population Studies of Genetics and    Ecology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Patricia Parker, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2001
* USD 41,019.00

9722735 Faaborg This Americas Program award will fund a 3-year cooperative
research project between Dr. John Faaborg, University of Missouri, Columbia, and
Dr. Tjitte de Vries, Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador. They will
conduct population studies on genetics and ecology on cooperative polyandry in
Galapagos hawks. Cooperative polyandry, where each female has several mates, but
each male has only one, is a useful system for studying the evolution of
sociality in vertebrates, and evaluating the conflict of interests between the
sexes. "Cooperative" polyandry of this type is rare, having been described in
only seven species besides Galapagos hawks. In order to understand the evolution
of this form of cooperative breeding, there is need to know the degree of
relatedness of individuals breeding in groups, the actual patterns of parentage
among polyandrous males, and the lifetime reproductive success of males and
females living in groups and those living in pairs. The investigators propose to
monitor more than 100 social groups per year to measure reproductive success as
a function of group size and compare distribution of reproductive success in
males and females. They will do survey work in four islands populations in order
to have both high and low habitat diversity. The proposed work most likely will
generate some interesting and provocative ideas about how ecological forces may
affect mating systems. ***