* 9722285
*  Genetic Analysis of Crassulacean Acid Metabolism in Mesembryanthemum crystallinum
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* John Cushman, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2001
* USD 364,750.00

9722285 Cushman Most higher plants assimilate atmospheric CO2 through the C3
pathway of photosynthesis using ribulose bis-phosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(RUBISCO). However, when environmental-stress conditions reduce the availability
of CO2, increased photorespiration reduces the efficiency of C3 photosynthesis.
To overcome the wasteful process of photorespiration, about 10% of higher-plant
species have evolved two alternative strategies for photosynthetic CO2
assimilation. These alternative carbon-fixation pathways, C4 photosynthesis and
Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), employ a CO2 pump to concentrate CO2 within
plant tissues near RUBISCO. This process improves the competitiveness of C4 and
CAM plants under environmental-stress conditions such as high light intensity,
high temperatures, or low water availability. Unlike C4 plants, however, CAM
plants assimilate CO2 mostly at night, limiting daytime water loss through
transpiration and greatly improving water-use efficiency. The goal of this
research is to identify and characterize key structural and regulatory
components of the CAM pathway by isolating mutants defective in CAM using the
common ice plant (Mesembryanthemum crystallinum) as a model system. To
complement this approach, a non-redundant database of expressed-sequence tags
(ESTs) will be established by sequencing randomly selected complementary DNA
(cDNA) copies of expressed genes. This EST collection will provide a rich source
of sequence information for identifying novel genes or gene-family members and
expression patterns peculiar to CAM plants. The mutant and EST collections
generated by this research will provide an indispensable resource for
researchers worldwide investigating CAM plants. The availability of large
amounts of nucleotide-sequence information from EST and genome-sequencing
projects in a variety of model organisms is rapidly changing the way in which
biological research is conducted and has generated a pressing need to educate
scientists in the analysis and study of biological information (Bioinformatics).
To exploit biological-information resources effectively, an integrated
educational and research program will focus on instructional and training
opportunities in Bioinformatics. A semester-long Bioinformatics course, an
abbreviated "hands-on" Bioinformatics workshop, and a series of instructional
modules (with computer lab) will be developed where graduate, undergraduate, and
high-school students will learn how to use informatic tools and resources
through active participation in the M. crystallinum EST-sequencing effort. In
this way, the research on the genetic basis of CAM will be integrated with a
series of unique instructional opportunities that combine research-based
experiences with cutting-edge training in Bioinformatics.