* 9722189
* CAREER: Research and Education in Gravitational Wave        Astronomy and Gravitation Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Eanna Flanagan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Theoretical research in several different areas of gravitational wave astronomy,
and also in areas of gravitation physics and relativistic astrophysics will be
studied. The principal topics are: (A) theoretical simulations of the accuracy
with which a network of gravitational wave detectors will be able to measure the
distances to and masses of coalescing binary neutron stars, the most promising
expected type of source; (B) investigations of how this accuracy will be
improved by the construction, now being considered, of additional detector
systems in Japan and/or Australia; (C) determining the required level of
accuracy for theoretical template waveforms that will be used to analyze the
experimental data; (D) developing new calculational tools that will be useful in
future calculations of low frequency waves from supermassive black holes; (E)
exploring quantitatively the prospects for measuring gravitational waves from
distant black hole --- black hole mergers, both by ground based detectors and
possible future space-based detectors; (F) an exploration of the effects of
`anti-gravity` that occur when quantum fields are coupled to classical gravity,
motivated by the expectation that this phenomenon will yield insight into the
nature of quantum gravity; (G) theoretical explorations of the structure of a
black hole's interior which probe deeply into the theoretical structure of
general relativity and bring out its poorly-understood nonlinear features. In
addition a comprehensive introductory course will be developed and taught at
Cornell to graduate students and interested faculty, covering the various
aspects of gravitational wave astronomy: the physical properties of the waves as
predicted by general relativity, the experimental technology to detect them, the
catalogue of anticipated sources, and the information we hope to extract from
the waves about the nature of gravity, about cosmology, and about the various
sources. The lecture notes will be made available on the world wide web so as to
be accessible to a wide audience beyond Cornell. These web pages will be
periodically updated to bring them up to date with the latest theoretical and
experimental research in the field, thus tying the educational facility closely
to current research. In summary, it is hoped that the course will contribute to
curriculum development, foster interdisciplinary interactions, and disseminate
specialized knowledge to a wide audience.