* 9722863
* MEF2 Function in Neuronal Cell Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Robert Schulz, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 11/30/2001
* USD 290,662.00

9722863 SCHULZ Proteins that act as transcription factors, which control the
expression of one or more other genes, are very important in determining how
different cell types take on different characteristics during development. One
small family of transcription factors, called the myocyte enhancer factor-2
(MEF2) family, is expressed in muscle cells and is highly conserved at the
genetic level across a wide range of animals. The analysis of MEF2 function has
been greatly facilitated by the study of D-mef2, the single mef2 gene of the
laboratory fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster. Embryos lacking a normal D-mef2
gene fail to form normal muscles. The gene controls differentiation in all
muscle cell types, and its absence results in lethality during embryonic
development. Mef2 genes are also expressed in non-muscle cell types. For
example, the mouse and human versions of this genes are expressed in neurons of
the brain. Throughout development, mef2 gene expression appears to follow
gradients of neuronal maturation and the initiation of neuronal cell
differentiation. D-mef2 is also expressed in the Drosophila central nervous
system in Kenyon cells, which are the intrinsic neurons of the mushroom bodies
of the brain. Very little is known about the development of these neural
centers, which are required for associative learning in flies. Given the
mushroom body-enriched expression of D-mef2, and the known function of the gene
in muscle differentiation, it is likely that this transcription factor also
functions in this neuronal cell. Because of the expected difficulties in
elucidating the functions of the vertebrate genes in the mouse or human brains,
studies conducted using the Drosophila model system should yield the first
insights into the functions of a MEF2 family member in complex neural
developmental processes. The overall goal of this project is to build upon
previous genetic and molecular discoveries to investigate the function of the
D-mef2 gene in neurons. The specific aims a re to characterize the regulatory
factors controlling D-mef2 expression in Kenyon neurons and to determine the
function of D-mef2 in these cells. Since the genetic programs controlling brain
development in flies and higher eukaryotes are believed to be highly conserved,
these experiments should be important to the understanding of neuron
differentiation during central nervous system development.