* 9722822
* RUI: An Investigation of the Mechanism Producing Rhythmic   Beating in Cilia and Flagella
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Charles Lindemann, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 10/31/2001
* USD 460,000.00

9722822 Lindemann The aim of this project is to understand the mechanism that is
responsible for the rhythmic beating of eukaryotic cilia and flagella. The
working hypothesis was developed in the previous grant period. It is called the
Geometric Clutch model of axonemic functioning and will provide the framework
for the proposed experimental investigations. This hypothesis contends that
forces (strains) produced within the axoneme, transverse to the axis of the
outer doublets (termed t-forces), are responsible for squeezing the doublets
together or pulling them apart and thereby acting to engage and disengage the
dynein motor proteins. When dynein motors are engaged, they generate motive
force between the doublets. Stretched elastic elements between the doublets also
contribute force to the doublets. The accumulated strain on each doublet
multiplied by the local curvature of the flagellum is the major determinant of
the t- force. This concept has been formulated into a computer model and the
model has been remarkably successful at simulating the movements of living cilia
and flagella. In the current proposal, key predictions of the Geometric Clutch
hypothesis will be compared to the behavior of real cilia and flagella in
controlled experiments. Tests are planned using bull sperm, mouse sperm,
respiratory cilia from newt lung and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Dr. Lindemann
has developed versions of the computer model which mimic the behavior of
Chlamydomonas and newt lung cilia. A special version has also been produced
which incorporates the unique feature of a bull sperm flagellum and can produce
good simulations of bull sperm beating. Experimental tests will assess the
validity of the t-force concept and the role it plays in the beat cycle. The
role of calcium ions in biasing the flagellar beat will be examined, and also
the roles of cAMP and ADP in regulating switching and power output of the beat
cycle. Then, specific modification of the Geometri c Clutch working mechanism
will be determined that must be implemented to produced calcium ion-, cAMP- and
ADP- like changes in the beat of the computer simulated flagella. Structural
mutants of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii will be used to explore the role of
specific structures in the functioning of the beat cycle. Outer arm deficient
mutants will be used to better define the role of the inner and outer row dynein
arms. Spoke deficient mutants will be used to explore the role of the spokes and
dynein regulatory complex in dynein bridge switching. Information gained from
experiments will be used to improve the theoretical model and refine the
concepts of the Geometric Clutch hypothesis. The ability of a cell to move
relative to its environment is a critical attribute for essentially all living
species. The specialized eukaryotic structures known as flagella and/or cilia
endow cells with such motile ability in aqueous environments. These long slender
structures, fully enclosed by the cell membrane, extend from the cell surface
and move back and forth with a characteristic and cell type-specific wave form
and beat frequency, resulting in the movement of the surrounding fluid relative
to the cell. If the cells are unencumbered, as in the case of protozoa or sperm,
the result is that the cell swims; if the cells are attached to a substratum,
the result is a sweeping of the fluid over the cell surface, as in the case of
epithelial cells that line the respiratory tract. The organelle at the core of
the flagellum that is responsible for this beating is a highly organized complex
of microtubules and motor proteins (dyneins) termed the axoneme. It is known
that flagellar beating is the result of some of the microtubules of the axoneme
sliding past the others within the confines of the membrane, and that this
sliding is catalyzed by the dyneins using the energy derived from ATP
hydrolysis. There is a large (although still incomplete) body of knowledge
available co ncerning the protein composition and arrangement within the
axoneme, as a result of electron microscopic observations, analysis of genetic
mutants, and biochemical analyses. However, exactly how all these proteins
interact in real time to result in the complex behavior of beating remains
unknown. This project represents a unique opportunity to test a well defined
theoretical construct which may explain the inner workings of the eukaryotic
flagellum. If this project is successful, the working mechanism of the
eukaryotic axoneme will be understood for the first time at a level of detail
sufficient to explain most of the behaviors seen in nature. ***