* 9722846
* Identification Problems in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2002
* Charles Manski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 11/30/2002
* USD 287,638.00

Econometricians have long found it useful to separate inferential problems into
statistical and identification components. Studies of identification seek to
characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the researcher had available
a sample of unlimited size. Studies of statistical inference seek to
characterize the generally weaker conclusions that can be drawn given a sample
of positive but finite size. Statistical and identification problems limit in
distinct ways the conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
Statistical problems are most severe when the available sample is small.
Identification problems are most severe when the researcher knows little about
the population under study and the sampling process yields only weak data on the
population. This research continues the investigator's program of work on
identification problems in the social sciences. Four projects combining
methodological research and empirical analysis are planned: Nonparametric
Regression When Outcomes and/or Regressors are Censored Whereas there is a
voluminous literature on regression analysis when outcomes are censored,
surprisingly little attention has been given to the inferential problems that
arise when regressors are censored. This project examines regressor censoring
from the same nonparametric perspective used earlier by the investigator to
analyze outcome censoring and other non identifying sampling processes. The
findings are used to characterize the possible implications for survey research
of item and interview nonresponse. Monotone Treatment Response The standard
formalization of the analysis of treatment effects assumes that each member of a
population of interest receives one of a set of mutually exclusive and
exhaustive treatments, and that the outcome under the realized treatment is
observable. Outcomes under the non realized treatments are necessarily
unobservable; hence these outcomes are censored. In earlier work, the
investigator has studied the nonparametric identification of treatment effects
in the classical case where there are two treatments and the objective is to
compare distributions of outcomes under these treatments. This project examines
the identifiability of treatment effects when treatments are ordered and
response functions are known to be monotone or concave monotone. The findings
have application to the econometric analysis of market demand and of production.
Empirical Analysis of Sentencing and Recidivism The question of how judges
should sentence convicted juvenile offenders has long concerned policy makers
and criminologists. The investigator is using nonparametric methods to compare
the effects on recidivism of the two main sentencing options available to
judges: confinement in residential treatment facilities and diversion to
nonresidential treatment. This project seeks to illuminate the basic ideas of
nonparametric analysis of treatment effects through a serious empirical case
study, to add new methodological findings, and to contribute substantively to
the field of criminology. Analyses of the Survey of Economic Expectations The
nature of subjective expectations is a shared concern of researchers who study
human behavior. The investigator has recently designed and implemented the
Survey of Economic Expectations (SEE). SEE is an ongoing national survey
initiated in an effort to learn how Americans perceive their near term economic
prospects. Probabilistic questions are used to elicit expectations about income,
employment, health insurance coverage, and crime victimization one year into the
future. Recently completed analyses of SEE data examine respondents' income
expectations and their perceptions of economic insecurity. This project would
continue collection of SEE data at the present rate of about 1500 interviews per
year and would perform a set of special studies that should enhance the value of
the survey.