* 9722489
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Studies of the Solar Corona Using      Simultaneous X-ray and Radio Observations
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Mukul Kundu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1998
* USD 15,800.00

9722489 Kundu This award provides funds to support a three-month research visit
by Dr. Mukul R. Kundu, Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland at
College Park, for collaboration with Dr. Takashi Sakurai, Narikura Solar
Observatory, National Astronomical Observatory, Mitaka, Japan. Their research is
concerned with studies of the sun's corona and solar flares using simultaneously
obtained X-ray and radio data from the Japanese Space mission Yohkoh and ground
based radio telescopes, especially, the Nobeyama Radioheliograph in Japan. Three
specific projects included in this research, covering a broad range of coronal
phenomena are (1) a study of radio emission associated with coronal X-ray jets
discovered by SXT (soft-X-ray brightenings which originate in the low corona and
then propagate through the corona along magnetic loops), using both low-
frequency and highfrequency radio data; and (2) a study of the evolution of
active regions in terms of flare productivity; and (3) a survey of the Xray
emission above sunspot umbrae, in order to determine the nature of the corona
directly above sunspots; this will be combined with radio data on the magnetic
fields above the same spots. Dr. Kundu has made pioneering contributions to the
knowledge of the sun's corona using combined radio and X-ray imaging data.
Dr.Sakurai will bring his theoretical expertise to the problem of studying solar
active regions and flares from the point of view of magnetic energy storage and
trigger mechanisms. Their complementary expertise is expected be an asset to
their collaborative studies. The project will provide to the U.S. scientist
access to unique resources, not available elsewhere in the world, for study of
the sun's coronal activities. This project is supported under the Science
Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Foundation Center for Global Partnership. ***