* 9722235
* "Career" Student Modelers - A study of Technology Enhanced  Modeling Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2004
* Helen Doerr, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2004
* USD 503,539.00

Project Summary The primary goal of this research project is to investigate the
nature of the development of models by students in technology enhanced
environments in middle school and secondary school settings. Model building
occurs as students use and create symbolic, graphical, numeric, geometric and
verbal descriptions of meaningful situations and structurally similar
situations. Understanding the way learners develop and make sense of
generalizable models and their underlying structure is the crucial focus of this
research. This research project should lead to a more refined conceptualization
of the model building cycles that learners engage in and to a characterization
of those activities and strategies that support multiple stages of successful
model building. This work in grounded in socioconstructivist learning theory and
will significantly extend the extensive base of problem solving research in
mathematics education by investigating multiple cycles of modeling. The results
of this research should have significant implications for the design of tools
and simulations as generalizable and re-usable technologies. Integrated with
this research is an education plan to develop an undergraduate course that will
provide pre-service mathematics teachers with the modeling experiences they need
as learners of mathematics in order to teach from a modeling perspective. In
addition, the proposed research should lead to the development and refinement of
principles for the design of sequences of model building activities and studies
of the associated pedagogical strategies and methods of assessing student
learning in a technology enhanced modeling environment. These principles and
studies will lead in turn to the development of guidelines and materials for
teacher professional development. Careful examination of the models that
students build will provide powerful new means of assessing student learning and
insight into the effective use of technological tools. An Advisory Committee
will be form ed to provide guidance and advice throughout the project.