* 9722745
* Joint United States/Poland Workshop on Quantum Optics;      Jaszowiec, Poland; June 17-24, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,10/31/1997
* Mark Edwards, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/1997
* USD 7,000.00

INT-9722745 Edwards This Joint U.S.-Polish Workshop on "Hot Topics in Quantum
Optics" will take place in Jaszowiec, Poland, from 17-24 June 1997 under the
leadership of Dr. Mark Edwards of Georgia Southern University and Professor
Kazimierz Rzazewski of the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the Polish
Academy of Sciences. The workshop will consist of two days of informal
discussions surrounding two days of formal presentations. The conference
atmosphere will be one in which both junior and senior American and Polish
researchers will participate in lively discussions. A new feature of this
workshop will be a major focus on Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) of trapped,
cold atoms, currently a "hot" topic in quantum optics. BEC discussion topics
might include: thermodynamic properties of BEC's; cold-atom scattering; the atom
laser; finite temperature excitation and damping in BEC's; and recent
experimental results in BEC. Other topics (and possible sub-topics) include:
interaction of atoms with strong fields (atomic ionization and stabilization;
high order harmonics; half-cycle pulses); quantum chaos (microwave ionization;
modes of microwave resonators; level statistics); Rydberg atoms in time-
dependent fields (far-infrared multiphoton ionization; electron capture by
elliptic Rydberg atoms; state-sensitive detection of Rydberg atoms); and quantum
control (wavepacket control; scattering from Stark wavepackets; bound-state
interferometry). This workshop should result in many new collaborative research
efforts in quantum optics between U.S. and Polish researchers. It fulfills the
program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland
to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
benefit. *** ??