* 9722620
* U.S.-Czech Research on Molecular and Biochemical diversity  of Chlorobenzoate Degrading Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* William Hickey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 29,588.00

INT 9722620 Hickey This U.S-Czech research project between William Hickey of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison and Vladimir Brenner of the Czech Institute of
Microbiology, Prague, will characterize chlorobenzoate biodegradation genes
(ohb): Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain JB2 and Pseudomonas putida strain P111. The
researchers expect that this examination of a key aspect of PCB mineralization
will lead to a better understanding of the impact of PCBs on the evolution of
metabolic pathways in soil bacteria. The collaborative effort will involve
isolation and characterization of the ohb genes by genomic library
construction/screening, nucleotide sequence analysis and metabolism studies.
Recombinant PCB-mineralizing strains will be constructed by using a broad host-
range suicide delivery system to introduce the ohb genes into biphenyl degraders
isolated from PCB contaminated sites in the Czech Republic. These strains will
then be tested for efficacy in mineralizing PCBs in soil by using PCB mixtures.
Overall, results are expected to contribute insight in developing cost effective
approaches for bioremediation of PCBs, an important class of environmental
pollutants. This project in metabolic biochemistry fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the
United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??