* 9722947
* Determinants of Mating Type in Phytophthora
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2002
* USD 315,000.00

Judelson 9722947 The goal of this research is to understand the regulation and
evolution of mating systems in oomycete fungi. Using the heterothallic species
Phytophthora infestans as a model system, the basis of mating type (sexual
compatibility) will be determined by cloning the mating type locus and
determining its function. This is expected to lead to studies of other
heterothallic and homothallic species of Phytophthora, of mating type loci in
other oomyceteous genera, and of other genes involved in the mating response.
During previous studies by this laboratory DNA markers flanking the mating type
locus were isolated and used to develop a genetic model to explain the
determination of mating type; those markers are now being used to isolate the
mating type locus by chromosome walking using cosmid and bacterial artificial
chromosome libraries. In addition, the prior studies indicated that the
chromosomal region containing the mating type determinants of P. infestans
displayed several unusual genetic and physical characteristics. These included a
non-Mendelian pattern of inheritance equivalent to that observed in systems of
balanced lethal loci, and instability of the region as evidenced by its
propensity to rearrange; these phenomena will continue to be addressed in this
project. The oomycetes are an important but under-studied group of diploid lower
eukaryotes that include many economically and environmentally significant
species. These include pathogens of plants and animals, biocontrol agents of
other pathogens, and saprophytes. P. infestans is a natural first choice for
these studies due to the well-developed molecular and classical genetic
techniques available for the species. P. infestans is also a widespread and
enormously important pathogen of several food crops. Consequently, the
importance of developing expertise in the molecular manipulation of this
pathogen can not be over-stressed. Furthermore, the analysis of mating type in
P. infestans represents an opportunity to study an important aspect of its
biology. Mating systems are significant since they regulate the flow of genes
through populations; for plant pathogens such as P. infestans, such genes
include those determining pathogenicity, host preference, race specificity, and
fungicide resistance. The mating cycle is also significant since the sexual
spores (oospores) are long-lived and serve as an important source of inoculum
for outbreaks of plant disease. Much will be learned from these studies
including information about the regulation of mating type in diploids and the
evolution of an unusual chromosomal region. This research will also illuminate
fundamental aspects of oomycete biology, including those concerning gene
regulation, cellular communication, signal transduction, and development. It is
likely that mating in oomycetes is regulated by mechanisms very different from
those of ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, which lack taxonomic affinity to the
oomycetes and in which mating is controlled by different genetic and biochemical
mechanisms. In the long term, these studies may have significant practical
applications as well. If the factors which control mating can be identified, it
might be possible to control plant diseases by manipulating or exploiting
portions of the mating cycle. Studies in P. infestans will naturally lead to an
understanding and ultimately control of other oomycete plant pathogens as well.