* 9722920
* A Regulatory Cascade for Entry into Anaphase
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Stephen Wolniak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 10/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract 9722920 Wolniak Mitosis is the process that facilitates the orderly
separation and apportionment of replicated chromosomes so that each daughter
cell possesses an entire complement of the genetic material. The regulation of
mitotic progression is now known to involve a number of signal transduction
events at specific time point during the process where enzymatically induced
modifications of proteins have profound effects on the occurrence and timing of
subsequent events. The research of this grant is focused on the regulatory
states that trigger sister chromatid separation at the onset of anaphase, in
stamen hairs of the spiderwort plant, Tradescantia virginiana. Stamen hair cells
exhibit a remarkable predictable rate of progression through metaphase, and
thus, are uniquely suited for the analysis of regulatory events that affect the
timing of sister chromatid separation. Kinases and phosphatases are enzymes that
add or remove phosphate, respectively, from substrate proteins, and thereby
affect their behavior, activity and distribution. As a consequence of these
phosphoylation events, the altered substrate proteins affect the rate of mitotic
progression. By microinjecting small quantities of peptides that represent
phosphorylation domains of substrate proteins into stamen hair cells at know
time points after nuclear envelope breakdown, this laboratory found that the
regulation of progression through metaphase is under the control of a
multifaceted phosphorylation cascade. The current project expands on this
approach and findings, and utilizes the screening of a cDNA library made from
stamen hair cells to isolate cDNAs that encode bone fide protein kinases and
kinase substrates from stamen hair cells. These cDNAs will enable them to make
peptides that represent legitimate stamen hair cell gene products for
microinjections designed to determine how and when their phosphoylation affects
mitotic progression. This research will furthe r our understanding of the
biochemical mechanisms involved in mitosis. %%% This research is using the
stamen hair cells of the spiderwort plant to examine the regulatory processes
involved in cell division. The research is using recombinant DNA techniques to
determine the protein kinases, phosphatases and the proteins they modify, and
how they regulate mitosis. ***