* 9722826
* Vesicle Pool Modulation by Serotonin and Long-Term          Facilitation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Zucker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2000
* USD 405,001.00

Synapses are the points of communication between neurons. Alterations in their
strength can critically affect the operations and functions of neural circuits
in the brain. Many hormones and drugs affect synaptic strength. Sometimes they
act by altering presynaptic calcium channels through which calcium ions enter to
trigger the secretion of neurotransmitter, the substance one neuron releases in
order to communicate with another at a synapse. But often neuromodulators act
without affecting calcium channels in ways still not understood. Serotonin is a
circulating hormone in crustaceans which strongly enhances transmission at
neuromuscular synapses. Serotonin increases transmitter release without altering
presynaptic levels of calcium concentration or increasing the influx of calcium
into nerve terminals during action potentials. Just how serotonin regulates
transmitter release is not known. Long-term facilitation (LTF) is a form of
synaptic plasticity observed at crayfish neuromuscular junctions where prolonged
neural activity results in an increase in transmitter release per action
potential. It is not associated with any change in presynaptic resting calcium
level or calcium influx during action potentials, and like serotonin's action,
its effects are mediated by the presynaptic biochemical intermediate cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). It is not known what aspect of the secretory
process is altered in LTF. Transmitter is stored in vesicles and released by
their fusion with the presynaptic membrane during action potentials. Preliminary
results suggest that serotonin acts at crayfish neuromuscular junctions to
increase the supply of vesicles available for release. This preparation will be
used to test this hypothesis, and also to develop procedures that could be used
to assay other drugs that might enhance the size of the vesicle pool. It will
also be determined whether vesicle pool size is altered during (LTF). In this
project, a membrane labelin g fluorescent dye (FM1-43) will be used to label
presynaptic vesicles and determine whether serotonin and LTF increase the number
of available vesicles or the probability they are released by action potentials.
A slowly developing depression of synaptic transmission due to exhaustion of the
vesicles available for release will also be used to estimate the number of
vesicles in the releasable pool and whether their number or their probability of
release is increased by serotonin and LTF. Other experiments will test for
changes in the rate of recovery of released vesicle membrane in serotonin and
LTF, and for involvement of cytoskeletal proteins in vesicle availability and
release during serotonin action and LTF. Finally, new cAMP-sensitive indicators
will be used to measure changes in presynaptic levels of cAMP during serotonin
action and LTF.