* 9722505
* U.S.- U.K. Cooperative Research:  Molecular Modeling of     Fundamental Mechanisms Governing Protein-Surface Adsorption
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Robert Latour, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1998
* USD 22,188.00

This one-year award supports US-UK cooperative research on engineering of
biomaterials between Robert Latour of Clemson University and Larry Hench of
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. The objective of the research is to
investigate model protein- surface adsorption behavior. The investigators will
study the fundamental mechanisms governing protein adsorption at the three basic
levels of protein structure: primary (amino acid sequence), secondary
(configuration of molecular chains in helices, sheets, and loops), and tertiary
(organization of secondary structures into the actual protein structure).
Following the implantation of a biomaterial into the body, proteins rapidly
adsorb onto the implant material's surface. Biologic response and the body's
reaction to the implanted material are controlled by cellular reactions to this
adsorbed protein layer. This project will advance our understanding of the
mechanism controlling protein adsorption and adsorbed protein conformation and
contribute toward the long-range goal of designing implant surfaces for
controlled biologic response. It takes advantage of British expertise in
biomaterials and protein sequencing at Imperial College and at the
Interdisciplinary Research Center in Biomedical Materials at the University of
London.