* 9722821
* Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in      Streptococcus pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Donald Morrison, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 458,000.00

Morrison 9722821 Pneumococcal transformation is a naturally occurring, inducible
gene replacement mechanism that is relatively simple and very efficient.
Competence for genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus pneumoniae)
occurs during a brief period of highly specialized protein synthesis,
coordinated among all cells of an actively growing culture by a secreted peptide
pheromone. During a period of approximately 10-20 minutes, the competent cells
can transport DNA into the cytoplasm and replace homologous genes in the
chromosome very efficiently. Central elements of the coordination mechanism are
a secreted 17-amino-acid peptide inducer and a two-component regulatory system.
In identifying and cloning genes involved in the quorum-sensing and DNA-
processing mechanisms, and in determining their roles, this research relies on
standard genetic techniques and the efficient gene replacement provided by the
natural transformation process itself, in combination with molecular methods in
vitro, and recombinant DNA cloning using new vectors in pneumococcus and in E.
coli, to establish the molecular genetics of the system. Gene disruption
mutations are made by insertion of a drug resistance marker that is expressed
both in pneumococcus and in E. coli. Induced genes are identified by insertion
of a lacZ reporter gene. These studies identify, map, clone, and sequence genes
of this natural transformation system in two broad areas: (a) genes regulating
the induction of this pathway in response to a population density signal, and
(b) genes of the pathway that transports DNA into the cell and processes it for
genetic recombination. This study of competence regulation focusses on cell-to-
cell communications that control transformation and on genes required for
transformation. Success will offer new approaches to understanding gene
replacement as a natural process. Eventually, characterization of this system
will make it possible to reconstitute the component reactions in a pure system,
and to def ine the set of genes necessary to reconstruct the system in other
species.