* 9722765
* Molecular and Functional Investigations of Gonadotropin and Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone in Lamprey Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Stacia Sower, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 324,000.00

9722765 Condon This proposal will investigate the control of reproduction by
the brain and pituitary in an ancient fish, the lamprey. Lampreys are important
because they are members of the oldest lineage of vertebrates, the Agnathans or
jawless fish, and raise interesting questions on evolution. This laboratory has
focused on the structure and function of two brain hormones involved in the
brain- pituitary gonadal axis in lampreys. The primary structures of two brain
hormones, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH- I and GnRH-III) have been
determined in lampreys. This information combined with immunocytochemical and
physiological studies provides strong evidence for the regulatory influence of
the brain on the pituitary-gonadal axis in lampreys. In addition, lampreys are
the first vertebrates to clearly demonstrate a dual role for GnRH molecules as
neurohormones mediating the pituitary-gonadal axis. However, the investigations
on the role of GnRHs in reproductive processes have been impeded by the lack of
an identified gonadotropin that could be used in assays as a measure of
pituitary responsiveness to GnRH. The purification and identification of lamprey
pituitary gonadotropin, GTH, is critical to examine the hypothalamic- pituitary-
gonadal relations in lampreys. Thus identification of GTH and verification of
the ways in which the hypothalamus affects the pituitary gonadal axis are needed
in the lamprey, and are part of this project. The experiments will incorporate a
variety of approaches to further define the relationship of the brain and
pituitary in Agnathans. The ongoing and proposed studies are focused on
molecular, biochemical and functional studies of GnRHs in lampreys to test the
hypothesis that multiple forms of GnRH released from the brain influence the
synthesis and secretion of a gonadotropin-like molecule which regulated the
function of the gonads. Results fsrom these studies in lampreys will provide
better understanding of the molecular evolution from invertebrates to later
evolved vertebrates. %%% This research is looking to see if there is regulation
from the hypothalamus to the pituitary and the gonads in the lamprey. The
lamprey belongs to one of the oldest lineage's of vertebrates and is used to
look at the origin of various vertebrate signaling systems. This laboratory has
identified and sequenced the gonadotropin releasing hormone from the
hypothalamus of the lamprey, and now wants to identify the hormone released from
the pituitary in response to GnRH. Also the effects of environmental factors on
this hormonal pathway will be determined. This research will provide a better
understanding of molecular evolution of the reproductive system. ***