* 9722320
* CAREER:  Subcellular Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1997,09/30/2004
* Andrew Webb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 349,876.00

deseree davisdeseree davis The proposed research aims to develop instrumentation
which will improve the resolution of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) microscopy
by at least an order of magnitude to the (1- 2 m)3 range. Since mammalian cells
are typically 5-10 m in diameter, this advance would open up a whole range of
subcellular applications which are currently precluded. The intrinsic advantages
of NMR over other microscopic techniques include the ability to provide full
three- dimensional information and its non-invasive character. NMR microscopy
not only gives spatial information, but can also be used to determine chemical
composition, proton mobility, and molecular diffusion, the latter two
measurements giving information on the physical environment of the biological
molecules of interest. The major innovation in this research will be the design
and optimization of radiofrequency (RF) microcoils of diameter 100-200 m, an
order of magnitude less than has previously been used in NMR microimaging
applications. In addition to the intrinsic increase in signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) per voxel for a given voxel size, the use of small RF coils results in a
lower acquisition bandwidth and further SNR improvements over larger coils.
These RF coils will also allow the design and construction of very small
diameter, high strength magnetic field gradients, which will be necessary to
overcome diffusion and susceptibility effects and achieve the desired
resolution. An integrated assembly of RF microcoil, magnetic field gradients,
and micropositioner will be constructed. Filtered back projection (FBP)
techniques will be used to acquire the data, since these have an intrinsically
higher SNR than Fourier techniques, and require smaller gradients for a given
resolution. The first experiments using the optimized imaging system will be to
determine experimentally the maximum possible resolution by comparing competing
theories of effects of molecular diffusion, the lowest detectable number of
spins, and the effects of phenomena such as edge enhancement at non- permeable
boundaries. These have not been rigorously studied previously since the
sensitivity of the radiofrequency coils was not sufficiently high. Two major
biological applications of the research are proposed. First, high resolution
microimaging of excised spinal cord tissue. Non-invasive MRI has shown that
signal intensity changes are produced by both spinal cord damage and subsequent
regeneration. In order to understand these changes fully, it is necessary to
look at the small structures within the cord, as opposed to a large volume
averaged signal intensity from the whole cord. Second, we will use the
microscopic radiofrequency and gradient coils to determine the presently unknown
physical environment of protein-rich vesicles by two dimensional diffusion-
ordered spectroscopy, information which should help to elucidate the action of
certain neurotransmitters in mammals. The development of micro-NMR systems is an
emerging area in imaging which should be fully integrated into our academic
curriculum. Currently the applicant, together with his colleagues, have
developed a unique series of three courses in magnetic resonance within the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. The major educational thrust
will be to complete the integration of interactive computer based learning into
these three courses, combined with the preparation of a laboratory based course
on magnetic resonance systems to accompany a graduate level lecture series. The
proposed research has many aspects which are relevant to electrical engineering:
high frequency modelling and simulations, electrical circuit characterization,
and design optimization, as well as applications which are of interest to the
bioengineer. Indeed, since magnetic resonance is not usually an active area for
electrical engineers, we anticipate that significant advances will be made by
the inclusion of faculty, underg raduate and graduate researchers from this
department. More than twenty students within the department have already chosen
this area for undergraduate research and their Senior Design projects with the
applicant in the past two years.