* 9722086
* Gravity Waves and Binary Neutron Star Hydrodynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Grant Mathews, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal shall study gravity waves from binary neutron stars near
coalescence. We will solve the relativistic hydrodynamic and field equations in
three spatial dimensions employing both a conformally flat condition on the
metric and in the post-Newtonian approximation. The gravity-wave signal will be
extracted via a multipole expansion including up to l = 4 the mass moment and l
= 3 in the current moments as well as the leading slow-motion correction. By
applying both numerical schemes we expect to gain better intuitive insight into
the relevant physical processes as the stars approach and the effect of these
processes on the emergent gravity-wave signal. An important feature of the
proposed calculations is the use of a realistic neutron star equation of state
which reproduces available constraints and is amenable to a study of parameter
sensitivity. From these studies we expect to obtain illustrative profiles of the
gravity wave forms during final orbits of a neutron star- binary as a function
of mass, spin, mass asymmetry and the neutron star equation of state. We will
also study compression and shock heating effects as the stars approach
coalescence and the effects of the linear and angular momentum loss from
radiated neutrinos on the emitted gravity waves. The coupling between the
gravity wave signal and a possible electromagnetic burst can also be analyzed.