* 9722726
* U.S.-Mexico Program:  Latin American Seminar in Biological  Rhythms; Puebla, Mexico, August 31-September 3, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Gene Block, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1997
* USD 11,230.00

9722726 Block This Americas Program award will support travel and related
expenses for 9 U.S. scientists to participate in the "Latin American Seminar in
Biological Rhythms," to take place in Puebla, Mexico, August 31 to September 3,
1997. Organizers are Dr. Gene Block, University of Virginia, and Dr. Raul
Aguilar-Roblero, Universidad Autonoma de Mexico. The topic of the proposed
meeting is circadian biology, and the goals are to provide a forum for academic
interactions among U.S. and Latin American scientists interested in the field of
chronobiology; to provide graduate students from participating countries with
the opportunity to interact with established scientists; and to promote the
exchange of students. During the past two decades there has been a tremendous
growth in our understanding of biological timing. Biological clocks play a
critical role, not only in the control of behavior and physiology, but also in
the measurement of daylength, and in solar orientation and navigation by a
number of species. In humans, few processes escape the impact of timing systems.
The US participants are recognized for their contribution to the study of
biological rhythms and for their commitments to the education of graduate
students. They represent different areas of basic biological rhythms research,
ranging from the molecular level to behavior, and from unicellular organisms to
vertebrates. A report on the main conclusions of the sessions, with specific
suggestions related to joint research, the exchange of graduate students, and
development of a basic curriculum in chronobiology graduate courses, will be
submitted for publication in the Archives of Medical Research. ***