* 9722949
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Dorsal-Ventral Gastrula-  Stage Patterning in Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* David Kimelman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

Kimelman 9722949 Gastrulation is a pivotal time in the development of the
vertebrate embryo, when major aspects of cell fate are decided. Earlier views of
vertebrate development focused on the dorsal organizer (the Spemann organizer in
frogs) as the center of these patterning decision. Recent studies have shown
that the entire embryo actively participates in cell fate specification, through
the use of signals and genes expressed both within and outside of the organizer.
This proposal is focused on genes that regulate the formation of the embryo
during the gastrula stages. One of these genes is the novel Xenopus homeobox
gene, Vox, which was isolated and studied in this laboratory. Vox is expressed
in the ventral and lateral regions of the embryo, and is proposed to interact
with the Centralizing signal BMP-4 during the process of establishing the non-
organizer regions of the embryo. Using both Xenopus and zebrafish, the role of
the Vox genes in vertebrate development will be examined. Xenopus will be used
to ask specific questions about the interactions between Vox and BMP-4, whereas
zebrafish mutants that perturb early ventral development will be used to
understand where the Vox genes fit in the hierarchy that regulates non-organizer
development. To broaden the understanding of early vertebrate development, an in
situ hybridization-based genetic screen will be used to identify new mutations
that regulate early dorsal-ventral development. Finally, 7 new zebrafish
homeobox genes will be analyzed to define new regulators of early embryonic
patterning. Since many aspects of embryogenesis are conserved among all
vertebrates, including the expression of related homeobox genes, these studies
will have broad implications for understanding fundamental processes in
vertebrate development.