* 9722367
* CAREER: Connecting Phenomenological Models to First         Principles Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Reggie Brown, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Winston Roberts
* 07/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed career development plan provides the PI with the means to develop
a complete and balanced career that includes both research and education.
Traditionally, models for dynamical systems are developed from first principles
considerations which yield physical meaning to variables, parameters, and
results of the model. In contrast, phenomenological models are developed
directly from experimentally measured data. The objective of the research plan
is to reconcile these approaches by developing analytic coordinate
transformations between the two representations. The path from experimental data
to physical model is a new method for understanding nonlinear systems when the
physical model contains terms that are unknown, or not easily determined. The
proposed research will add to our understanding of all nonlinear systems
including mechanical, fluid, optical, and chemical systems. It also has
engineering applications related to control, monitoring, and maintenance of
experimental systems. The objectives of the education plan are curriculum
development, supervision, outreach, and mentoring of students. The plan is
designed to give students the educational background necessary for careers in
industry and/or academia. To achieve this I will develop and teach new cross-
disciplinary courses at the undergraduate and graduate level. In addition,
students will participate in conferences, academic research, and research
applicable to industry. The latter will grow out of a visiting scientist program
involving scientists from industry and national laboratories.