* 9722487
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program:  Advanced       Optimization Strategies for Large-Scale Chemical            Manufacturing Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Lorenz Biegler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 07/31/2001
* USD 15,616.00

9722487 Biegler This Americas Program award will fund a 2-year cooperative
research project between Dr. Lorenz T. Biegler, Carnegie Mellon University, and
Dr. J. Alberto Bandoni, Planta Piloto de Ingenieria Quimica (PLAPIQUI), Bahia
Blanca, Argentina. The primary goal is to develop a software platform for large-
scale process optimization. This will include leading edge algorithms for
nonlinear programming, and allow for the analysis and treatment of process
uncertainties in process optimization studies. These capabilities are not
available in any large scale modeling and design tools for process engineering.
The proposed research will be devoted to three topics, executed in sequence over
the next two years. They are: improvement of optimization algorithms to solve
larger problems more efficiently and reliably; assessment of the influence of
external parameters on the solution of the nonlinear program, and; assessment of
the effects of uncertainty in the design of chemical processes and related
tasks. In the last decade optimization strategies have seen widespread
application in process systems engineering and chemical manufacturing processes.
They have also led to the implementation of nonlinear programming algorithms in
commercial process simulators and the application to large detailed, process
models. However, there are still a number of current needs in algorithmic
development, formulation of large-scale optimization problems, and
implementation within efficient and reliable software, requiring further
investigation. This project will research some of these topics. ***