* 9722781
* Structure-Function Relationships in the Photoactive Yellow  Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2002
* George Atkinson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2002
* USD 320,000.00

9722781 Cusanovich Photoactive Yellow Protein (PYP) is a small soluble protein
whose three-dimensional structure has been determined to high resolution. It
appears to function as a blue light biosensor in the negative photoactic
response of halopilic photosynthetic bacteria. It has a photocycle remarkably
similar to those of bacteriorhodopsin and its homologs, although PYP is
unrelated in structure to these membrane-spanning proteins. The long-term goal
of this project is to elucidate the molecular details of the PYP photocycle as
they relate to protein and chromophore structure. To accomplish this goal three
general lines of study will be pursued: (1) Active site mutant proteins having
altered spectra and photocycle kinetics will be prepared; (2) Structurally
modified chromophores will be incorporated into wild type and mutant proteins in
place of natural ones; (3) These two approaches will be combined by engineering
an active site which will accommodate larger chromophores. The structural,
thermodynamic, kinetic, and optical properties of the native and altered
proteins will be investigated to understand the absorption and subsequent
structural changes driven by light. As a light sensory system PYP has many
properties in common with other less easily studied systems, such as
bacteriorhodopsin and the visual pigment rhodopsin found in animals. In
biological sensory systems responsive to light the protein portion of the
molecule interacts with a pigment (for example, retinol in the human visual
system) to define the wavelength or color of light which results in a biological
response. The proposed studies with PYP will determine how the protein modulates
the color of light detected. In addition, following the absorption of light by a
photoactive sensory protein a series of events are initiated which lead to the
biological response (for example the transmission of a signal to the brain in
the visual process). PYP offers the opportunity to understand the light-induced
structural changes which lead to biological recognition. Finally PYP has
properties that make it a candidate as a biomaterial for use as bioelectronic
devices (for example, a switch or computer memory) which may have applications
in the next generation of electronic devices. ***