* 9722295
* CAREER:  Fast Spectroscopic Measurements of the Unwinding   Kinetics of DNA Molecules following a 10-Nanosecond         Temperature-Jump
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Anjum Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2002
* USD 400,603.00

9722295 Ansari Dr. Ansari intends to study the DNA helix-coil transition
pathway, and identify and characterize possible intermediates along that
pathway. She intends to do this by initiating the uncoiling transition and
monitoring the kinetics of relaxation back to equilibrium. There is some
evidence that suggests that flanking sequences outside a primary interaction
site between a section of DNA and a ligand can render the DNA duplex more
unstable, resulting in an increased reactivity with the ligand. The experiments
described will ultimately contribute to our understanding of the interplay of
the structural, thermodynamic, and dynamic characteristics of DNA and the
recognition mechanisms of reacting ligands and proteins. The educational goals
will focus on integrating multidisciplinary studies into the curriculum of both
undergraduate and graduate students. The objectives are to introduce a
Biophysics program that will synthesize existing courses offered in Physics,
Chemistry and Biology Departments for an interdisciplinary degree. In addition,
a Molecular Biophysics course will be offered at the undergraduate level that
will focus on the physical chemistry of biomolecules and introduce the students
to research topics of current interest. Effort will be made to reach out to high
school students from Chicago schools, particularly from underrepresented
minorities, for summer internships.