* 9722885
* Anaerobic Gene Regulation of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1997,10/20/1998
* Michiko Nakano, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/20/1998
* USD 99,920.00

Nakano 9722885 The Gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis activates
diverse processes for its survival upon exposure to various kinds of stress.
Recent findings that B. subtilis grows anaerobically support the use of B.
subtilis as a system to study gene regulation in response to oxygen limitation.
Since B. subtilis is often used as a host in the fermentation industry, the
study of anaerobiosis in B. subtilis may provide an opportunity to improve upon
its use in fermentation as well as providing insights into regulation of gene
expression in response to a changing environment. B. subtilis grows
anaerobically by two different pathways, nitrate respiration using nitrate as an
electron acceptor and fermentation in the absence of alternative electron
acceptors. This research focuses on regulation of gene expression in cells
undergoing nitrate respiration. Fnr, a member of catabolite activator protein
(CAP) family, is known as a global anaerobic regulator in nitrate respiration.
Fnr is required for the transcription of genes whose products function in
nitrate respiration, such as narGHJl, encoding respiratory nitrate reductase,
and narK, which is involved in nitrite extrusion. The accumulated studies of
Escherichia coli demonstrate that the activity of Fnr as a transcriptional
regulator is modulated by anaerobiosis through a mechanism mediated by iron
bound to cysteine residues. B. subtilis Fnr may also be activated by this
mechanism, but transcription of the fnr gene is highly induced by oxygen
limitation unlike the case in E. coli. The anaerobic induction of fnr
transcription requires the ResD-ResE two-component signal transduction system
that also regulates aerobic respiration. Thus mutations in resD or resE impair
both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. The major goal of this research is to
determine how the ResDE system is activated and how fnr transcription is induced
by the ResDE-dependent mechanism. In order to understand the activation of the
ResDE pathway, a suppresser muta nt that bypasses the requirement of the
putative histidine kinase, ResE, in nitrate respiration will be characterized by
sequencing the wild-type and the mutant allele of the gene. The part of the fnr
promoter region that is required for anaerobic regulation will be defined by
deletion or mutational analysis using PCR. The wild-type and mutant fnr
promoters will be used to examine if ResD binds to the fnr promoter by gel
retardation assay and DNA footprinting. Searches for other possible regulators
of fnr transcription will be carried out by using transposon and plasmid
integration mutagenesis as well as by looking for ResDE-controlled promoter
activities in an SP( phage-borne library of B. subtilis promoter-lacZ fusions.