* 9722519
* Nuclear Force and Nucleon Structure Studies at Intermediate Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Bryon Anderson, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/2001
* USD 603,000.00

This three-year grant will support the research of three faculty members, two
post-doctoral fellows, and three graduate students to perform a variety of
experiments in medium-energy nuclear physics. Much of the activity of the group
is focused around measurements of the neutron polarization. These experiments
include studies of the complete set of spin observables in the reaction of
polarized protons with a variety of targets at the neutron polarization facility
at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility. These experiments use specialized
detectors developed by Kent State to measure normal and sideways polarizations
of the neutron simultaneously. Measurements with 2H 3He, and 4He targets would
study the nucleon-nucleon interaction part that is mediated by a single pion or
rho meson. Other experiments would study the isovector response of the nuclear
continuum and the isovector giant dipole resonance. The determination of the
electric form factor of the neutron would be obtained from neutron polarization
measurements using polarized electron beams at the MIT-Bates Laboratory and the
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF). Other experiments
include a search for three-body forces and a search for pion-field effects. This
grant would also support experiments with the Crystal Ball at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory AGS and the CLAS detector at Hall B at TJNAF in order to
study neutral baryon resonances and nucleon resonances, respectively.