* 9722068
* Problems in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Richard Matzner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 04/30/2001
* USD 247,776.00

A variety of general relativistic systems will be studied using computational
techniques: research will focus on critical phenomena in gravitational collapse,
black hole dynamics, and development of software infrastructure to support
general large-scale computations in numerical relativity and other fields. The
studies of black-hole critical phenomena will involve time-dependent
computations in l, 2 and 3 spatial dimensions. The 1-d calculations will be used
to investigate the nature of critical phenomena in perfect fluid and multi-
scalar collapse as well as the stability of various spherically-symmetric
critical solutions in the presence of other matter fields. A new adaptive,
axisymmetric general relativistic code (including rotation) will be constructed
and used to study critical phenomena in axisymmetry. The code will incorporate
couplings to scalar and electromagnetic fields and will be used to search for
new critical solutions, to answer important questions concerning the stability
of spherically-symmetric critical solutions to non-spherical perturbations, and
to investigate the role of angular momentum in critical collapse. Preliminary
studies of critical behaviour in a fully 3- dimensional context will also be
undertaken in collaboration with other researchers involved in the Binary Black
Hole Grand Challenge effort. Research on black hole dynamics will focus on the
issue of determining coordinate systems appropriate for the simulation of
general black hole encounters. Black hole excising techniques, in which the
computational domain is constructed to roughly coincide with those regions of
spacetime which lie outside of event horizons, will be further developed and
used in conjunction with these coordinate systems. Adaptive mesh algorithms for
use on massively parallel hardware will be implemented and rigorously tested.
This work will be initially performed in the context of the relatively simple
model of non-relativistic boson stars interacting through the Newtonian
gravitational field. Work will also continue on the construction of rapid
prototyping environments for the solution of general time-dependent finite-
difference systems, and on the development of software for the analysis and
visualization of the output from large scale computations.