* 9722872
* Dissertation Enhancement:  Rural and Agricultural           Restructuring in Aomori Prefecture, Japan:  A Study of the  Lives and Economies of Apple Growers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Gregory Veeck, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 33,550.00

9722872 Veeck This award supports a 9 month National Science Foundation
Dissertation Enhancement award for Dr. Gregory Veeck at the Hirosaki University
Department of Agricultural Economics, Hirosaki City, Japan. Dr. Veeck's student,
Ms. Ann Brucklacher, will work with Dr. Kensaku Kanda, Professor of Agricultural
Economics, on a research project entitled, "Rural and Agricultural Restructuring
in Aomori Prefecture, Japan: A Study of the Lives and Economies of Apple
Growers." The proposed research will document changes in the economies and lives
of apple growers in the Tsugaru Region of Aomori Prefecture, Japan. Using
archival studies, interviews, and surveys, the research will examine rural and
agricultural restructuring over the last century and will focus on changes in
agriculture and rural life in the past twenty years in the Chunan District, the
core district of apple growing in the Tsugaru Region. Historical research on the
region as a whole will permit a spatial reconstruction of the apple industry
from the 1870s to the present and will relate changes in the industry to
locational factors and to corresponding economic, political, and social trends.
Data gained from the study will be used as a framework for a broader
understanding of contemporary agricultural and cultural restructuring occurring
throughout rural Japan. ***