* 9722858
* Late Quaternary Paleoecology and Archeology of Alaska's     Alexander Archipelago
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* E. James Dixon, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 109,975.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. James Dixon and his collaborators
will conduct one season of archaeological excavation and associated survey at
the site of PET-408 which is located on the Prince of Wales Island on the West
Coast of Alaska. In 1996 human remains and artifacts were discovered in this
remote cave as a result of paleontological excavations. Two radiocarbon dates on
the human bone have yielded ages in excess of 9,000 years and make the skeleton
the oldest reliably dated human in Alaska or western Canada. A series of
additional dates demonstrate that the cave deposits span the past ca. 40,000
years. While clearly of great potential significance, work at PET-408 to date
has been limited and it is not known how the skeleton is associated with the
surrounding deposits. Until this is determined is unclear how much further
excavation is required. With one season of support Dr. Dixon and his
collaborators will conduct further evaluation of the site and survey surrounding
areas for other such occurrences. Human remains dating to the end of the last
Ice age are extremely rare in North America. Organic artifacts of this age are
virtually unknown from Southeast Alaska. PET-408 provides the first opportunity
to understand and describe the physical characteristics of early Northwest Coast
peoples and their material culture. It will also help to trace the path of the
original inhabitants from Asia into the New World. Two alternative hypotheses
have been proposed. Many archaeologists believe that humans moved south through
central western Canada after the melting of continental glaciers. Others have
suggested that the earliest human migration may have occurred with the use of
watercraft along the southern margin of Beringia and the southward along the
Northwest Coast of North America. This may have enabled humans to enter southern
areas of the Americas prior to melting of the continental glaciers. It is
important to address these hypotheses because each requires a different type of
cultural adaptation by the New World founding population and the nature of this
adaptation set the stage for subsequent New World cultural development. The
caves of Prince of Wales Island are ideally suited for evaluating the coastal
migration theory because they were ice free during the late Pleistocene, they
were the foci of human activity, and they contain preserved datable organic
remains.