* 9722213
* CAREER:  Genetic Investigation of Integrin Function at the  Synapse
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Kendal Broadie, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2001
* USD 339,000.00

BROADIE, KENDAL IBN - 9722213 Movement, behavior and higher brain function all
require nerve cells to transmit information to each other, and to muscle cells.
Information travels along the nerve cell in the form of an electrical impulse,
and is transmitted to another cell via a special communication link called a
synapse. The objective of this research is to understand the mechanisms of
synapse formation and function. One powerful approach is to use genetics and
molecular biology in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. Genetic mutants which
lack a particular component of the synapse are studied to determine the normal
function of that component in synaptic mechanisms. The fly neuromuscular
junction (NMJ), a synapse formed between a motor nerve cell and a muscle, is
well suited for these investigations because it is large and accessible for
physiology studies. Recently, a family of four integrin proteins were shown to
be present at the Drosophila NMJ. Integrins are proteins which span cell
membranes and are known to be important in adhesion and for relaying information
across the membrane. Integrins are always found as pairs: one alpha subunit and
one beta subunit make a functional protein. At the Drosophila NMJ, four of these
integrin subunits have intriguing expression domains; one alpha-subunit is
present in the nerve cell membrane, two alpha-subunits are present in the muscle
membrane and a single beta-subunit is present on both sides of the synaptic
cleft. Unlike other synaptic proteins, these integrins show a distinctive onset
of expression in the NMJ, following embryonic development and concurrent with
the onset of overt synaptic plasticity, the use-dependent modification of
synaptic morphology and function. Moreover, a mutation in one of these integrin
subunits causes a specific loss of short-term memory. These results suggest that
integrins are playing important, specific roles in the mature synapse, possibly
mediating a form of plasticity unde rlying higher brain functions including
memory. We propose to investigate integrin function at the synapse by
genetically modifying or removing each integrin subunit in turn and in
combination and investigating their mutant phenotypes with a combination of
functional (electrophysiology) and anatomical (light microscopy, electron
microscopy) assays at the NMJ. The long-term goal is to completely characterize
the function of integrins at the synapse.