* 9722906
* The Impact of Three Dimensional Immersive Virtual           Environments on Modern Pedagogy
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1997,07/31/1997
* William Winn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 07/31/1997
* USD 39,049.00

Our research at the University of Washington's Human Interface Technology
Laboratory (HIT Lab) indicates that three dimensional immersive virtual
environments such as virtual reality may be able to help students understand
concepts and rules in complex content domains better than traditional
educational delivery methods. The main goal for this project will be develop a
research program to fully explore and test hypotheses associated with these
observations. In order to accomplish this goal we propose to host a two-day
meeting of 12 to 15 content specialists, educators, education technology
specialist and cognitive scientists in Seattle, Washington, during March 1997.
This workshop will focus on the teaching and learning of complex science
content. In this regard, we have selected global warming phoenomenon as the test
content area to analyze because of its complexity and its relevance to middle
and high school science curriculum. Expected workshop results include: 1)
recommendations on the direction of virtual reality (VR) research in education;
2) key questions and metrics to assess the goodness of immersive 3D interactive
virtual environments relative to more traditional methods; 3) determination of
the curriculum topics wherein 3D, interfaces and interactivity may have the
greatest impact on learning; 4) organization of a core group of
interdisciplinary researchers who will be available to advise and collaborate on
research projects of interest. We plan to disseminate the results of the
workshop via published reports and via a WWW site. We feel that the research
agenda that we develop will be useful to the National Science Foundation (NSF)
and other government agencies in helping to establish priorities in vestments to
deploy advanced technologies in the classroom. In addition, we anticipate that
this workshop will serve as a catalyst for the research community to develop
into the difficult issues such as the cost versus benefits of advanced virtual
interfaces versus currently available lower-cost alternatives.