* 9722907
* Characterization of the Interactions of Eukaryotic          Initiation Factors, Ribosomes, and mRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 09/30/2000
* USD 341,316.00

9722907 Goss The long term goal of this project is to understand the mechanism
of eukaryotic protein synthesis. Eukaryotes initiate translation differently in
normal cells than in virus infected cells or cells under stress conditions such
as heat shock. The overall scheme of protein synthesis has been described, but
the details and particularly the kinetics of this process remain to be
elucidated. The equilibrium and kinetics of the interaction of eukaryotic
initiation factors (eIFs) with mRNA and oligonucleotides will be examined. The
effects of eIFs on ribosome binding to several oligonucleotides and mRNA will be
determined. Direct fluorescence measurements will be used to elucidate the
interaction of initiation factors, ribosomes and mRNA or oligonucleotides. These
multiple interactions will be analyzed to determine if the binding interactions
are cooperative, anti-cooperative, or independent. Kinetic results will
determine the rate limiting steps and the probable pathway of interactions.
Quantitative data will give insight into the effect of mRNA secondary structure
on ribosome binding, the possible communication between the 5' and 3' termini of
RNA, and the possibility of internal ribosome entry in higher plant systems.
These results will aid in formulating a detailed molecular mechanism for the
assembly of the eukaryotic initiation complex. This project will elucidate the
mechanism for protein synthesis in plant systems. Regulation of protein
synthesis is important in regulation of cell growth and development as well as
in biotechnology applications. Plants provide possible hosts for production of
vaccines and other proteins of commercial interest without the contaminants that
may be present from a bacterial or other host used for gene cloning. It is
therefore important to understand the regulation of protein synthesis in plants.
These studies will determine the rate limiting steps for interactions that
determine the production of proteins. By elucidating these steps o ne can then
determine the possible intervention points to increase or decrease the rate of
the overall protein synthesis process.