* 9722544
* Japan STA Program:  Building Regional Innovation Systems:   A Comparative Study of Kanagawa and Osaka, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,11/30/1998
* Steven Collins, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 11/30/1998
* USD 10,500.00

Collins 9722544 This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Steven W. Collins at the Kanagawa
Industrial Technology Research Institute, Ebina, Japan. Dr. Collins will work
with Dr. Hikoji Wakoh, Chief Scientist, on a research project entitled "Building
Regional Innovation Systems: A Comparative Study of Kanagawa and Osaka, Japan."
The proposed research will study the role of regional science and technology
transfer policies in promoting local economic development in two Japanese
prefectures, Kanagawa and Osaka. Recently in Japan, a major goal of science and
technology policy has been to stimulate regional economies by promoting
technological innovation that uses resources found in abundance locally. Such
policies are based on a growing body of research showing that a richly endowed
science and technology infrastructure, coupled with appropriate mechanisms for
diffusing and transferring new knowledge, contributes to an entrepreneurial
business environment. Notable examples are California's Silicon Valley and North
Carolina's Research Triangle, which many local governments in Japan wish to
emulate. This study will examine two such regions in Japan, comparing activities
and policies of prefectural governments and research institutes aimed at
leveraging regional and national resources to promote sustainable development.
The results will shed light on the geography of technological innovation, as
well as provide insight into differences in regional policies across Japan.
Finally, the project will contribute to the Kanagawa Prefectural government's
goal of understanding technological innovation in the region and situating it in
the broader context of both regional and local science and technology policy
across the nation. ***