* 9722752
* Workshop:  An International Gene Nomenclature Workshop at   the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine, April 30, 1997 - May 3, 1997.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Muriel Davisson, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 03/31/1998
* USD 18,437.00

This award will partially fund a workshop to be held at The Jackson Laboratory,
Bar Harbor, Maine, on April 30 through May 3, 1997 on the topic of reconciling
existing systems of gene nomenclature. Rapid comparative, multi-species genome
mapping and the integration of genetic data derived from various model organisms
have become powerful tools in understanding the structure and function of the
human genome. These various model organism communities until now have developed
independent systems for naming genes which has resulted in an abundance of
duplicate names and various other nomenclatural inconsistencies which are
especially problematic when genes are compared among species. Accurate gene
names are essential for effective communication both in the literature and in
online database cross-linking. This workshop will serve as a forum for
discussing current nomenclature issues and for the coordination of this
information among nomenclature groups for different species. Although the mouse
and human nomenclature committees have met formally in the past, this will be
the first multi-organism genetic nomenclature workshop. It will bring together
approximately 40 scientists representing various species (vertebrates,
invertebrates, yeast, and plants), and databases (MGD, GDB, GSDB, EMBL, NCBI) to
discuss issues such as 1) developing systematic approaches to nomenclature and
symbol assignment across species, 2) improving links between databases, 3)
organizing genes into gene families and retrieving family information from
databases, 4) fostering working relationships among those involved in
nomenclature, and 5) encouraging community curation of gene family designations
across species. A summary manuscript will be prepared and submitted for
publication in the journal Genomics and for on-line access.