* 9722834
* Research on Plio-Pleistocene Hominid Activities at Kanjera, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Thomas Plummer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 25,463.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Thomas Plummer and his
collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological and associated
paleontological and geological fieldwork at the site of Kanjera which is located
on the Homa Peninsula in southwestern Kenya. Previous work at the site has
indicated the widespread presence of stone tools as well as abundant faunal
remains. Biostratigraphic dating indicates an age of 1.7 to 2.3 years and the
site thus documents the same time period as Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania as well as
a series of important Kenyan Lake Turkana sites. The research team will carry
out both excavation and geological trenching. They will examine horizontal and
vertical patterns in the distribution of archaeological materials and relate
this to lateral paleohabitat variability. Major site formation processes will be
diagnosed through analysis of fossil bone surface damage and detailed
stratigraphic observations. Faunal analysis as well as isotopic studies of
pedogenic carbonates and tooth enamel will address questions of hominid and
faunal paleoecology. Analyses of artifact raw material will be conducted to
distinguish between local and distant raw material sources to elucidate early
human ranging behavior. The depositional history of the site will be interpreted
through examination of microstratigraphy within individual excavations and in
geological trenches between them. The results will provide insight into the
behavior of early human ancestors and the environment in which they functioned.
This research is important because it documents an extremely early period in
hominid development. While extensive work has been conducted for many years both
at Olduvai Gorge and at Lake Turkana sites in northern Kenya, both of these
areas are located in the Rift Valley and because of similar geological setting,
share a number of ecological characteristics. Kanjera is not in the Rift and
faunal analysis indicates an environment which was much more open and more
characteristic of a grassland setting than either of the other two regions.
Behavioral adaptability is a basic characteristic of the human species and it is
important for paleoanthropologists to understand how far back this extends in
time. Because of the unique environmental challenge posed by Kanjera's grassland
setting the site provides an excellent opportunity to examine this issue.