* 9722444
* U.S.-Czech Paleobotanical Research on Tertiary Plant        Disjunctions of North America and Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Steven Manchester, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2001
* USD 25,159.00

INT 9722444 Manchester This U.S.-Czech research project between Steven
Manchester of the University of Florida and Zlatko Kvacek of Charles University
will examine late Eocene to early Oligocene evolution and spread of mixed
mesophytic (hardwood deciduous) forests in North America and Europe.
Specifically, the researchers intend to study the systematic relationships and
biogeographic history of key genera shared between these floras of Europe and
western North America. Coniferous and dicotyledonous species will be featured,
namely: Tetraclinis (Cupressaceae), Platanus (Platanaceae), Asterocarpinus,
Ostrya (Betulaceae), Tilia and Craigia (Tiliaceae), and Hooleya (Juglandaceae).
The three-year collaborative effort will benefit greatly from access to
important Central European botanical fossil collections that have been
historically less accessible. While results are expected to clarify the
phylogenetic relationships, they will also contribute to our knowledge of the
role of evolution in shaping modern deciduous hardwood assemblages and climatic
zonation worldwide. This paleobotanical research project fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??