* 9722625
* Studies of Electronic Excitations in Low-Dimensional Systems by Optically Detected Resource Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Bruce McCombe, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 312,700.00

9722625 McCombe This is a new project in which optically Detected Resonance
(ODR) spectroscopy, which combines the sensitivity of near IR/visible photon
detection with far IR excitation, will be used to investigate basic issues
related to many-body interactions of electrons and holes in low-dimensional
semiconductor systems. Intraband electronic excitations of very low densities of
photoexcited carriers and carrier complexes can be investigated in this way.
Specific projects include: internal states of neutral and charged excitons in
high magnetic fields; effects of excess electrons and holes on excitonic states
and the metal- insulator transition; many body effects in the integer and
fractional quantum hall effect regimes through the influence of donor impurities
on the far IR excitations; and ODR echanisms. This research will yield unique
information about excitons, effects of excess carriers on their internal states,
mechanisms of energy ransfer to the ground state recombination paths, and
insight into the any-body ground states of electrons at low temperatures and
high magnetic fields. %%% This is a new project in which a novel technique that
combines sensitive near infrared/visible detection with resonant absorption in
the far infrared region of the spectrum, Optically Detected Resonance (ODR)
spectroscopy, will be used to investigate the allowed energy states of charge
carriers in small (tens of nanometers) man-made semiconductor structures. The
unique electronic and optical properties of these structures are determined by
quantum mechanics and the interactions of the charge carriers, electrons or
holes. This research will yield unique information about and improved
understanding of the energy states of electrons and holes bound together (the
so-called exciton), the effects of excess free electrons and holes on these
states, and how e nergy absorbed in exciting the electron-hole system is
transferred back to the lowest energy states and subsequently leads to
recombination and light emission. This work will also provide insight into the
interesting many-electron states that exist at low temperature and in high
magnetic field, the Quantum Hall and Fractional Quantum Hall states. ***