* 9722774
* CAA: Chemical Synthesis of Affinity Tagged Flavonols
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Loverine Taylor, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 52,437.00

9722774 Taylor Using mutants that are unable to synthesize flavonols preliminary
research has established an essential role of flavanols in reproduction.
Although mutant, flavanol-deficient maize and petunia pollen is unable to
germinate or produce a functional pollen tube, the defect can be corrected by
the exogenous application of low concentrations of kaempferol, a flavonol
aglycone to an in vitro suspension of pollen. This results in a rapid (2-5 min)
pollen tube outgrowth that is indistinguishable from that of wild-type pollen.
The rapid response of pollen to low doses of kaempferol indicates that this
flavanol has a role in signal transduction. In order to understand how flavanols
signal pollen germination it is essential to identify the proteins that interact
with kaempferol. By using highly specific affinity probes it is feasible to
identify the proteins that bind to kaempferol and thereby elucidate the
downstream components of the signal transduction pathway. To gain new expertise
in the synthesis and use of labeled flavanols as tools the following objectives
will be accomplished as career advancement activities; 1, To synthesize and
evaluate radiolabeled photoaffinity probes for flavonol (kaempferol) receptors.
2, To prepare kaempferol-polymer conjugates for affinity chromatography. 3, To
make caged kaempferol to study the intracellular sites of action. 4, To adapt
the existing yeast two-hybrid system to detect protein-protein interactions
mediated by kaempferol. In order to become proficient in use of bioactive small
molecule chemistry in biological research I will conduct sabbatical research and
training in the laboratory of Dr. Thomas Wandless of the Department of Chemistry
at Stanford University. As a consequence of the sabbatical research and training
I will have expanded opportunities to investigate biological problems involving
the signaling and regulation of pathways by small bioactive molecules. Many
small molecules signal the onset of biological processes. How variou s molecules
induce new physiological and developmental activity remains some of the most
important biological processes that must be elucidated. Flavanols are essential
to growth of pollen tubes and reproductive activity in plants. Mutants unable to
produce flavanols are arrested in pollen growth that can be almost immediately
restored with the exposure of the mutant pollen to low doses of the flavanol
kaempferol. This grant will fund sabbatical training and research devoted toward
developing tools and techniques that will allow the PI to investigate how
flavanols interact with specific cellular proteins that result in signaling
reproductive growth in pollen. ***