* 9722982
* Improved Aequorin for Monitoring Ca and Superoxide in Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Osamu Shimomura, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 07/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

9722982 Shimomura The photoprotein aequorin has been used in monitoring
intracellular calcium for many years, and the functional group of this protein,
coelenterazine, and its analogues are sensitive probes for measuring superoxide
anion. The main objective of this project is to design and prepare optimally
improved forms of aequorin and coelenterazine for studying various biological
events that involve free calcium and superoxide anion. Aequorin was discovered
in a jellyfish by the PI in 1962. It emits blue light in the presence of ionized
calcium by an intramolecular reaction, decomposing itself into apoaequorin,
coelenteramide and carbon dioxide. Apoaequorin can be regenerated into the
original aequorin by incubation with coelenterazine in the presence of oxygen.
In the past several years, about 50 kinds of coelenterazine analogue were
synthesized and incorporated into apoaequorin. Many of the products, which are
called semisynthetic aequorins, showed excellent properties for measuring
cellular calcium. Some had a very high sensitivity, others had a very low
sensitivity, and some had a very fast response, thus making possible the
monitoring of rapid, transient changes of calcium ions in a wide concentration
range (1 nM - 1 mM). A recent trend is to express recombinant apoaequorin in
cells, which is followed by the in situ reconstitution of aequorin by the
addition of a coelenterazine. In this procedure, the choice of coelenterazine
analogue is critical for the success of the reconstitution of an aequorin. The
significance of superoxide radical generation in biological systems has long
been recognized, but the technique of measuring it lags far behind that of
measuring calcium. This is largely due to the unavailability of the superoxide
probes that are sufficiently sensitive for the purpose. In the past two years,
more than 20 kinds of coelenterazine analogues were prepared and tested at the
PI's lab. Some of them showed significantly improved responses to superoxide,
and the structure- sensitivity relationships of the analogues provided useful
information for further improvement of superoxide probes. The research plan for
the next three years includes: (1) Preparation of the semisynthetic aequorins
that emit red light (550-650 nm), by extending the conjugation system of
coelenterazine at the position 8 of its imidazopyrazinone ring. The products
will be useful in monitoring calcium in colored and opaque cells and tissues,
and also in certain two-wavelength techniques. (2) Identification of suitable
coelenterazine analogues for the reconstitution of the recombinant apoaequorin
that is expressed in cells. This information should significantly contribute to
the work in progress at many laboratories. (3) New, improved superoxide probes
will be designed and prepared based on the information now available; the probes
will have at least 100 times higher sensitivity than MCLA, the most sensitive
probe currently available, with a very low background luminescence. (4) The PI's
laboratory will continue to supply various aequorin preparations and
coelenterazine analogues to cell biologists to aid their studies. The
supersensitive superoxide-probes, when prepared, will also be provided. The
perception of extrinsic environmental effects such as light, temperature and
chemicals influences cells and organisms to exert a multitude of overt changes
in physiology and development. The initial perception of environmental changes
is detected by specific proteins that transmit the signal downstream in the cell
through mechanisms that often involve rapid changes or fluxes of intracellular
calcium. The PI discovered a protein, apoaequorin with coelenterazine, is used
for bioluminescence in jelly fish is highly sensitive to calcium. The gene for
apoaequarin can be expressed in cells to provide an intrinsic visual probe for
calcium with the addition of coelenterazine. To be able to visualize the changes
a nd fluxes of calcium within cells in response to signals is extremely useful
in the study of cellular reactions to environmental and developmental changes.
With this award, Dr. Shimomura will continue to refine the use of aequorin by
producing new analogs of coelenterazine that will emit light in the red instead
of blue and to be sensitive to oxidative burst that accompanies many stress
reactions. Attaining these goals will provide the scientific community with
extremely valuable tools to explore many types of reactions to changes in the
physiology of animal, plant and fungal cells. ***