* 9722509
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Topography of Pectin      Biosynthesis in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Debra Mohnen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 04/30/2001
* USD 35,944.00

9722509 Mohnen This Americas Program award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. Debra Mohnen, University of Georgia, and Dr. Ariel Orellana,
Universidad de Chile, to study pectin biosynthesis in plants. Pectin is a
polysaccharide of plant primary wall that plays critical roles in plant growth
and development. A full understanding of these roles requires elucidation of the
mechanisms that regulate its biosynthesis. The goal of the proposal is to
determine the topology of the pectin biosynthetic enzyme, with the long term
goal of elucidating, on a molecular level, how pectin is synthesized. In this
study, the researchers will try to identify enzymatic activity, determine the
topography of the enzyme, and solubilize and purify enzymes. The increased
understanding of their biochemistry, gained during the identification and
purification process, will be important for building accurate models of
biosynthesis of pectin. The proposed collaboration brings together two
complementary groups required to achieve the project's objectives. The US
scientist's expertise in biosynthesis of pectin complements Dr. Orellana's
experience in nucleotide sugar-transport and topography of membrane proteins. In
addition to its importance to plants, pectin is an important food fiber that
contributes to the roughage of fruits and vegetables, and is an economically
important gelling and stabilizing agent in foods. ***