* 9722970
* Biochemistry of 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetate and pentachlorophenol degradation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Luying Xun, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2001
* USD 350,000.00

9722970 Luying Xun The specific aims of this project are to study the
biochemical pathways used to degrade two halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, the
herbicide 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetate (2,4,5-T), a derivative of
2,4,5-trichlorophenol, and the biocide pentachlorophenol (PCP). The PI and
collaborators have identified, purified, and characterized three enzymes
involved in 2,4,5-T degradation by Burkholderia (Pseudormonas) cepacia strain AC
1100 and four enzymes involved in PCP degradation by Sphingomonas
(Flavobacterium) sp.strain ATCC 39723, but this still leaves gaps in our
knowledge of the pathways of both 2,4,5-T and PCP degradation. Both 2,4,5-T and
PCP are first completely dehalogenated and converted to hydroxyquinol
(1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene) before ring-cleavage, but the dehalogenases involved
in the two systems are very different. 2,4,5-T oxygenase oxidizes 2,4,5-T to
2,4,5-trichlorophenol, which is oxidized by chlorophenol 4-monooxygenase to 2,5-
dichloro-p-hydroquinone and then to 5-chlorohydroxyquinol
(5-chloro-1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene). A chlorine and a hydrogen are eliminated
from 5-chlorohydroxyquinol by a newly identified enzyme to form
hydroxybenzoquinone which is likely reduced to hydroxyquinol by a yet to be
identified quinone reductase. PCP 4-monooxygenase oxidizes PCP to tetrachloro-p-
hydroquinone, then tetrachloro-p-hydroquinone dehalogenase reductively
dehalogenates tetrachloro-p-hydroquinone, first to 2,3,6-trichloro-p-
hydroquinone and then to 2,6-dichloro-p-hydroquinone. 2,6-Dichloro-p-
hydroquinone chlorohydrolase converts 2,6-dichloro-p-hydroquinone to
6-chlorohydroxyquinol (6-chloro-1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene). It is unclear how
6-chlorohydroxyquinol is convened to hydroxyquinol, but a partially
characterized dioxygenase oxidized only hydroxyquinol. This research will focus
on the undocumented steps in these pathways. They will identify, purify and
characterize the enzymes that catalyze undefined reactions involved in either
2,4,5-T or PCP degradation, as they have don e with other enzymes of these two
systems. After a protein is purified, a partial amino acid sequence (probably
from the N-terminus) will be determined. This sequence will be used to clone the
gene encoding each protein, either by identifying it as a gene known in another
context or by using probes based on the amino acid sequence. This should allow
us to more completely characterize each protein in order to understand the
factors that might limit its activity. Halogenated aromatic compounds have been
released into the environment in large quantities as a result of their wide use
as pesticides and herbicides and their production as byproducts of processes
such as wood pulp bleaching. They are a major group of environmental pollutants.
They usually do not have counterparts in nature and often are very stable.
Fortunately, some microorganisms can degrade these compounds and remove them
from the environment. Few of the enzymes that catalyze step-by-step reactions to
remove the halogens (chlorine, fluorine and bromine) to produce natural
metabolic intermediates have been characterized. This research will discover
novel enzymes and determine how microorganisms use these enzymes to degrade
halogenated compounds. This work may have important applications in
bioremediation.