* 9722646
* Relaxation Dynamics in Glassy Systems and Pattern Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9722646 Nagel This renewal project contains a series of experiments concerning
the dynamics in supercooled liquids. In particular, an extension of dielectric
spectroscopy will be implemented so that an investigation of "strong" glass
formers can be made possible. A study of ordered materials will be carried out
to see if they have the same complex response as has been observed in their
disordered counterparts. Finally, there will be a study of the low-angle
scattering from glass-forming liquids in order to search for clustering effects.
In addition, experiments on pattern formation are proposed. There will be a
continuation of earlier photographic and simulation studies that probe the
interface near where a single drop of liquid splits into two separate pieces. In
addition there will be an investigation of the shape of the fluid in the
presence of an intense electric field. Finally there will be a study of the
problem of contact line sedimentation, a phenomenon which occurs whenever a
partially wetting drop of liquid dries on a surface. %%% This renewal project
contains a series of experiments concerning the mechanism by which a liquid
becomes increasingly more resistant to flow as it is cooled. If cooled
sufficiently, it will form a glass where the molecular motion is highly
constrained. We will study the molecular motion in a variety of liquids and
disordered solids to understand this glass-formation phenomenon. These studies
will include electronic probes of the behavior as well as the use of neutron and
synchrotron sources. In addition, experiments are proposed to investigate how
pattern formation occurs in technologically important situations using high-
speed photography and numerical simulations. One situation that will be studied
is how a drop of liquid splits into more than one piece. There will also be an
investigation of the shape of the fluid in the presence of an intense electr ic
field. Finally there will be a study of the problem of contact-line
sedimentation, a phenomenon occurring whenever a drop of liquid dries on a
surface. ***