* 9722851
* Workshop:  Functional Meso-Optics to be held on January 25- 28, 1997 at Crested Butte, CO
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/1997,03/31/1997
* Anthony Levi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 03/31/1997
* USD 7,406.00

9722851 Levi A workshop on the topic of functional meso-optics is proposed. The
workshop will be held Jan. 25-28, 1997 at Crested Butte, CO. The purpose of this
workshop is to bring together members of the scientific and engineering
community to discuss and help define this new subject area. This will involve
developing an understanding and synergy between members of the system, device,
and physics community. Future functional meso-optic devices and circuits will
likely exploit very small high-Q optical resonators and optically non-linear
materials. The high-Q resonators are needed to enhance local electric-fields,
allowing construction of very small, very low-loss optical devices. Functional
devices require active regions which cause switching of optical power from one
state to another. This will likely involve the use of an optical non-linear
medium to either spatially or spectrally switch a local state. The interplay
between non-linear effects and high-Q resonators is a potentially fertile area
for both physics and device research. There are also significant opportunities
for developing advanced systems concepts using new functional meso-optical
components which will emerge from this overall effort. Funds from both NSF and
AFOSR will be used to support the workshop. The NSF support will stress students
and education.