* 9722501
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Development of a Geant4-based          Simulation of the BELLE Detector at the KEK b-Factory
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Joseph Izen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1999
* USD 136,162.00

Izen 9722501 This award supports a collaborative research project between Dr.
Joseph Izen of the University of Texas at Dallas and Dr. Tadao Nozaki of the
National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (KEK) in Tsukuba, Japan on
"Development of a Geant4- based Simulation of the BELLE Detector at the KEK b-
Factory." Dr. Izen will spend one year working on this project in Japan. The
BELLE and BABAR experiments under construction in Japan and the United States
will explore CP violating asymmetries in the decays of select B mesons and will
test theories of why those mesons and their antiparticles have slight
differences in behavior. A new computer language is being developed and applied
to the management and interpretation of data from high energy physics
experiments. The goal of this project is to implement a BELLE simulation using
the new language. Recording, reconstructing and extracting physics from
increasingly large data samples is a formidable challenge. Particle physicists
from the United States, Japan and around the world are reinventing the computing
environment of their experiments. This collaborative research project will
provide information on software and design strategies that will benefit high
energy physics experiments now under development in both the United States and
Japan. The project is supported under the Science Fellowship Program between the
National Science Foundation and the Japan Foundation Center for Global
Partnership. ***