* 9722777
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research on Strongly Correlated        Electrons Under Multi-Extreme Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Ward Beyermann, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 37,315.00

INT 9722777 Beyerman This U.S.-Czech research project between Ward Beyerman of
the University of California-Riverside and Vladimir Sechovsky of Charles
University, Prague, will examine magnetic, thermal, transport, and cohesive
properties of strongly correlated electron systems under: 1) multi-extreme
conditions of very low temperatures, 2) very high magnetic fields, and 3) high
pressures. The experimental data obtained will be compared to theoretical ab
initio electron structure calculations which account for specific features of
the electron structure and material parameters. The researchers intend to
concentrate on the influence of various external parameters in selected 4f- and
5f- narrow-band intermetallic compounds. Results are expected to contribute to
our understanding of a complex hierarchy of interactions and their role in
different phenomena including: heavy fermion behavior, valance mixing, non-Fermi
liquid scaling, weak magnetic order, band metamagnetism, huge anisotropy and
giant magnetoresistance. Such new knowledge may permit the design of novel
materials useful in catalysis and refrigeration. This project in materials
research fulfills the program objectives of advancing basic scientific knowledge
by enabling leading experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of mutual interest
and competence. ??