* 9722054
* FASEB Conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology on July 6-11, 1997 in Copper Mountain, CO
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1998
* Carolyn Price, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,000.00

9722054 Price Partial support is requested for the "Seventh International on
Ciliate Molecular Biology". This meeting will be held as a FASEB Conference at
Copper Mountain Colorado, July 6-11, 1997. The meeting is intended to bring
together researchers who are employing molecular techniques to investigate
diverse biological problems using ciliated protozoa as a model system. In recent
years, an invigorating number of young researchers have chosen to use ciliated
protozoa in the labs. This renewed interest directly reflects the important
discoveries that have been with ciliates; eg. self-splicing RNA, telomerase,
telomere structure, extensive DNA rearrangements, unusual use of the genetic
code and behavioral mutants. The great value of ciliates for studying difficult
biological problems stems from their unusual geomic organization and life cycle.
However, these same unusual features make it extremely important for researchers
to attend not only meetings in their own research area (eg. DNA replication,
signal transduction, etc.) but also meetings where they can share information
about the molecular biology of their experimental system. The Ciliate Molecular
Biology Meeting fills this critical niche. Approximately 170 foreign and
domestic scientists will attend the meeting and many of the conferees will be
graduate students or postdocs. The session chairs and speakers have been chosen
based on the quality of their work and many are either female or junior
investigators. ***