* 9722066
* Sequencing and Functional Genomics of Halobacterium
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Elizabeth Stuart, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1999
* USD 160,203.00

DasSarma 9722066 To better understand the genetic basis for gas vesicle
synthesis and the mechanism of genetic instability in the halophilic Archaeum,
Halobacterium halobium NRC-1, plasmid pNRC100 is being sequenced in its
entirety. Plasmid pNRC100 is 200 kb in size and is composed of two intersion
isomers, related by recombination between two copies of 35 kb inverted repeats.
It contains a cluster of genes specifying gas vesicle synthesis and many
transposable IS elements which mediate DNA rearrangements. The complete sequence
of pNRC100 would reveal all of the gas vesicle genes and transposable elements
on this plasmid and provide a deeper understanding of the structure of this
novel replicon. Moreover, the plasmid sequence will shed light for the first
time on the organization of a large replicon in a halophilic Archaeum, including
the distribution of genes, IS elements, and left-handed Z-DNA regions. The
plasmid also represents a significant fraction of the H. halobium genome,
approximately 8%, and its successful sequencing would demonstrate the
feasibility of sequencing the complete H. halobium genome. For sequencing of
pNRC100, we have already constructed a shotgun library in M13mp18. We plan to
sequence 3,000 members of this library (about 0.5 - 1.0 kb from each clone) to
obtain 6 to 8-fold coverage. After shotgun sequencing, we plan to use both GCG
and Phred assemblers running on UNIX workstations for sequence assembly. We
recently end-sequenced all 13 Hindlll fragments of pNRC100, which we had cloned
previously, to serve as a scaffold for assisting in the assembly. After shotgun
sequencing is complete, any remaining gaps will be filled by sequencing the
complementary strands of M13 clones located at the ends of contigs, and bridge
clones generated by PCR amplification. Ambiguities resulting from band
compression in GC-rich regions will be resolved, as necessary, by radioisotope-
based sequencing using modified nucleotides, different polymerases, and highly
denaturing gels. The complete pNRC100 sequence will be analyzed using a battery
of sequence analysis programs in the GCG and other software packages and the
NCBI homology search server. Genes on pNRC100 with homologs elsewhere will be
analyzed by phylogenetic analysis. Halobacteria have a very well developed
genetic system, so analysis of sequenced genes can be undertaken much more
easily than with other Archaea that grow in "extreme" conditions. Proteins from
halobacteria have unusual properties in their abilities to function in high salt
or even organic solvents. A better understanding of genes from halobacteria is
likely to have applications in biotechnology.