* 9722761
* Studies of Luminescence, Degradation, and Defects in II-VI  Laser Diodes by Cathodoluminescence and X-Ray               Microdiffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* George Cargill, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2000
* USD 326,751.00

9722761 Cargill This GOALI proposal addresses basic materials science issues in
a collaborative program between Columbia University and Philips Laboratories to
understand fundamental phenomena and interactions between electron-hole pair
recombination, atomic displacements and defect generation in ZnSe-based
heterostructures. Research at Columbia will involve T-dependent CL microscopy,
spectroscopy, and x-ray microbeam mapping of microstructure and strain. Philips
Laboratories will provide state-of-the-art MBE-grown samples and devices
characterized electrically and optically. The joint activities include staff
exchange with the PI and graduate students spending time at Philips, and with
the co-PI, T. M. Marshall from Philips spending time at Columbia. Additionally,
an on-going collaboration with Brookhaven NL will continue in connection with
the x-ray microbeam work. The proposed research emphasizes understanding of
fundamental mechanisms and processes along with some the practical aspects of
electronic/photonic materials technology. This project is supported by the
DMR/EM program and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). %%% The
project addresses forefront materials science research issues in a topical area
of materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry, in general.
Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the
research is expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced
devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***