* 9722706
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Henry Frisch, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 03/31/2001
* USD 7,346,338.00

The NSF-supported experimental Elementary Particle Physics (EPP) group at the
University of Chicago consists of several research teams which involve
themselves in the four experiments discussed below: The `Kaon at the Tevatron`
(KTEV) experiment is now running at Fermilab. Its intent is to study CP
violation and the rare decays of long-lived K-mesons. CP violation is thought to
be the origin of the a symmetry between matter and antimatter in the universe.
KTEV is an experiment of fundamental importance to our understanding of the
origins and evolution of the universe. At the `Collider Detector at Fermilab`
(CDF) experiment, the focus is to study high momentum transfer events in proton-
antiproton collisions at 1.8 TeV (the highest energy available in the world
today). The Chicago group has the responsibility of constructing the electronic
systems for the first level calorimeter trigger and the silicon tracker
processor. The CDF experiment is being upgraded so that it can exploit the
higher luminosity to be provided by the new main injector ring now under
construction. The CDF experiment was one of the co- discoverers of the top
quark. The `Omni-Purpose-Apparatus-at-LEP` (OPAL) collaboration at the Large
Electron-Positron collider (LEP) at CERN has completed a program that uses Z
boson decays to conduct several important tests of the `Standard Model` of
particle physics: a measurement of the Weinberg angle, a study of various
B-meson decays, and a search for exotic particles that would indicate physics
beyond the `Standard Model`. The collaboration is now taking data at `LEP200`,
where with double its present energy, the accelerator can make W meson pairs and
hence obtain direct measurements of the W mass. Searches for new particles are
also being conducted at these higher energies. ATLAS (A Toroidal Large Angle
Spectrometer) will be a general-purpose detector designed to exploit the
potential of the future LHC proton-proton collider. LHC will provide 10 times
higher center-of-mass energy and 100 times higher proton-proton collision rates
than previous colliders, thus opening up a new frontier of physics. Discovery of
the mass- generating mechanism or spontaneous symmetry breaking, which predicts
the existence of a scalar particle, the Higgs boson is a primary objective of
ATLAS. The Chicago group is the leading group in the EPP program in its
education and outreach activities.