* 9722937
* Nucleotide-Dependent Signal Transduction in Nitrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Lance Seefeldt, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9722937 Seefeldt Nitrogenase is the metalloenzyme responsible for biological
nitrogen fixation, thereby occupying a central position in the global nitrogen
cycle. The reduction of all substrates by nitrogenase requires the hydrolysis of
a minimum of two MgATP molecules for each electron transferred to substrates.
The long range objective of this research program is to provide a detailed
understanding of the functions of nucleotides in the nitrogenase reaction
mechanism. The studies in the current project period focus on (i) defining the
mechanisms of nucleotide induced protein conformational changes within the
nitrogenase iron (Fe) protein and the roles that these conformational changes
play in regulating the affinity of the nitrogenase Fe protein for binding to the
molybdenum-iron (MoFe) protein and (ii) defining the functions of MgATP
hydrolysis within the Fe protein-MoFe protein complex in gating and accelerating
electron transfer, promoting substrate reduction, and triggering protein-protein
dissociation. The approach will be to utilize the X-ray crystal structures of
the individual nitrogenase component proteins and the structure of a nitrogenase
Fe protein-MoFe protein complex, in conjunction with site-directed mutagenesis
and biochemical and spectroscopic methods to unravel details of the functions of
nucleotides at each step in the nitrogenase mechanism. It is expected that the
results from this project will contribute to a detailed understanding of the
functions of nucleotides in the nitrogenase reaction mechanism and will have
broader implications in understanding the mechanisms of other nucleotide-coupled
energy transduction proteins. Reduced forms of nitrogen are essential to all
life on earth. The need for reduced nitrogen is especially limiting in modern
agriculture where it must be supplied in the form of fertilizers. The nitrogen
in fertilizers is prepared by a chemical reaction that requires high
temperatures and pressures. In contrast to this chemical process, many soil
bacteria can make reduced forms of nitrogen by conversion of atmospheric N2, a
gas that constitutes 80% of the air that we breath, into ammonia without the
requirements for high temperature or pressure. This bacterial process, called
nitrogen fixation, is catalyzed by an enzyme called nitrogenase. Nitrogenase
catalyzed ammonia production presently accounts for the largest total input of
fixed nitrogen into the environment and represents a very attractive alternative
to industrially prepared fertilizers for agriculture. The research team is
investigating the mechanism of this biological process at the molecular level,
especially the requirement for the cellular energy source MgATP. The approach
will be to combine modern genetic cloning techniques with biochemical and
biophysical techniques to define the mechanism of energy utilization by
nitrogenase. It is anticipated that the results of these investigations will
provide a detailed understanding of the mechanism of nitrogenase and will
provide the foundation knowledge that will be required to initiate protein
engineering of nitrogenase. Such studies will be vital to the utilization of
nitrogenase as a potential source of nitrogen in agriculture.