* 9722187
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Performance Studies of the EM-X        Distributed-Memory Multiprocessor
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Andrew Sohn, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/2000
* USD 85,456.00

9722187 Sohn This award provides funds to support two research visits, for a
total of nine months, by Dr. Andrew Sohn, Department of Computer and Information
Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, for collaboration with Dr.
Yoshinori Yamaguchi, Computer Science Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory,
Tsukuba, Japan. Their research is concerned with developing algorithms to
investigate when, where, and how multithreading and multithreaded architecture
can reduce communication time between parallel processors in high performance
computers. To achieve their objectives, the collaborators have a technical plan
consisting of the following five steps: (1) design single-threaded and
multithreaded algorithms for selected benchmark problems; (2) develop data and
workload distribution strategies with varying thread granularity; (3) implement
the algorithms to compare the performance of three multiprocessors, the
multithreaded EM-X (designed and built by the Electrotechnical Laboratory,
Japan), and the single-thread IBM SP-2, and Cray T3E; (4) analyze parameters
that characterize the performance of single-threaded and multithreaded machines;
and (5) formulate a model to predict the performance achieved by single
threading and multithreading. The principle result of this research will be a
set of tools and methodologies which enable the identification of the
performance of multithreading and multithreaded parallel machines against
single-threaded machines. This set of tools and methodologies will help
algorithm designers to convert single-threaded algorithms to a multithreaded
version. The results also will help future supercomputer architects develop
multithreaded machines for reducing communication time towards high performance
computing. The Dr. Sohn and his Japanese collaborator are highly regarded
investigators in this field of research. This project is supported under the
Science Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Foundation Center for Global Partnership. ***