* 9722972
* Cellular Signals Mediating Symbiosis in Vibrio fischeri
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Paul Dunlap, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9722972 DUNLAP This project will test the hypotheses that the signal molecules
3' :5'-cyclic AMP (cAMP) and N-acyl-homoserine lactones (autoinducers) play key
roles in the bioluminescent mutualism of Vibrio fischeri with the sepiolid squid
Euprymna scolopes. Two classes of mutants will be used in colonization assays
with aposymbiotic hatchling squid to test the cAMP-CRP hypothesis, mutants
defective in adenylate cyclase and CRP, constructed using the suicide vector
pSMC300, and mutants defective in cAMP-CRP-regulated proteins, identified and
isolated by 2-D gel electrophoresis and through transposon-mediated lacZ
insertional mutagenesis. Preliminary evidence suggests that the periplasmic 3'
:5'-CNP of V.fischeri also plays a key role in its symbiosis with E. scolopes.
The enzyme is hypothesized to mediate bacterial metabolism of extracellular,
host-produced cAMP in the animal's light organ, and diminished symbiosis
competency of the mutant would imply that cAMP is a growth substrate or key
signal for the bacteria in the light organ. To address 3' :5 ' -CNP hypothesis,
colonization initiation capability and retention of the cpdP mutant will be
examined and levels of 3' :5 ' -CNP activity, CpdP protein, and cpdP mRNA will
be quantified at several points during development of the animal. To test the
autoinducer hypothesis, two classes of mutants will be used in squid
colonization assays, an autoinducer-deficient mutant defective in the two V.
fischeri autoinducer synthases, LuxI and AinS, constructed using the suicide
vector pSMC300 and transposon mutagenesis, and mutants defective in production
of autoinducer-dependent proteins, identified and isolated by 2-D gel
electrophoresis and through transposon-mediated lacZ insertional mutagenesis.
This research will form a foundation for understanding the complex network of
inter- and intra-cellular signals and responses through which a bacterium senses
and adapts to mutualistic host association. The mutually beneficial symbiosis
between the marine b acterium Vibrio fischeri and the squid Euprymna scolopes
serves as an important model system for determining how a bacterium colonizes
and persists in an animal host. Symbiosis between bacteria and animals is common
in terrestrial and marine habitats and has a substantial environmental
importance, in some cases providing the biological foundation for an ecosystem.
Consequently, knowledge gained from detailed study of one assocation is likely
to provide widely significant ecological insight. Knowledge of the bacterial
signals and the bacterium-animal biochemical communication is of fundamental
importance for understanding how mutualisms are successfully established and
maintained and how biologically different organisms cooperate to survive and
reproduce. This project consequently focuses on key bacterial intracellular and
intercellular signals, because of their central importance in gene expression
and their likely importance for host-association.