* 9722253
* CAREER:  A Polymerase Switch in the Synthesis of rRNA in    Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Heather Conrad-Webb, Texas Woman's University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 07/31/2003
* USD 497,294.00

9722253 Conrad-Webb As we achieve greater understanding of the molecular basis
of cellular structure and function, the distinctions among genetics, molecular
biology and cellular biology fade. Undergraduate students, who usually take
separate courses in these disciplines, often compartmentalize information to the
specific course and do not recognize the interdependence of these cellular
processes. Such fragmentation impedes the recognition of basic biological
principles. This project includes three educational objectives: a three semester
course which integrates genetics, molecular and cellular biology and emphasizes
cellular interactions; a corresponding two semester laboratory course to
reinforce fundamental principles by conducting basic experiments; and exposure
of students to the process of discovery through independent research. The
independent research will focus on the study of a polymerase switch in the
synthesis of rRNA. In respiratory deficient strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
rRNA is synthesized by both RNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase II. In these
cells, a cryptic pol II rDNA promoter that overlaps the pol I promoter is used
to synthesize an equivalent 35S precursor rRNA that can alleviate the
requirement for pol I. This novel finding introduces new questions in the
regulation of rRNA synthesis and is particularly well suited to illustrating the
role of scientific inquiry in changing perceptions of cellular function. The
objectives of this research are to: 1. Define the sequence signals for pol II
transcription of rDNA. 2. Identify regulatory factors required for pol II
transcription of rDNA. 3. Investigate the function of pol II rRNA. Dissecting
the role of poll II transcription of rRNA presents an intriguing problem for the
introduction of students to the role of scientific discovery in expanding our
understanding multiple cellular processes. The switch in rRNA synthesis from pol
I to pol II involves the interactions of multiple cellular processes including :
interorganellar communication, transcriptional activation and silencing, and
preferential excision and replication of rDNA episomal copies. Students will be
investigating these interactions by synthesizing the various cellular processes
that intertwine to produce pol II synthesis of rRNA. %%% As we achieve greater
understanding of the molecular basis of cellular structure and function, the
distinctions among genetics, molecular biology and cellular biology fade. This
project will include the development of a three semester course to integrate the
information usually acquired in separate courses in genetics, cell and molecular
biology. Emphasis will be placed on the synthesis rather than
compartmentalization of information, and the interactions of cellular processes
as a framework for problem solving. Furthermore, by participation in laboratory
exercises and in the pursuit of independent research, students will witness
first hand the process of scientific inquiry. In respiratory deficient strains
of yeast is synthesized by both RNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase II.
Dissecting the role of pol II transcription of rRNA presents an intriguing
problem which will be used to introduce students to the role of scientific
discovery in expanding our understanding multiple cellular processes. Students
will be investigating these interactions by synthesizing the various cellular
processes that intertwine to produce pol II synthesis of rRNA. ***