* 9722392
* CAREER:  Structural Studies of Transcription Regulation by  RNA-Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Arthur Palmer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2002
* USD 450,000.00

9722392 Palmer A career development program is described that integrates
research and pedagogy of structure/function by NMR spectroscopy. The research
program will provide a molecular basis for understanding molecular recognition
in RNA-protein complexes as well as transcription termination/antitermination in
lambdoid coliphages. The initial goal is the characterization of the interaction
between HK022 Nun protein and Box B RNA sequences. The educational objectives of
this proposal are the development of resources for the teaching and self-study
of high resolution NMR spectroscopy. High-resolution NMR spectroscopy is an
increasingly important component of chemical and biological research in academic
and industrial settings, and courses in NMR spectroscopy are offered at an
expanding number of universities. The educational efforts are based on the
textbook, entitled Protein NMR Spectroscopy: Principles and Practice, co-
authored by the PI of this proposal. Course materials will be used in the course
"NMR spectroscopy of biological macromolecules", taught at Columbia University,
and will be distributed via the Internet. Understanding the mechanisms by which
proteins specifically recognize and interact with other molecules is a critical
research problem in chemistry, biophysics, and biotechnology. The research
component of this proposal will use NMR spectroscopy to elucidate the nature of
the interactions between proteins and RNA molecules that are important for
molecular recognition. The educational component will develop computer-based
materials for teaching NMR spectroscopy at the advanced undergraduate and
graduate university levels. The educational materials will complement the
textbook, entitled Protein NMR Spectroscopy: Principles and Practice, co-
authored by the PI. ***