* 9722049
* Mathematical Aspects of Einstein's Theory of General        Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Ezra Newman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* David Berley
* 05/31/2000
* USD 39,000.00

An investigation of several physical and mathematical issues concerning the
structure of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, (GR) will be undertaken.
GR can be understood by its analogy with the more familiar ideas of electricity
and magnetism. Most often it has been useful to study gravitational phenomena as
just another classical field and use the analogies with electro-magnetic theory
for the understanding of different physical phenomena or as a guide to the
problems of a quantum theory of gravity. Recently, there has been developed a
new point of view towards general relativity, where the analogy with electro-
magnetic fields completely breaks down. The primary variables are no longer
conventional fields but are instead non-local structures; in particular, they
are three dimensional surfaces in space-time with the special property that
light can travel along these surfaces, i.e., the surfaces are null or
characteristic surfaces. It has been possible (though it was not at all obvious
how to do so) to give a formulation of GR where the basic equations are for the
determination of these surfaces. In turn, when these surfaces are determined the
geometry of the space-time turns out to be identical with the conventional view
derived from Einstein's general relativity. In other words, general relativity
has been reformulated as a theory of three dimensional surfaces. The major
portion of this project involves the study of the properties of these surface
equations. We have been interested in both their classical aspects - (their
geometric meaning, their consequences and methods of integration and
approximation) and what relationship they might have with the difficulties
associated with the construction of a quantum theory of gravity.