* 9722914
* Mechanism of Protein Import into Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Danny Schnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2001
* USD 330,000.00

9722914 Schnell The mechanism by which cytoplasmically synthesized proteins are
targeted and assembled into their proper subcellular compartment remains a major
unsolved problem in cell biology. The cells of higher plants contain a unique
organelle, the chloroplast, which offers an excellent model system for studying
this problem. The majority of the protein components of the chloroplast are
encoded in the nucleus, synthesized as precursors on cytoplasmic ribosomes, and
posttranslationally imported into the organelle across the double membrane of
the chloroplast envelope. The long-term goal of this research is to understand
the mechanism of protein import into chloroplasts. In recent years, the signals
responsible for targeting proteins to the chloroplast have been determined, and
a number of components of the protein import apparatus at the chloroplast
envelope have been identified. The major challenges to a more detailed
understanding of the import process are determining the supramolecular structure
and dynamics of the import apparatus and defining how the import components
interact with precursor proteins during the import process. This proposal
addresses both of these challenges. The first aim of this proposal is to
investigate the structure and dynamics of membrane complexes that mediate
protein import at the outer and inner envelope membranes. This strategy will use
immunochemical and biochemical techniques to investigate the composition and
regulation of import complexes within and between the two envelope membranes.
These studies will indicate the supramolecular structure of the import apparatus
and provide information on how the outer and inner membranes cooperate to
facilitate transport of proteins across the envelope. The second aim of this
proposal is to determine the sequence and specificity of the interaction of the
import components with precursor proteins during the complete time course of
protein import. This strategy will em ploy chemical cross-linking of precursor
proteins to import components at intermediate stages in import ranging from
initial binding of the precursor at the outer membrane to the completion of
translocation at the inner membrane. The third aim is to characterize two newly
discovered import components, IAP21 and IAP25, whose molecular properties have
not been investigated. To this end, cDNA clones for each of the putative
components will be isolated and sequenced, and antibodies specific for each
component will be generated to localize the putative import components within
the envelope. These reagents will provide the basic tools for functional studies
aimed at determining the roles of each protein in envelope translocation. The
sum of these studies will provide a considerable advancement in our goal of
understanding the mechanism of protein import into chloroplasts. These studies
are significant for several reasons. First, protein translocation plays a
central role in chloroplast biogenesis. Therefore, definition of this process is
essential to obtaining an understanding of the mechanism by which the
photosynthetic and metabolic machinery of the organelle are targeted and
assembled. Second, understanding the import process is important for
applications directed at optimizing the metabolic and photosynthetic
capabilities of genetically engineered plants by directing foreign or altered
proteins to chloroplasts. Finally, the parameters governing the chloroplast
protein import undoubtedly will contribute to the formulation of broader
principles concerning the mechanism of protein targeting and membrane
translocation in all cells. Chloroplasts are complex subcellular structures that
support the photosynthetic metabolism of plants and algae. The interior of the
chloroplasts contains many different proteins and a complex of membranes that
mediate the photosynthetic process. Most of the proteins that support the
photosynthetic metabolism are made in the cell outside of the chloroplast and
are translocated into the chloroplast as precursors. Chloroplasts are enveloped
by a double unit membrane that must be bridged in order to deposit proteins
within its interior. This award will support detailed studies to examine the
process by which proteins are translocated through the double membrane that
bounds the chloroplast. The information gained from these studies will greatly
advance the understanding of how the chloroplast is assembled. ***