* 9722408
* CAREER:  DNA Replication and Telomere Maintenance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* D. Scott Samuels, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 516,654.00

Samuels 9722408 Bacterial replicons are primarily circular DNA molecules, but
linear plasmids and chromosomes have been identified in various prokaryotes.
Telomeres, the physical ends of linear DNA molecules, are essential for the
stability of these molecules. Distinct proteins and DNA sequences are required
for replicating DNA and maintaining telomeres. The mechanisms of linear DNA
replication and telomere maintenance in bacteria remain largely unknown. The
replication and stability of prokaryotic linear DNA with hairpin telomeres has
not been previously investigated. A model system for studying this class of
linear DNA is the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. The genome of B. burgdorferi
consists of a linear chromosome, linear plasmids ranging from 16 to over 50 kb,
and several circular plasmids. The research project focuses on trans-acting
proteins and cis-acting DNA sequences required for DNA replication and telomere
maintenance in B. burgdorferi. Several telomeres from B. burgdorferi linear
plasmids have been cloned and sequenced. The nucleotide sequence, predicted
structure, and phasing of certain sequence motifs suggest that proteins bind at
the telomeres. These putative trans-acting factors include the small DNA-binding
protein HBb. HBb will be purified to homogeneity and its interaction with
telomeres will be studied. In addition, other DNA-binding proteins will be
purified by assaying their ability to recognize telomere sequence or structure.
The DNA-binding properties of these proteins will be characterized. Sequences on
the 16 kb linear plasmid that are required for replication and segregation will
be analyzed by manipulating recombinant plasmids. These plasmids will be
constructed using coumermycin A1-resistant gyrB, the only available antibiotic
resistant marker in B. burgdorferi. The cis-acting sequences involved in the
replication of circular plasmids from this unusual genome will also be analyzed.
Student training, teaching biochemistry and molecular genetics courses, and
devel oping new courses are important aspects of this CAREER award. Innovations
include training high school teachers, undergraduates, and high school students,
introducing computer modeling into the classroom, and designing courses to teach
students to present and critically evaluate research seminars. Life involves the
passing of traits from parents to offspring; the genetic information encoding
these traits is stored in the macromolecule DNA. Parental DNA must be accurately
and precisely copied for transmitting genetic information to the offspring. The
copying of DNA, and its segregation into offspring cells, requires the
interaction of specific regions of the DNA molecule with specific protein
molecules. In bacteria DNA is often circular, which solves a problem caused by a
fundamental limitation in the DNA copying mechanism. A few bacteria, including
the spirochete B. burgdorferi, have linear, rather than circular, DNA as their
genetic material. This research project will address how linear DNA is copied in
B. burgdorferi. Specific regions of DNA involved in the copying mechanism,
including the ends of the linear DNA molecules, and the proteins that interact
with these regions of DNA will be studied. This will be the first elucidation of
the mechanism by which genetic information is transmitted utilizing this type of
DNA. The teaching aspect of this project seeks to improve and expand the
transmission of advanced knowledge to students and teachers from the high school
to the graduate level.