* 9722744
* RUI:  Investigation of the Ambient pH Signal Transduction   Pathway of Aspergillus nidulans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,06/07/1999
* Steven Denison, Mississippi College
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/07/1999
* USD 98,510.00

Denison 9722744 All cells respond to signals from the environment. This is true
of micro-organisms, many of which are composed of only a single cell, and of
individual cells of multicellular organisms such as humans. Single-celled
organisms respond to environmental signals such as the availability of nutrients
and increases in temperature, acidity or osmotic pressure of the environment.
The response of micro-organisms to environmental signals is to alter cellular
processes to ensure survival in the new conditions. For example, yeast cells
respond to increases in environmental osmotic pressure by accumulating certain
intracellular substances to balance the change in environmental osmotic
pressure. These various responses of cells to environmental signals occur as a
result of altered activity of genes whose products are required for these
processes. As genes of these eukaryotic cells are located in the nucleus, the
environmental signal must be transduced from the cell membrane, which separates
the cell from the environment, to the nucleus. The signals are transduced by
mechanisms called signal transduction pathways. Components of signal
transduction pathways from micro-organisms are very similar to those of cells of
multicellular organisms. Aspergillus nidulans is a filamentous fungus used as an
experimental system to investigate a number of important questions in genetics
and cell biology. Aspergillus possesses an ambient pH signal transduction
pathway which ensures that enzymes which function extracellularly are produced
under conditions of ambient pH at which they can function. Extracellular enzymes
which function only at certain pH values include proteases and phosphatases
which are required for nutrient acquisition by Aspergillus. The components of
this ambient pH signal transduction pathway are the products of the pal genes,
palA, B, C, F, H and I. At alkaline ambient pH, the pal pathway causes the
activation of the pacC-encoded transcription factor which causes genes whose
products fun ction in alkaline pH to be transcribed. The goal of this project is
to determine how the pal pathway transduces the signal of alkaline ambient pH.
The aims of the project are to complete the sequence of the palI gene, which
will allow determination of the protein product that it encodes. Preliminary
sequence information suggests that the palI-encoded protein, PalI, is a membrane
protein and may therefore be the pH sensor in the signaling pathway, initiating
the signal transduction in response to alkaline ambient pH. A strain of
Aspergillus which is disrupted for the pall gene will also be created to
determine the effect of a complete absence of PalI. Another goal of the project
is to use immunofluorescence microscopy to determine if PalI is located in the
cell membrane which will help determine if it is the ambient pH sensor. New
mutations (suppressor mutations) in Aspergillus will also be isolated which
overcome the lack of pH signal transduction in strains with mutations in palI.
This is to isolate new genes whose products interact with PalI in transducing
the signal of alkaline pH and new genes whose products function elsewhere in the
signaling pathway.