* 9722893
* Mechanisms of Integrin Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Susan Zusman, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1999
* USD 135,465.00

9722893 Zusman This proposal focuses on determining the functional significance
of the Drosophila Position Specific (PS) integrin cytoplasmic domains. The
experiments address the following questions: 1) Which morphogenetic and
signaling processes require integrin cytoplasmic domains? 2) Which regions of a
subunit cytoplasmic domains affect specific developmental processes? 3) Can a
subunit cytoplasmic domains function in developmental processes without a (
subunit cytoplasmic domain? 4) How do integrin cytoplasmic domains influence
extracellular binding and gene expression? 5) What are the molecules that
associate and/or are involved with the PS integrins in developmental processes
and signaling pathways? These questions will be answered using molecular,
genetic and cellular techniques that will involve the following: 1) The ability
of integrin subunits lacking all or a portion of their cytoplasmic domains or
having mutated cytoplasmic domains to function in developmental processes,
signaling pathways and gene expression will be assessed. These experiments will
involve altering cDNAs encoding a subunits by in vitro mutagenesis techniques,
inserting them into the Drosophila genome with P- element transformation and
expressing them with the Drosophila GAL4 system. Genomic DNA encoding the ,(
subunit will also be altered and expressed. 2) The requirements for a
cytoplasmic domains in processes requiring PS integrins, but not requiring (
subunit cytoplasmic domains will be examined. 3) DNA encoding Drosophila
integrin subunits with mutated cytoplasmic domains will be transfected into S2
cells and examined for their ability to induce cell spreading on matrix
molecules. 4) A molecular characterization of mutations that produce "integrin-
like" phenotypes and show genetic interactions with mutations in integrin-
encoding genes will be performed. 5) Integrin cytoplasmic ligands and functio
nally related molecules will be identified by a genetic screen for suppressors
of the dominant lethality caused by misexpression of the cytoplasmic domain of
an a subunit .