* 9722050
* Nuclear Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Hilding Kohler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Winston Roberts
* 08/31/2000
* USD 84,360.00

There are many examples of systems in a state of non- equilibrium in the world
around us. Physicists study such systems in the laboratory and observe processes
that lead to equilibration. The theoretical studies of such processes led to the
discipline of Statistical Mechanics. Early on (1870's) Boltzmann gave us the
H-theorem and his famous transport-equation. Though tremendously important this
equation is unsatisfactory for some applications, especially for quantum
mechanical systems. Using Green's function methods Kadanoff and Baym (1962)
developed a set of equations applicable to such systems with the potential of
application to numerous technological systems. They reduce in a classical limit
to Boltzmann's equation, but are even more complicated. Although frequently
referred to, they have in the past been regarded as impractical for numerical
solutions. Numerous approximations have however been suggested with applications
in plasma-physics, semiconductors and nuclear heavy-ion collisions. Not until
recently with the availability of high-speed and large memory computers have
exact solutions been possible in certain cases. I have developed computer-
programs for the numerical solutions of these equations and am applying them to
the study of collisions between heavy ions with emphasis on memory- and
correlation- effects. these effects are not included in the Boltzmann-like
equations previously applied to these problems. This proposal includes a further
study of these effects as well as pionic, relativistic and collective phenomena.
The problem of equilibration of a quark-gluon plasma is also included in our
studies.