* 9722797
* 1997 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Meeting on Eukaryotic    mRNA Processing held on August 20-24, 1997, in Cold Spring  Harbor, NY.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Adrian Krainer, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9722797 Krainer A conference on "Eukaryotic mRNA Processing" will convene
scientists studying various aspects of mRNA splicing and 3' -end processing
mechanisms and regulation in metazoans and in yeast. Major advances have
recently been made in these areas, and the conference will be a timely event for
discussing the latest unpublished results and exchanging ideas, thereby
fostering new developments in this rapidly moving field. The conference is a new
international meeting to be held every other year at Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory. The first meeting will be held on August 20 - 24, 1997, and is
expected to attract 300-400 scientists who are actively investigating various
aspects of messenger RNA maturation in eukaryotic cells, using genetic,
biochemical, molecular, and cell biological approaches. The major focus of the
first meeting will be on nuclear events in mRNA maturation, particularly mRNA
splicing and polyadenylation. It will include eight plenary sessions and two
poster sessions. Speakers in the plenary sessions will be selected on the basis
of the submitted abstracts, which will encourage active participation by junior
scientists. The main topics covered will include catalytic mechanisms and
specificity of mRNA splicing and 3' -end processing; developmental and cell-type
specific regulation of gene expression by alternative splicing and
polyadenylation; structure and function of snRNP particles and of hnRNPs, SR
proteins, PRPs, and other yeast and metazoan protein factors involved in
splicing or polyadenylation; spliceosome assembly; and localization and dynamics
of processing reactions, factors, substrates, and products, in relation to
nuclear architecture and to nuclear-cytoplasmic transport. The proper regulation
of gene expression is essential to all life. One fundamental mode of regulation
is the processing of RNA transcripts of genes. At this international meeting,
between 300 and 400 scientists will gather to share, discuss, and analyze the
most recent results and i deas in this field of mRNA processing in eukaryotes.
***