* 9722884
* Energetics of CRP Activation of Transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Frederick Schwarz, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9722884 Schwarz In E. coli. the transcription of over 20 genes for enzymes
involved in sugar metabolism is activated by cAMP receptor protein (CRP) which
has undergone a conformational change induced by the binding of cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) to CRP. Amino-acid substitutions in CRP, however,
dramatically alter the level of its transcriptional activity. To elucidate how
mutations alter the level of transcriptional activation and ultimately the
mechanism for transcriptional activation, the research will consist of (1)
determining the thermodynamic linkages between the binding reactions of
CRP/mutants with cNMP, DNA, and RNA polymerase from calorimetry measurements and
(2) determining the structures of the cNMP-ligated complexes from x-ray
crystallography measurements. Small angle neutron scattering measurements,
differential scanning calorimetry, and protease probes will be employed to
substantiate these structural differences in solution. The level of
transcription by the cNMP-ligated CRP/mutant complexes will be quantitatively
determined by a well-defined in vitro assay. Correlations between the
conformational changes and the thermodynamic linkages will ascertain how
conformational changes control the thermodynamics of transcription. Comparison
of the levels of in vitro and in vivo transcriptional activation may lead to the
discovery of secondary events which also influence the level of transcriptional
activation in the cell. Many biological processes are initiated by
conformational changes in proteins induced by specific protein-ligand
interactions. The goal of this research is to provide a better understanding of
how ligand binding at sites far removed from the active site of a protein
control its level of activity through conformational changes induced by binding
of the ligand. In addition, it will elucidate how small structural alterations
in the DNA binding site of proteins control the high specificity of DNA-binding
proteins which exhibit similar topologies at the D NA binding site, e.g. the
eukaryotic homolog of CRP, the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Ultimately, this
knowledge will lead to a better understanding of the relationship between
structure and function in biological systems. ***