* 9722151
* Dissertation Research: The Importance of Root Hairs in      Phosphorus Acquistion and the Mechanism of Root Hair Growth in Response to Phosphorus Availability
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Jonathan Lynch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Lynch 9722151 Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for plant growth; however, in
many soils, phosphorus is an immobile resource which makes phosphorus
acquisition an obstacle for plants. In the United States, phosphorus
overfertilazation in agricultural has added to the pollution of the Chesapeake
Bay, the Florida Everglades, and other major watersheds. To increase the
availability of phosphorus in naturally occurring soils and to decrease the
amount of fertilizer used in agricultural practices, it is important to study
how plant roots extract phosphorus from the soil. Plant root hairs are
subcellular extensions from the root epidermis that are hypothetically important
in the acquisition of immobile resources such as phosphorus. The PI's previous
work with Arabidopsis thatliana has shown that root hair length, growth rate,
and density is highly regulated by phosphorus availability. The goal of the PI's
research is to determine the importance of root hairs in overall plant
phosphorus nutrition, characterize the response of increased root hair density
with decreased phosphorus availability, and dissect the cellular mechanism of
root hair growth in response to exotenous phosphorus nutrition. Quantitative
ratio fluorescence microscopy and root hair mutant plants will be used to study
the response of root hairs to phosphorus availability.