* 9722171
* CAREER: Song and Plumage in the House Finch: A Study of     Signal Content in a Multiple-Signal System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Jane Brockmann
* 08/31/2003
* USD 500,000.00

IBN-9722171 Hill Bright colors and beautiful song are among the most conspicuous
features of birds, but these traits pose a paradox for evolutionary biologists.
How could such gaudy traits, which seem to waste energy and expose individuals
to predators, have evolved by natural selection, a process that should promote
survivorship and reproduction? The generally accepted answer to this question is
that such ornamental traits arose through sexual selection, a process that
promotes access to mates either through mate attraction or mate defense. Female
mate choice has been shown to be an important selective agent in the evolution
of ornamental traits, but why should females choose such traits? One explanation
for this riddle is that ornamental traits serve as honest signals of male
quality. By choosing males with well-developed ornaments, females choose better-
than-average males. The plot thickens further, though, in that most species of
animals have not one but multiple ornamental traits. For instance, most species
of songbirds have both colorful plumage and song. This research will study the
function of song and colorful plumage in the House Finch, a common backyard bird
found throughout the contintental U.S. Studies will test the idea that female
House Finches gain different information about male quality from different
ornamental traits. Colorful plumage in the House Finch is a result of carotenoid
pigments, which birds must obtain from their diet. Thus, plumage brightness is a
function of the nutritional condition of males at the time when feathers are
grown. The control of song development is less well understood, but it may also
be dependent on nutrition. The focus of this work is on two measures of male
quality: disease resistance and parental effort. Using a combination of
experiments conducted with captive birds and observations of wild birds, the
study will determine how song and ornamental plumage coloration of male House
Finches relate to two different types of disease: coccidia, a chronic intestinal
parasite, and conjunctivitis, a bacterial infection of the eye and upper
respiratory system with rapid onset. The prediction is that song, which is
produced at the time of display, will be a better indicator of fast- acting
disease of short duration. In contrast, plumage, which is grown over a six-week
period, months before it is used in display, will be a better predictor of
chronic infection. Song and plumage may also convey different information about
the ability of males to provision young. This research will be among the first
to simultaneously investigate the function of multiple ornamental traits, and
will provide new insight into the process of sexual selection and the evolution
of ornamental traits in animals. The idea that conspicuous ornamental traits in
male animals might convey information about prospective mates to females is an
intuitively appealing hypothesis that many students (in the broad sense -
including high school students, science teachers, undergraduates and adult
education students) find compelling. The research project will incorporate an
educational focus involving participation by the previously-mentioned student
populations. The House Finch is an ideal species for studies intended to
introduce students to field biology - they are small, docile, easy to catch,
have bright colors that are easy to quantify, are habituated to people, and nest
in conspicuous locations on campus. In addition, House Finches are found in
nearly every schoolyard in the U.S., and part of this study will also develop
science exercises with high school teachers, and allow students to experience
the challenge and excitement of real scientific investigation.