* 9722686
* International Conference - Complex Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Yaneer Bar-Yam, New England Complex Systems Institute
* Standard Grant
* Winston Roberts
* 08/31/1998
* USD 4,889.00

A major international conference on the study of complex systems will be
organized. There is a new and growing effort to understand systems formed out of
many interacting parts that display complex dynamic behaviors. These include
physical, chemical, biological, social and economic systems as well as
artificial (engineered) systems. Researchers from diverse disciplines and
different perspectives are sharing knowledge, mathematical methods and insights
in order to advance the effort in all areas. The new scientific effort to
understand complex systems has attracted significant public attention because it
addresses issues that include individual psychology, dynamics of social and
economic change, and ecology that are of current concern. Thus it can serve as a
vehicle for public awareness of the importance of science in society. Various
conferences have addressed aspects of these growing efforts. However, this is
the first major international conference to bring the wide diversity of
researchers together, demonstrating the interdisciplinary but coherent nature of
these efforts. The conference will be organized under the aegis of the New
England Complex Systems Institute -- a new educational institution with
participation of faculty from major academic institutions in New England.