* 9722042
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop on Structure and Topograpy of       Surfaces; LaPlata, Argentina, November 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* William Steele, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 06/30/1998
* USD 20,196.00

9722042 Steele This Americas Program award will fund a joint USA-Argentina
workshop on aspects of surface science, to be held in La Plata, Argentina,
November, 1997. Organizers are Dr. William Steele, Pennsylvania State
University, and Dr. Eduardo Bottani, Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquimicas
Teoricas y Applicadas (INIFTA), La Plata. The workshop will bring together
scientists from US and Argentina to present and discuss the most recent studies
on surface science, and explore the possibilities of collaboration in future
work. Modern surface science covers a wide variety of topics. Subfields to be
discussed in this workshop include surface heterogeneity and its influence on
the diffusion, thermodynamics and chemical reactivity of molecules adsorbed on
such surfaces; methods of characterizing surface heterogeneity, such as fractal
dimension or the distance dependence of the correlation between adsorption sites
of a given energy; and chemisorption and chemical reactivity on well
characterized surfaces. These topics are at the forefront of current research
involving surfaces. Surface science is a subject that has seen explosive growth
over the past two decades due to the introduction of powerful new techniques for
visualizing and characterizing the species that form on the surfaces of
chemically active solids. It is of enormous importance to catalysis, to
purification procesqes, to corrosion, wear and lubrication, and to the
fabrication of ever-smaller computer chips. ***