* 9722460
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Neural Crest Induction in Xenopus
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Marianne Bronner, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 05/31/2000
* USD 39,999.00

9722460 Bronner-Fraser This Americas Program award will support Dr. Marianne
Bronner- Fraser, California Institute of Technology, in a research collaboration
with Dr. Roberto Mayor, Universidad de Chile. The investigators plan to study
the effect of expression of a newly isolated gene, NP-1, on the initial
formation of neural crest cells. The new gene, isolated and sequenced from avian
embryos by Dr. Bronner in collaboration with two other researchers, has no
obvious similarities to other known gene families. However, although the chick
system has many advantages for experimental embryology, it is difficult to
ectopically express gene products in birds. Therefore, the researchers have
initiated studies of the Xenopus system, which represents an ideal system in
which to pursue ectopic expression of molecules in early development. To that
effect. they plan to isolate the Xenopus homologue of NP-!. Their research will
combine molecular biological approaches with experimental embryology, with the
long-term goal to characterize and understand the function of the gene in neural
crest formation. The collaboration will benefit greatly from the combined
expertise and research intereqt of both researchers. The proposed experiments
will take place in Dr. Mayor's laboratory, who is an expert on the Xenopus
system and has a long standing interest in neural crest development. . ***