* 9722750
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Many-Body Effects in the   Photoionization Process
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Steven Manson, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 9,950.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Steven
Manson of the Physics Department at Georgia State University in Atlanta and Dr.
Altun Zikry of the Physics Department at Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey.
The project focuses on photoionization of open-shell atoms using many-body
perturbation theory (MBPT), with particular emphasis on the very difficult
transition metals and rare earth elements, and photoionization with excitation
of closed-shell atoms. With the advent of the new powerful synchrotron light
sources, these kinds of systems will be more readily explored in the laboratory,
thus rendering this study quite timely. The further development of the MBPT
codes will engender the possibilities of applying this very powerful methodology
to systems where the amount of work was previously unmanageable and take full
advantage of the revolution in computer hardware. Scope: This research project
will be useful in promoting the scientific knowledge on the electron and photon
interactions with atoms. It involves US and Turkish scientists with
complementary expertise. Dr. Manson is an expert at extracting physical insights
from conceptually simple and well-designed calculations of photoionization
processes and the ionization of atoms by high-energy, charged particles. Dr.
Altun is most familiar with the use of the codes developed earlier for many-body
perturbation theory. This proposal meets INT objective of increasing
U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides.