* 9722974
* Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium Japonicum/Soybean   Symbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Mark O'Brian, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2001
* USD 364,000.00

9722974 O 'Brian Bradyrhizobium japonicum is the bacterial endosymbiont of
soybean that fixes nitrogen within cells of a specialized plant organ called a
root nodule. The broad objective of the research is to understand the regulation
and coordination of processes necessary for symbiotic development and function.
Nitrogen fixation is energy-intensive, and thus changes in the plant and
bacterial heme profile are concomitant with nodule ontogeny to accommodate this
demand. The project addresses the hypothesis that heme biosynthesis is a
regulated, interactive process in B. japonicum, and that it is coordinated with
cell differentiation and function. In addition, this system is excellent for
studies of heme synthesis and heme protein function, and serves as a paradigm
for both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. (-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is the first
universal committed heme precursor, and work from the P.I. 's laboratory
indicates that B. japonicum heme can be synthesized by host-derived ALA. This
model requires a mechanism for acquiring exogenous ALA, and suggests regulation
of bacterial heme biosynthesis at steps other than, or in addition to, ALA
synthesis. Indeed, data show that B. japonicum hemB is a highly regulated gene.
A novel protein called IRR has been identified that mediates iron control of
heme synthesis directly by repressing hemB expression and indirectly by
activating iron transport; hemB and IRR function and regulation will be studied.
The ALA uptake system of B. japonicum has been partially characterized, and
shown to be controlled by a homolog of the transcriptional regulator Lrp.
Finally, recent findings question the long-held view that plant nodule
hemoglobin heme is derived by the rhizobial symbiont, and that problem will be
revisited. Certain bacteria that live in the soil can form a beneficial
relationship with soybeans and other related plants of agricultural interest.
The relationship confers on the plant the ability to grow in soil in the absence
of applied nitrogen fe rtilizer, thus it has economic and environmental
importance. In addition, the symbiosis has become a good model for understanding
other biological phenomena that appear to differ from the one under study, but
in fact are very similar at the molecular level. The research focuses on
understanding how the bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum changes during its
interaction with soybean to adapt to its role in symbiosis, and how formation of
heme, a compound important in energy metabolism, is controlled.