* 9722452
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Patterns of Habitat Use  by Birds in a Disturbed Landscape in Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Blake, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1999
* USD 14,360.00

9722452 Blake This U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Program award will support Dr. John
Blake and Ms. Catherine Graham of the University of Missouri-Saint Louis, in a
research collaboration with Dr. Sergio Guevara, of the Institute of Ecology in
Xalapa, Mexico. The researchers aim to understand the effects of forest
fragmentation on patterns of habitat selection and movement by fruit-eating
birds. This understanding is important because birds disseminate the seeds of
many tropical forest plants. For this study, the researchers will examine the
relative influence of patch-level (vegetation structure, fruit abundance) and
landscape-level factors (habitat placement in the landscape) on patterns of
habitat use by studying bird use of three common habitat types in a landscape
dominated by pasture in the Los Tuxtlas region of Veracruz, Mexico. The research
will have three basic objectives: 1) determination of use patterns of distinct
habitat types; 2) development of a series of hypotheses (matrix models) to
predict bird movement; and 3) validation and refinement of these models through
comparison with an independently derived data set on movement patterns. The
Mexican counterparts at the Institute of Ecology in Xalapa have been studying
the role of isolated fig species in promoting seed dispersal by fruit-eating
vertebrates in Los Tuxtlas. Data collected in this study will complement the
work of these collaborators by examining the roles of patches and riparian
corridors in patterns of habitat selection and movement by fruit-eating birds.
***