* 9722969
* Modulation of Neuronal Differentiation by Growth Factor-Like Phospholipids
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Gabor TIGYI, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 09/30/1998
* USD 32,063.00

IBN-9722969 Gabor Tigyi The goal of this research is to understand the
fundamental mechanisms that regulate the development of neuronal connections in
the brain. Past research by this group has led to the discovery of a novel group
of molecules (lysophosphatidates) that inhibit the outgrowth of neuronal
processes that provide the wiring of the nervous system. Interestingly, these
molecules are generated after injury to the central nervous system and might
impair its regeneration and recovery of function after such events as spinal
cord injury, stroke, and brain hemorrhage. The work proposed for the next 6-12
months will investigate the molecular signals that mediate this inhibitory
effect. Specifically, we will generate, using molecular biological techniques,
special cell lines that are deficient in one of three key molecular switches,
Cdc42, Rac, and Rho, which are presumably involved in the inhibitory effect. By
using these engineered neuron- like cells, we will be able to answer which of
these three switches need(s) to be turned on for the inhibition to take place.
Once the switches mediating the inhibitory effect are determined, they will
become potential targets for drug development and therefore could lead to novel
treatments that can prevent paralysis in patients suffering from lack of
regeneration in the central nervous system.