* 9722814
* Characterization of Spatiotemporal Chaos
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Henry Greenside, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2001
* USD 104,063.00

9722814 Henry Greenside "CHARACTERIZATION OF SPATIOTEMPORAL CHAOS" Renewal of
support is requested for interdisciplinary research (nonequilibrium physics,
nonlinear dynamics, and computational mathematics) concerning the
characterization of spatiotemporal chaos in large nonequilibrium systems such as
those found in biological, chemical, fluid, and laser systems. The research will
use numerical methods, parallel computers, and carefully chosen mathematical
models to explore two questions: (1) how is spatiotemporal chaos related to the
mathematical structure of attractors in phase space? and, (2), can the infinite
hierarchy of unstable periodic orbits associated with a strange attractor be
used to characterize and control high-dimensional chaos? The proposed research
will: (a) yield new methods for analyzing spatiotemporal data accumulated by
experimentalists and by computational scientists; (b) provide new information
about unstable periodic orbits (UPOs) associated with extensive chaos and
suggest new strategies for their stabilization; (c) provide new insights about
parallel numerical algorithms for finding unstable periodic orbits of partial
differential equations in large spatial domains ; and (d) give valuable training
to students and postdocs at Duke in the numerical analysis, simulation, and
theory of complex nonlinear dynamical systems. Many problems in basic and
applied science require a deeper understanding of sustained nonequilibrium
systems in which complicated time-dependent behavior is caused by a steady flux
of energy and matter into a system. Examples can be found in almost all areas of
science but might include fluid turbulence, fibrillation in a heart, epilepsy in
a brain, the design of high-power lasers, and instabilities of electrical power
grids. A fundamental question of high current interest for many areas of science
is how to re late the spatial structure of a complex nonequilibrium medium to
its temporal state, especially when the system varies nonperiodically
(chaotically) in time. The proposed research suggests two ways of addressing
this question that have yet been incompletely explored by previous research.
This research will use applied mathematics and computer simulation to study
simplified mathematical models in which spatial and temporal structure can be
examined in detail, and then various insights will be tested with experimental
data. Eventually, this research should improve engineering control and design of
complex systems as well as provide a foundation for developing a fundamental
theory of sustained nonequilibrium systems.