* 9722435
* Symposium on:  RNA Biology II; to be held in North Carolina Research Triangle on October 17-19, 1997.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Paul Agris, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 4,195.00

9722435 Agris Many different groups are using a variety of approaches to
understand the plasticity of RNA and how RNA structure is recognized by other
RNAs and small molecules. A symposium on RNA will thus be very timely. Nine
major researchers (from the USA, Europe, and Canada) have accepted invitations
to speak at a Symposium on October 17-19, 1997, in the North Carolina Research
Triangle. With the acknowledgement and recognition of the RNA Society,
researchers in North Carolina have formed a "chapter", the RNA Society of North
Carolina, which is responsible for organizing and funding the Symposium on RNA
Biology. The objectives of this symposium are as follows: 1. Promote
communication in this important research area of RNA structure/function
relationships in a focused manner not obtainable at regular society, or other
group meetings; 2. Provide an educational experience for postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students in a setting conducive to open discussions with
established investigators who have broad experience in the field of RNA
interactions; 3. Stimulate discussion and the sharing of ideas and techniques by
principals as well as by postdoctoral fellows and students; and 4. Bring
researchers to a venue where three major universities, federal research
institutions and laboratories, and many corporate research centers are located.
RNA research has spawned a dozen biotechnology companies in the US alone and has
been funded extensively by several large, well-established corporations,
including those in North Carolina's Research Triangle. RNA synthesis, chemistry,
structure and function are central to the viability of all biological systems.
Research in these areas has led to biotechnological applications of RNA as both
target and reagent. New and exciting RNA structures have been discovered that
are both potential targets and tools, and are revealing interesting new
functional modes of interaction with proteins. This meeting will focus on this
area and will serve as a forum for sharing data and techniques. ***