* 9722274
* CAREER:  The Research Integrated Curriculum Involving A     Molecular Study of Retrotransposition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Jill Keeney, Juniata College
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 432,709.00

Keeney 9722274 The educational objectives of this CAREER award are to expose
students to the excitement of scientific research from the high school through
the college level. This is being achieved by: 1. Preparing undergraduate
students for engaging fully in research through development of an investigative
laboratory course, Molecular Techniques, based on the research in the principal
investigator's laboratory. 2. Providing the capstone experience of senior
research and providing the opportunity for students to present their research
results. 3. Involving local high school teachers in the research project and
assisting them in more effectively relating the research process to their
students through development and implementation of appropriate curricular
exercises. Developed exercises will be distributed through the successful
Science in Motion Outreach Project in place at Juniata College. 4. Continuing
building a strong Biochemistry/Cell and Molecular Biology Program through
advising and integration of educational activities which expose students to the
process and complexity of research. The research involves using a genetic system
to study the mechanism of reverse transcription in yeast retroelements. The
reverse transcriptase (RT) enzyme of these elements, like the RT enzymes of
retroviruses, employ a host-encoded tRNA molecule as a primer in the first step
of copying their RNA into DNA. The resulting DNA can then be incorporated into
the host genome, allowing for further replication. The research is appropriate
for undergraduates due to the relative simplicity of techniques required to
conduct yeast genetic studies. The research objectives are to: 1. Use saturated
mutagenesis of the tRNA gene, initiated in the Molecular Techniques laboratory,
to identify residues important for recognition by RT enzyme. 2. Use identified
tRNA mutations to screen a panel of RT mutations in vivo for the rescue of
transposition, thus identifying the amino acid residues in the RT enzyme
required f or recognition of the tRNA primer. 3. Purify mutant RT enzyme for
collaborative biochemical studies of interaction with primer tRNA.
Implementation of the research objectives relates directly to the institutional
goal of building a strong program which includes an opportunity for research
experience. The educational objectives will strengthen this goal by integrating
into the curriculum, beginning in high school, the opportunities for students to
experience the excitement of discovery. Students choosing to pursue a capstone
research project as college seniors will be well prepared, assuring a positive
and productive experience with cutting-edge research.