* 9722917
* The Eleventh International Congress on "Nitrogen Fixation"  will be held in Paris, France from July 20-25, 1997.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Paul Ludden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 4,000.00

Ludden 9722917 The Eleventh International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation will be
held in Paris, France, July 20-25, 1997. Nitrogen fixation is one of the most
important subject areas relating to the support of life on earth and encompasses
concerns related to natural resource conservation, particularly fossil fuels,
plant-microbe signaling and interaction, regulatory mechanisms, nutrition, food
production, etc. This congress is of great importance for this scientific field.
Scientists from over 30 different countries are expected to attend. The topics
to be discussed will cover virtually all aspects of biological and non-
biological nitrogen fixation and will include the following major topics: 1)
chemistry and biochemistry of nitrogen fixation; 2) genetics and regulation of
nitrogen fixation and assimilation; 3) rhizobial and actinorhizal symbiosis; 4)
environmental and physiological factors controlling nitrogen fixation; 5)
nitrogen fixation by bacteria in association with grasses; 6) nitrogen fixation
in forests; 7) sustainable agriculture and nitrogen fixation; 8) genetics of
legumes and symbiotic organisms; 9) taxonomy and phylogeny of diazotrophs; 10)
nitrogen fixation by photosynthetic bacteria and cyanobacteria; 11) carbon
metabolism of nitrogen-fixing organisms; and 12) nitrogen fixation and
environmental stresses. This grant will be used to provide travel funds for U.S.
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other more junior scientists. All
recipients will present their work at the meeting.