* 9722264
* CAREER:  Study of Phosphatidyl Inositol Regulation of       Cytoskeletal Proteins Through Dendritic Polymer Mimics of   Lipid Assemblies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Martha Oakley, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2002
* USD 340,000.00

9722264 Oakley Lipids are crucial components of many signal transduction
pathways, specifically binding to target proteins and modulating their
functions. In spite of the biological importance of these interactions, the
origin of specificity in protein-lipid interactions is not well understood. This
work will focus on the interaction between the actin-binding protein profilin
and the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). Binding by PIP2 to
profilin is both specific and multivalent, with approximately five molecules of
PIP2 binding to each molecule of protein. To identify the determinants of
specificity in the complex between profilin and PIP2 lipid assemblies, a
branched, polymeric, covalent scaffold capable of presenting multiple copies of
the headgroup from PIP2 will be used. PIP2 headgroups and headgroup analogs will
be attached to polymers of various sizes. The effects on complex formation of
the number of headgroups available for binding, the structure of the headgroups
attached, and their spatial arrangement will be tested. Furthermore, dendrimeric
analogs containing spectroscopic probes of crosslinking moieties will be used to
probe the protein binding site. Such analogs will not only allow an exploration
of the protein and lipid determinants of specificity, but will also be used to
investigate the mechanism by which PIP2 modulates profilin function. The
cytoskeleton is a dynamic network of protein filaments that determines the shape
of eukaryotic cells and can reorganize to allow directed cell motion in response
to external stimuli. The means by which external stimuli are transmitted to the
cytoskeleton are incompletely understood. Nonetheless, the lipid
phosphatidylinositol 4-5-bisphosphate (PIP2) is known to play a key role,
binding to proteins that regulate filament formation in the cytoskeleton and
modulating their functions. The purpose of this work is to gain a detailed
understanding of the specificity of these protein-lipid interactions, providing
too ls for further dissection of cytoskeletal signaling pathways.