* 9722785
* Mechanisms of Long-Term Transynaptic Regulation of          Neurotransmitter Release
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Alan Grinnell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 06/30/2000
* USD 277,140.00

Project Summary: IBN-9722785, Alan D. Grinnell, P.I. Mechanisms of Long-Term
Transynaptic Regulation of Neurotransmitter Release" Competitive interactions
between synapses innervating the same target cell are critical in the
establishment and refinement of connectivity in the nervous system, and in the
adjustment of synaptic strength with use or experience. One of the most
intriguing forms is known as "Hebbian" plasticity, in which synaptic inputs that
are active simultaneously with postsynaptic activity are retained or
strengthened, while synapses that are not active at the same time as the
postsynaptic cell are suppressed or lost. A particularly clear, accessible
instance of such pre-synaptic suppression is that observed in synapses between
Xenopus motoneurons and muscle cells in culture. Transmitter release at a
synapse is suppressed by manipulations that elevate the calcium concentration in
the muscle cell, simulating activation of another synaptic input. The synapse
can be protected from suppression if it is active during the time of calcium-
induced feedback. The mechanisms of suppression and protection are unknown. We
have developed techniques for patch-clamping synaptic terminals and postsynaptic
cells simultaneously in this system, allowing us to analyze rigorously the
magnitude and time course of ionic currents in the terminal and the associated
neurotransmitter release. With a third patch pipette it is possible to introduce
reagents into the synaptic terminal through the neuronal cell body. Since
calcium influx during a presynaptic action potential is critical to
neurotransmitter release, we will first (1) determine whether long-term
suppression of synaptic function is associated with a decrease in calcium-
influx either by direct modulation of calcium channels or by changes in other
ionic currents in the terminal, and what these changes are at the level of
single channels. If suppression of release can be explained by changes in ionic
currents, we will determine (2) whether the suppression effects are mediated by
G-protein associated receptors, and whether this is by a direct ("membrane
delimited") or indirect (second messenger mediated) pathway, and (3) whether
cyclic nucleotides help mediate the effect. In addition, we will test (4)
whether protection by simultaneous synaptic activity is due to prevention of the
suppressive influence or to some compensatory change, and (5) what aspect of
neuronal activity is responsible for this protection. The Xenopus motoneuron-
muscle cell synapses are robust, characteristic in most respects of mature
synapses. The Hebbian character of the modulation, the evidence for activity-
dependent protection of synapses, the accessibility of the preparation, and
above all the ability to monitor and manipulate pre-synaptic events make this an
ideal preparation in which to obtain insights about mechanisms of long-term
synaptic remodeling and plasticity.