* 9722956
* Hormones, Programmed Cell Death and DNA Breakdown in        Aleurone Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Russell Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1998
* USD 115,000.00

9722956 Jones The goals of this project are to characterize the cellular events
that accompany programmed cell death (PCD) in the barley aleurone cell. PCD in
aleurone cells is controlled by the hormones gibberellic acid (GA) and abscisic
acid (ABA). GA induces PCD in barley aleurone and ABA prevents cell death.
Experiments are proposed to characterize DNA breakdown, to ask how DNA is
degraded, and to identify the enzymes that are involved in this process.
Apoptosis in animal cells is accompanied by intranucleosomal cleavage of nuclear
DNA resulting in the formation of characteristic DNA ladders. Previously
published work by others has suggested that DNA laddering is a feature of PCD in
the barley aleurone cell. Preliminary data from the Principal Investigator's
laboratory show that whereas PCD is accompanied by DNA breakdown in GA-treated
aleurone cells, formation of DNA ladders does not occur. A detailed study is
planned of DNA degradation from barley aleurone layers and protoplasts treated
with hormones that regulate PCD to characterize the mechanism of DNA breakdown.
The nucleases in aleurone cells will be characterized to determine whether these
enzymes only possess exonuclease activity, which would account for the absence
of DNA laddering in the aleurone cell. Experiments will also be carried out to
determine when DNA breakdown occurs in aleurone cells. The Principal
Investigator has established that DNA breakdown occurs after GA but not
following ABA treatment. Is DNA degraded in living cells or does DNA degradation
only occur after PCD? Is the absence of DNA degradation in ABA treated cells a
result of the low levels of nuclease activity in these cells, or is DNA modified
to be less rapidly degraded in ABA treated cells? Fluorescent dyes that stain
DNA in living aleurone cells will be used to monitor DNA degradation and to
correlate changes in DNA with PCD. If DNA breakdown occurs after aleurone cells
die, dead cells will be purified from prot oplasts to monitor how the DNA is
degraded. In the barley seed, there is a starch-rich tissue called the
endosperm, which serves as a reservoir for nourishment of the developing plant
embryo inside the seed. The aleurone layer is a cellular tissue surrounding the
endosperm, which produces and secretes hydrolytic enzymes that digest the
starchy endosperm into monosaccharides that are can be used directly as food by
the developing embryo. The aleurone can thus be thought of as the digestive
organ of the developing embryo within the germinating seed. When the aleurone
has finished producing the enzymes, it has no further purpose and the cells of
the tissue undergo a programmed cell death. The developmentally regulated life
and death of the cells of the aleurone are under the control of two major plant
hormones, gibberellic acid and abscisic acid. The results of this work will
provide valuable insights into the process of developmentally regulated PCD in
plants and the roles that hormones play in regulating this process. ***