* 9722539
* U.S.- Czech Research on Knowledge Systems Affecting Rural   Landscapes in the Czech Republic and the U.S. Midwest
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* J. Sanford Rikoon, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2002
* USD 29,897.00

INT 9722539 Rikoon This U.S.-Czech project between J. Sandford Rikoon of the
University of Missouri-Columbia and Miloslav Lapka of the Czech Institute of
Landscape Ecology will feature a comparative analysis of the knowledge systems
and knowledge communities of private farmers in two industrialized countries,
the United States and the Czech Republic. Efforts will emphasize a synthesis of
sociocultural and political economy approaches with the intent of contributing
to a comprehensive and syncretic understanding of human behaviors impacting on
the landscape. The overall collaboration will benefit from a multi-disciplinary,
macro-level qualitative methodology employed by the Czechs and the U.S.
participants' expertise in use of analytical tools such as geographic
information systems for spatial representations of social, cultural, economic
and environmental data. To better understand intersections between ecological,
social and economic systems, the researchers have chosen a watershed as the
primary unit of analysis. Results are expected to offer new insights into the
dynamics associated with knowledge creation and may contribute to comparative
methodologies for analyzing knowledge bases which, in this case, will pertain to
human ecology. This project in sociology fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the Untied States
and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources
in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??