* 9722887
* Analysis of Voltage-Induced Structural Changes in Cell      Membrane Components with Miniature Infrared Waveguide       Sensors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,10/27/1998
* Mark Braiman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/27/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9722887 Braiman The goal of this research is to develop miniature infrared wave-
guide in order to detect an analyze voltage-induced conformational changes in
membrane-bound proteins. The motivation for miniaturization of the sensors,
using a thickness of 5-50 (m and a width of 0.5-2 mm, is to permit in-situ
observation of IR spectra from membranes of intact individual cells. This will
allow IR spectroscopy to be performed as a function of cell membrane potential,
which will be controlled using a whole-cell voltage clamp. Sensitive voltage-
dependent IR differences spectra should thus reveal how the living cell's
membrane components respond to transient shifts in transmembrane voltage. A
particular goal is to prove experimentally a set of feasibility calculations
predicting that this approach will allow voltage-induced difference spectra to
be measured on an ion channel expressed in a frog oocyte, or on a small channel
peptide reconstituted into a giant liposome. The cell or liposome will be held
in contact with a miniature supported planar Ge waveguide. A portion of the IR
light energy propagating along the waveguide is carried in a evanescent wave
that can be absorbed by molecules near its surface, including those in the cell
or liposome membrane. Detection of a reproducible voltage-dependence of the
evanescent-wave absorption spectrum is the principal goal of the project, since
this voltage-dependent spectrum will provide information about the structural
changes involved in channel opening. A kind of biosensor, based on a thin
genmanium waveguide that conducts infrared light, will be used to detect
structural changes in the membranes of single cells. When a cell, or a single-
layer biomembrane vesicle resembling a cell, is placed in contact with the
germanium surface, the light transmitted through the waveguide can be absorbed
at selective wavelengths, and the spectrum measured. The waveguide concentrates
infrared light along a path that maximizes the light's interaction with mol
ecules in the cell membrane, relative to the light's interaction with the
strongly-IR-absorbing bulk water that must also be present to allow the cell to
function normally. Selective absorption of different infrared wavelengths by the
cell membrane's components will be the basis for spectroscopic analysis of their
chemical structures. A particular goal is a basic understanding of how various
ion-channel proteins function. However, this research should also advance our
national technical capabilities in the sensitive chemical analysis of a wide
variety of tiny samples, which may be of importance for such varied tasks as
environmental monitoring. ***