* 9722227
* Career:  Regulation of Virulence Genes in Agrobacterium     tumefaciens
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Shouguang Jin, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 282,358.00

Jin 9722227 Agrobacterium tumefaciens is a gram-negative soil bacterium which
causes tumors on plants by means of natural genetic engineering. The organism
harbors a large tumor inducing plasmid (Ti-plasmid) which plays an important
role in plant tumor formation. Upon infection of a plant wound site, A.
tumefaciens delivers a piece of DNA, called transfer DNA (T-DNA), from its Ti-
plasmid into plant cells where it becomes integrated into the plant chromosome.
Another region on the Ti-plasmid, the virulence genes (vir genes), is not
transferred but required for the transfer of the T-DNA from Agrobacterium into
plant cells. The expression of these vir genes is specifically induced by plant
signal molecules, including simple phenolic compounds and monosaccharides. This
naturally occurring plant transformation system has been modified to genetically
engineer a variety of plant species with genes of interest. Many studies
suggested that the level of vir gene expression determines the efficiency of
plant transformation as well as the range of plant species that can be
transformed. This research is intended to further analyze the molecular
mechanism of the vir gene activation by plant signal molecules. Genetic as well
as biochemical approaches are being carried out to study the structure-function
relationship of the VirA protein and to characterize the chromosomal genes of
Agrobacterium that affect the vir gene activation. Based on these studies, we
will reconstitute vir gene activation in a genetically and biochemically well
studied E. coli background. Specifically the following objectives are being
carried out: 1) Study the structure-function relationship of the VirA sensor
protein. Chimeric fusion proteins will be generated between VirA and other known
phenolic binding proteins to localize the phenolic binding domain of the VirA
protein. Further, the virA mutants that have altered specificity for the
phenolic inducers will be characterized. Amino acid residues of the VirA protein
that are i mportant for the recognition of the phenolic compounds will be
identified. Finally, the binding of VirA protein to the phenolic compounds will
be studied in vitro using radio-labeled acetosyringone. 2) Characterize
chromosomal mutants that are defective in the vir gene expression. The
transposon insertional mutant strains of the Agrobacterium, those defective in
the vir gene activation, will be analyzed further to identify chromosomal genes
that are disrupted. Novel loci that affect vir gene activation will be cloned
and sequenced. 3) Reconstitute vir gene induction in E. coli. The A. tumefaciens
chromosomal cosmid clone which confers vir gene expression in E. coli in the
presence of a constitutive virG gene will be characterized. The functional gene
will be subcloned and sequenced for further studies. Using the newly isolated
gene, an acetosyringone mediated vir gene activation will be reconstituted in E.
coIi. These studies will help us to better understand the molecular mechanism of
vir gene activation by plant signal molecules and enable us to reconstitute and
study the T-DNA transport system in a genetically and biochemically well studied
E. coli background, which will facilitate the studies of the T-DNA transport
from bacteria into plants. These studies should eventually contribute to the
improvement of existing Agrobacterium mediated plant cell transformation
systems, especially transforming economically and environmentally important
plant species, including rice, corn and wheat. The educational plan includes (1)
Development of advanced teaching materials. The plant-microbe interaction topics
will be introduced into graduate courses and computer-based self-learning
teaching materials will be developed; (2) Support of undergraduate student
research, especially involving underrepresented minority students; and (3)
Improvement of teaching materials used in an existing outreach project for local
high school teachers.