* 9722772
* 1997 U.S.-Korea Seminar on Storm- and Mesoscale Weather     Analysis and Prediction
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Seon Ki Park, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1998
* USD 36,208.00

Droegemeier 9722772 This award supports the participation of American
researchers in a U.S.-Korea seminar on "Storm- and Mesoscale Weather Analysis
and Prediction" to be held in Seoul, Korea in October 1997. The co-organizers
are Professors Kelvin Droegemeier of the University of Oklahoma and Dong-Kyou
Lee of Seoul National University. This seminar will bring together leading
researchers to discuss storm- and mesoscale meteorology. The goal of the seminar
is to integrate, through scientific exchange and the initiation of specific
collaborative projects, research efforts in Korea and the United States to
significantly advance the technology of operational weather analysis and
prediction in both countries. The feasibility of site-specific weather
forecasting is made plausible by recent technological advancements, such as
improved means of sensing the environment at a relatively high resolution, and
the availability of powerful parallel computer resources to run mesoscale
numerical weather prediction systems. The potential impact and value of locally
accurate weather forecasts on society and the economy are enormous. The United
States and Korea have common research interests in this area and both countries
exhibit state-of-the-art observation networks. The exchange of ideas and data
with Korean experts will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and
will set the stage for future collaborative projects. ***