* 9722134
* Dissertation Research: Ontogenetic Ecomorphology of Escape  Performance in Threespine Stickleback
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Bell 9722134 Lake populations of the threespine stickleback fish (Gasterosteus
aculeatus) are believed to be derived from marine populations that migrate to
fresh water to breed. Lake populations have diverged morphologically and
behaviorally from the marine condition. Stickleback in some lakes feed on
plankton in open water and are often exposed to predators. Stickleback in other
lakes feed on bottom-living invertebrates and frequent vegetated habitats that
provide refuge from predators. Adults that differ in feeding mode show body-
shape variation that is probably related to the swimming styles favored by
different foraging behaviors and predation risks. Little is known of foraging
mode, locomotion, and body shape in larval and juvenile stickleback. The
proposed study will quantify variation in (1) morphological features that affect
predator evasion and foraging locomotion (using new methods involving
morphological landmarks) and (2) swimming ability (by measuring steady and
evasive swimming performance) in larvae, juveniles, and adults from different
lake populations in Alaska. Variation in vertebral number, which may affect
evasive swimming, will also be analyzed. Lake populations will be compared with
a migratory population (the putative ancestral form). Field observations and
stomach-content analyses will be conducted to assess variation through
development and among populations in diet, foraging behavior, and microhabitat
use.