* 9723791
* The Genetics of Cell and Tissue Shape in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Joseph Jack, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Jack 97-23791 The actin-myosin cytoskeleton controls the shape of cells in a
variety of situations. Changes in the shapes of cells caused by contraction of
the actin cytoskeleton are known to be responsible for tissue morphogenesis,
invagination of epithelial sheets, cell rearrangement, and cell motility in a
variety of organisms. Contraction of the actin cytoskeleton is caused by the
action of nonmuscle myosin proteins on actin filaments. Preliminary results
identify three mutations that prevent cells in various tissues--especially
tubular epithelia and the nervous system--from assuming their proper shape. One
of the three mutations, zipper, encodes nonmuscle myosin II. The products of the
other two, raw and rib, are unknown. The rib and zip mutations are nearly
identical in phenotype. Both cause embryonic defects and abnormalities in tissue
morphology consistent with a function of their products in conferring cell
shape. Mutations of raw cause a subset of the phenotypes of rib and zip mutants.
In addition to the remarkable similarity of their phenotypes, mutations of the
rib and zip genes are synthetically lethal, further suggesting that the products
function in the same process. Experiments in this proposal are designed to test
the hypothesis that the products of the raw and rib genes are required for the
cell shape changes caused by the contraction of the actin cytoskeleton by
nonmuscle myosin II. Tissues and cells of mutant embryos will be studied in
greater detail to test the prediction that the abnormalities caused by the
mutations will be consistent with defects in cell shape. In order to test
hypotheses regarding the functional interaction between the raw and rib products
and nonmuscle myosin, the distribution of filamentous actin and nonmuscle myosin
between tissues and within cells will be compared in wild type and mutant
animals. In addition, the requirement of other cytoskeletal components on tissue
morphology will be examined by assessment of the mutant phenotypes and genetic i
nteractions of mutations of the genes that encode them. Cloning of rib will be
undertaken in order to characterize the sequence, cellular location, and
biochemical interaction of its product with nonmuscle myosin II.