* 9723183
* The Role of MAP Kinase in Neural Specification in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Amy Sater, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2001
* USD 279,250.00

Sater 97-23183 The renewed investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying
neural induction in Xenopus has identified both positive and negative regulators
of neural fate. These include the neural repressor Bone Morphogenetic Protein-4
(BMP-4) and its antagonists, the neural inducers noggin and chordin, which are
thought to act by binding and sequestering BMP-4. Moreover, several studies have
shown that basic Fibroblast Growth Factor (bFGF) can induce posterior neural
ectodemm. Since FGF signals are transduced primarily by the Mitogen-Activated
Protein Kinase (MAP kinase) pathway, these results implicate MAP kinase in the
response to neural induction. Despite these advances, the molecular mechanisms
underlying the establishment of neural fate and anteroposterior neural pattern
remain poorly understood. Preliminary results from this laboratory provide
provocative evidence that the MAP kinase pathway regulates commitment to neural
fate in gastrula ectoderm. Previous work has shown that ectoderm cells undergo
an increase in intracellular pH (pHi) in response to endogenous inductive
signals. More recent results indicate that this alkalinization is necessary and
sufficient for the initiation of anterior neural-specific gene expression in
gastrula ectoderm (Uzman et al., submitted). Moreover, both neural induction and
artificial alkalinization of uninduced ectoderm lead to an increase in MAP
kinase phosphorylation and activity over that observed in uninduced ectoderm at
the same stage. Preliminary data further show that neural-specific gene
expression is greatly reduced or absent in induced ectoderm overexpressing MAP
Kinase Phosphatase-1, which dephosphorylates and inactivates MAP kinase in vivo.
These findinga, together with the earlier studies on the inductive effects of
bFGF, suggest the following two hypotheses: 1) MAP kinase plays a key role in
neural specification during gastrulation; and 2) increasing levels of MAP Kinase
activity in newly induced neural ectoderm lead to an increasingl y posterior
positional identity. The proposed work addresses the role of MAP kinase in the
establishment of neural fate and anteroposterior pattern in Xenopus. The first
set of experiments will determine whether there is a correlation between neural
fate and MAPK activity by quantifying MAP kinase activity in uninduced ectoderm
treated with known regulators of neural fate. The second set will test for a
requirement for MAP kinase activity in neural induction by examining neural
specification in ectoderm in which the MAP kinase signals are disrupted by
overexpression of MKP-1. The third study will investigate whether activation of
MAP kinase in gastrula ectoderm is sufficient to bring about neural
specification, and whether elevating MAP kinase activity in newly induced neural
ectoderm leads to a posterior shift in positional identity. Finally, the fourth
study will determine whether the MAP kinase pathway underlies the activation of
anterior neural-specific gene expression in response to intracellular
alkalinization. This work will reveal intracellular regulatory mechanisms that
underlie the establishment of neural fate.