* 9723532
* Role of Parafusin in Membrane Fusion in Exocytosis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Birgit Satir, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9723532 Satir Regulative secretion in eukaryotic cells involves a large number
of components that interact to control membrane fusion and exocytosis via a
signal transduction cascade. In many systems, this cascade is initiated by an
increase in cytosolic Ca2+. The targets of this Ca2+ increase are not completely
understood. They probably include a phosphoglycoprotein, parafusin (PFUS), that
is widely found from protozoa to mammalian cells. In Paramecium where PFUS has
been carefully studied, a Ca2+-dependent dephosphoglucosylation of the molecule
is clearly correlated with exocytosis. The possibility that PFUS is a critical
component of the secretory apparatus has now been enhanced by the finding that
PFUS localizes to the surface "coat" of the dense core secretory vesicles in
Paramecium and to the cell membrane prior to exocytosis and that it changes its
localization when exocytosis is induced. Coat proteins are important in many
membranes to determine localization within the cell. In this proposal we seek to
explore the function of PFUS in membrane fusion and exocytosis, including a
possible relationship of PFUS to specific components of the 20S docking complex.
This function may have fundamental consequences for the signal transduction
cascade leading to exocytosis and secretory product release in tissues of
multicellular organisms. The secretion of proteins from cells is an essential
physiological process in cells as diverse as unicellular organisms to organs of
animals. This process involves the intracellular packaging of secretory proteins
into membrane-bounded vesicles that fuse with the cell's limiting membrane, or
plasma membrane, to be secreted into extracellular space. A conserved protein,
termed parafusin appears to be involved in the fusion of the secretory vesicles
to the plasma membrane. The PI has found that the reversible attachment of a
phosphoglucose to the parafusin protein may regulate the fusion of the secretory
vesicle to the plasma membrane. This type of modification of a protein is
apparently unique to this protein. The regulation of the attachment and removal
of the phosphoglucose is proposed as a critical step to regulate the secretion
of proteins from cells. This award will fund basic research in the functional
role and regulation of parafusin phosphorylation in protein secretion.