* 9723043
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  A Model System for the Development of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2003
* Barbara Fadem, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/2003
* USD 191,633.00

Fadem 9723043 Sex differences in reproductive behavior in mammals are determined
not only by the genes and by hormones produced in adulthood, but also by steroid
hormones secreted by the gonads during perinatal development. Although it is
known that testicular androgens play an important role during perinatal
development, androgens are metabolized into estrogens within specific brain
cells. Determining whether an androgen or its estrogenic metabolite is the
differentiating hormone is complicated since placental mammalian fetuses have
systems which actually "protect" them from maternal estrogen. Thus, getting
estrogen to the fetus and quantifying the amount of estrogen acting on the fetus
is extremely important yet almost impossible to achieve. Dr. Fadem has developed
a marsupial model to examine the role of estrogen. The newborns are born at a
developmental stage equivalent to that of a 13-day fetal rat or 8-week human
embryo. Because the newborn marsupial is essentially an external fetus, studies
utilizing marsupials can give unique information about the effects of hormones
on reproductive development. Dr. Fadem will modulate the hormonal environment of
the newborns and then assess the effects on behavior, morphology and physiology
in adulthood. The results from these studies will contribute to a better
understanding of various human birth disorders that result from insufficient or
excess steroid hormone exposure during development.