* 9723633
* Refinement and Comparisons of the Structures of             DAHPsynthases and KDOPsynthase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ronald Bauerle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9723633 Kretsinger The structures of 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate
synthase (DAHPsynthase) and 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate-8-phosphate synthase
(KDOPsynthase), will be determined by X-ray crystallography at atomic
resolution, alone and in complex with substrates, inhibitors and regulators. The
enzymes share 19% sequence identity and have secondary structures that resemble
one another. The enzymes differ in their use of metal ions and regulation by
feedback inhibition. Thus the ultimate goal of these studies is to determine the
similarities and possible homologies between these enzymes. These enzymes
catalyze the condensation of phosphoenol pyruvate with a sugar molecule
containing four (erythrose-4-phosphate) and five (arabinose-5-phosphate)
carbons, respectively. In both cases, an unusual cleavage occurs, in that the
carbon-oxygen bond of phosphoenol pyruvate is cleaved and not the oxygen-
phosphorus bond. Both enzymes are at important points of a biosynthetic pathway,
one leading to aromatic end products, the other leading to the
lipopolysaccharide of the outer membrane in Gram negative bacteria. The overall
goal of this structural investigation by X-ray crystallography is to understand
the similarities and differences in substrate binding and mechanisms of action
of these two enzymes, and whether these two enzymes are homologues or have
arisen by convergent evolution. ***