* 9723579
* Characterization of K+ Channels in the Archaeon, Methanococcus jannaschii
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Karen Ketchum, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9723579 Ketchum Potassium ion channels catalyze the transport of K+ across
cellular membranes. These proteins are part of a large family of cation
transporters found in all three domains of life, Eubacteria, Archae, and
Eukarya. All members of this family have a common structural motif (M1-P-M2)
consisting of a highly conserved pore-region (P) bordered by two membrane-
spanning helices (M1,M2). Sub-families are distinguished by the presence of
additional membrane segments, multiple M1-P-M2 motifs, or associated regulatory
domains. These differences indicate that both intragenic duplication and domain
fusion have played a role in the evolution of ion channel genes. The first
complete sequence of an Archeon, Methanococcus jannaschii, was recently
published. Three open reading frames (MJ0138, MJ0139 and MJ1357) were identified
which encoded peptide segments similar to the P- region of K+ selective channels
found in eukaryotes. MJ0138 and MJ1357 have a predicted membrane topology
similar to inward rectifier channels with two transmembrane segments. In
contrast MJ0139 is analogous to Shaker K channels with 5 hydrophobic regions.
MJ0139 is immediately followed by MJ0138 on the chromosome. These proteins are
translated in the same reading frame and separated by 3 nucleotides of a stop
codon. Their M1-P- M2 sequences display 65% identity suggesting that the
adjacent pore motifs originated from an incomplete, intragenic duplication. The
fusion of these two would result in a coding sequence similar to that of tandem
pore channels found in eukaryotes. Thus these Archaeon sequences may represent
an intermediate stage in K+ channel evolution. This research will examine the
transport activity of the three channel proteins from M. jannaschii, and
determine whether these proteins function in a similar way as the channels found
in eukaryotes. Each protein will be put in two experimental systems where K+
transport can be monitored: budding yeast cell and Xenpo us oocytes. A
comprehensive computer analysis of K+ channel genes from eubacteria, Archaea and
Eukarya will be done, to identify conserved structural motifs and establish the
evolution of this gene family. %%% The research in this grant will study the
function and genetic sequence of a new type of K+ channel in Archaea, and
compare this to similar studies in yeast and eukaryotes. These studies will
provide important information on the evolution and function of these channels
which are important for the transport of K and the maintenance of ionic charge
in cells. ***