* 9723605
* Blue Light Photoreception and Guard Cell Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Eduardo Zeiger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/2000
* USD 325,000.00

9723605 Zeiger This research proposal focuses on blue light perception and
transduction in guard cells, and its role in stomatal function. Guard cells
sense internal and external signals in the leaf environment and integrate them
into regulated stomatal apertures that control leaf gas exchange. The blue light
response of guard cells belongs to a large family of blue light responses which
are central to plant adaptations and acclimations to their environment. The
identity of the chromophore(s) mediating blue light sensing in higher plants
remains unknown. Recent work with hy4 and nph1, two Arabidopsis mutants for blue
light- dependent inhibition of stem elongation and phototropism, has provided
evidence for a flavoprotein mediating blue light photoreception. Both mutants
however are reported to have normal stomatal responses to blue light, indicating
that guard cells might have a distinct blue light photoreceptor. Recent studies
have identified the carotenoid, zeaxanthin, as a putative blue light
photoreceptor in guard cells. The blue light sensitivity of guard cells
increases with their zeaxanthin content, and inhibition of zeaxanthin formation
by dithiothreitol (DTT), inhibits blue light-dependent stomatal opening, without
altering opening stimulated by guard cell photosynthesis.. In the proposed
experiments, the blue light responses of guard cells from wild type Arabidopsis
leaves will be characterized, and compared with that of the zeaxanthin-less
mutant, npq1. This mutant has a defective violaxanthin de-epoxidase and is
unable to accumulate zeaxanthin. Since the de-epoxidase gene appears to be a
single copy gene, it is anticipated that npq1 guard cells will also lack
zeaxanthin. We have recently confirmed that guard cells from npq1 are devoid of
zeaxanthin. Gas exchange experiments with intact wild type and npq1 leaves will
be used to establish whether Arabidopsis stomata have a typical response to blue
light and whether the response has been altered by the lack of zeaxanthin in
npq1. Guard cells in enzymatically cleaned epidermis will be used to study the
stomatal response to blue light in isolated guard cells. Initial experiments
have just shown that npq1 guard cells fail to open in response to blue light
under a red light background. If detailed studies support this initial funding,
the mutant will be used to test whether the inhibitor of zeaxanthin formation,
DTT can mimic the genetic lesion in npq1. Other experiments will investigate a
possible role of Ca2+ as a second messenger transducing blue light sensing at
the guard cell chloroplast to a H+ ATPase at the guard cell plasma membrane.
Patch clamp experiments in the whole cell configuration will be used to measure
blue light-induced electrical currents at the guard cell plasma membrane, over a
range of intracellular Ca2+ concentrations shown to alter proton pumping
activity in guard cells. Isolated guard cell chloroplasts will be used to test
whether blue light elicits Ca2+ fluxes across the chloroplast envelope that
could account for in vivo changes in cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations. We will also
investigate whether transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing the Ca2+ indicator,
aequorin, can be used to characterize Ca2+ fluxes between the chloroplast and
the cytosol. The proposed research has significant potential for the conclusive
identification of a blue light photoreceptor in guard cells and a mutant for
stomatal responses to blue light, and for the detailed characterization of the
sensory transducing cascade of an important blue light response. Plants perceive
light in several wavelengths that control growth, orientation and development.
Blue light perception and how it is signaled to mediate downstream effects has
been a controversy. At the heart of the controversy is what pigment absorbs the
perceived light and transmits the information downstream. Dr. Zeiger has
obtained mutants of the pigment zeaxanthin synthesis and the mu tants exhibit
effects that indicate that this pigment is responsible for perceiving blue
light. With this award Dr. Zeiger will use mutant and wild type plants to
analyze how zeaxanthin blue light photoreception signals opening response of
guard cells mediating gas exchange in leaves. Other studies will focus on how
zeaxanthin photoreception induces calcium fluxes in cells that mediate
intracellular signaling. This research is important because it addresses one of
the most basic aspects of how plants function by responding to light in its
environment. ***