* 9723393
* Adaptive Mechanisms for Aluminum Tolerance in               Ectomycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Joseph Morton, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 08/31/2001
* USD 327,470.00

Cumming 9723393 Mycorrhizal fungi form a beneficial relationship with the roots
of trees, increasing the aluminum (Al) tolerance of the tree hosts. However,
little is known about the influence of elevated A1 on ectomycorrhizal community
and population structure or the mechanistic basis of A1 tolerance in these
organisms. The proposed research will fill this void by: (i) determining the
extent to which soil Al influences communities and populations of
ectomycorrhizal fungi; and (ii) elucidating mechanisms of Al tolerance in
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Reclaimed coal mine soils differing in acidity and
available A1 will be used in these investigations. Population studies will
assess species richness as a function of soil A1. Genetic studies will utilize
DNA fingerprinting to analyze biodiversity in populations from low and high A1
sites. Physiological studies will investigate the operation of potential Al-
detoxification systems. Finally, the capacity of selected fungi to confer A1
stress tolerance to Pinus strobes seedlings will determined. Together, these
studies will indicate whether Al influences biodiversity in ectomycorrhizal
fungi and what physiological mechanisms are selected for in acid soils.
Isolation and identification of genotypes tolerant of Al may provide an aid to
the future reforestation and reclamation of mined sites. This award is supported
by Integrative Biology and Neuroscience and the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).