* 9723015
* Nuclear Permeability as a Function of Cellular Activity
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Carl Feldherr, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 06/30/2002
* USD 492,445.00

9723015 Feldherr Signal-mediated nuclear transport varies as a function of
cellular activity. Thus, as proliferating fibroblasts become quiescent there is
a significant decrease in the size of materials that are able to enter the
nucleus. Conversely, nuclear transport capacity increases in rapidly dividing,
SV40-transformed cells. The experiments proposed are designed to investigate
nuclear transport during oogenesis in Xenopus laevis. There are several
advantages for using this system to study the regulation of nuclear transport.
First, there is a considerable amount of data, obtained from oocytes, relating
to the composition and structure of the pores, as well as the cytoplasmic
factors that are required for transport. Second, since oogenesis is accompanied
by a high level of nuclear synthetic activity, these cells are especially useful
for studying nuclear transport. Third, it is possible to correlate nuclear
permeability changes with specific changes in RNA synthesis. In preliminary
studies, it was found that there is a size-dependent increase in the nuclear
import of colloidal gold particles coated with nucleoplasmin (a Xenopus nuclear
protein) as Stage 1 oocytes progress to Stage 2 (early vitellogenesis). This is
accompanied by a shift in RNA production from primarily 5S RNA (during Stage 1)
to mainly 18 and 28S rRNA (in Stage 2 cells). Studies are proposed to further
characterize nuclear transport capacity at these stages, and determine: 1, if
there are differences in import rates that are independent of substrate size;
and 2, if there are corresponding differences in nuclear export. Transport will
be investigated by microinjecting either fluorescent labeled proteins or coated
colloidal gold particles into intact cells, and subsequently analyzing the
intracellular distribution of the particles. It has also been established, using
permeabilized HeLa cells, that cytosolic extracts obtained from vitellogenic
oocytes are more effective in promoting nuclear import than Stage 1 extracts.
There is evidence that this difference is due either to variations in the
activity of cytoplasmic translocation factors (rather than binding factors) or
to the presence of transport inhibitors (particularly in Stage 1 extracts).
Experiments will be performed to distinguish between these possibilities, and
also to determine if known translocation factors (e.g., Ran or p10) are involved
in altering transport capacity. The eukaryotic cell is highly compartmentalized,
with various specific cellular functions and metabolic processes localized in
one or another compartment. These functions need to be coordinated and
regulated. The nucleus of the cell is the compartment which contains the genetic
material, DNA, and within which all of the DNA-based metabolic functions
(replication and transcription) occur. Those proteins that are involved in these
functions are manufactured in the cytoplasm, and must be transported into the
nucleus; similarly, the RNA that is transcribed from the genes and serves as the
templates for all of protein synthesis must be transported out of the nucleus.
Regulation of nucleocytoplasmic exchange could represent a fundamental mechanism
for modulating metabolic processes in cells. In the proposed studies, changes in
nuclear transport will be analyzed during oogenesis in Xenopus laevis (the
African clawed frog). This experimental system is especially suited for
examining the molecular basis of transport changes. ***