* 9723593
* Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics of Entner-  Doudoroff Metabolism in Escherichia coli
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Peekhaus Norbert, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 10/31/2000
* USD 360,000.00

9723593 Conway The Entner-Doudoroffpathway (ED) forms the core of central
metabolism in a large number of important microorganisms and is widely
distributed, including the most deeply rooted Archae. In E. coli, the ED pathway
is induced for gluconate catabolism, together with two systems for gluconate
transport and phosphorylation. While it is generally appreciated that E. coil
has evolved to grow in the intestinal habitat, little is known about which
nutrients are used. Recent evidence suggests that metabolism of gluconate via
the ED pathway is essential for E. coli to colonize the large intestine. The
long term goal of this laboratory is to understand the roles of the ED pathway
in nature and during the course of evolution of glycolytic pathways. We have
begun to employ genomic information to study the four gluconate transporters,
two gluconate kinases, and two regulatory proteins involved in gluconate
metabolism. The GntI system for gluconate transport and phosphorylation contains
two transporter genes, gntT and gntU. The work addresses how differential
expression of these transporters impacts the physiology of growth on gluconate.
Glucuronate, not gluconate, signals induction of gntP, another recently
discovered gluconate transporter gene. Since the large intestine contains more
glucuronate than gluconate, and since glucuronate induces the catabolic pathway
for yet another sugar acid, it appears that glucuronate provides a general
signal of sugar acid availability in nature. The importance of glucuronate-
induction and GntP function for growth on gluconate is being investigated. The
GntII subsidiary system for gluconate transport and phosphorylation (which
normally functions only in the absence of the GntI system) also encodes two
newly identified "dehydrogenase-like" enzymes which allow growth on L-idonic
acid, with gluconate as a key intermediate. The biochemistry and physiology of
the GntII pathway is being studied. Since gluconate appears to be an
intermediate of the GntII pathway, and since gluconate is an inducer of other
regulons, it seems important in terms of cellular economy to have crosstalk
between these pathways. A protein that is both a positive regulator of GntII and
a negative regulator of GntI is being characterized. The ultimate goal of this
project is to elucidate the physiology, biochemistry and, regulation of sugar
acid metabolism by E. coli in order to more fully understand its ecology. While
it is generally appreciated that E.coli has evolved to grow in the intestinal
habitat, little is known about which nutrients are used to support growth.
Recent evidence suggests that metabolism of gluconate, an acidic form of the
sugar glucose, is essential for E. coil to colonize the large intestine. In E.
coil, the Entner-Doudoroff pathway is used for metabolism of gluconate and other
sugar acids that are found in the large intestine. The Entner-Doudoroff pathway,
as it operates in E. coli, is very complex; there are at least ten genes and
three levels of genetic regulation involved in sugar acid metabolism. The goal
of this project is to characterize the physiology, biochemistry and, regulation
of sugar acid metabolism by E. coli in order to more fully understand the role
of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway in colonization of the large intestine.