* 9723391
* Studies of Transcriptional Repression by the Cellular       Protein RBP
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Lynne Vales, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9723391 Vales The role of transcriptional activation in regulating gene
expression in eukaryotes has been amply documented. In contrast, the regulatory
role of transcriptional repression in eukaryotes has been appreciated only
lately based on the identification and role of several factors that function to
inhibit transcription. Many important mechanistic studies in prokaryotes have
revealed that repressors evolved to target almost every possible step in the
transcription process. In contrast, given the new appreciation for repressors in
the eukaryotic field, the mode of action of these factors is largely unknown.
The focus of this research is the cellular protein RBP, which was originally
isolated as a presumed recombinase. Studies of viral gene expression led to the
identification of RBP as a transcriptional repressor. Recent studies have
demonstrated that RBP targets the adenoviral gene encoding polypeptide IX (pIX).
The newly recognized role of RBP as a transcriptional repressor presents an
unique opportunity to identify the target(s) of RBP in repression as well as the
mechanism by which repression is achieved. The viral pIX promoter is relatively
simple, containing a single recognition site for the cellular transcription
factor SP1. RBP binds immediately upstream of the TATA box in the viral promoter
but does not dislodge the adjacent factor; therefore repression does not involve
occlusion of adjacent factor binding. On the other hand, repression is dependent
upon both the presence and the position of the RBP site in the pIX promoter. The
goal of this research is to identify the precise target(s) of RBP in repression
and to determine the molecular mechanism by which RBP mediates repression of the
pIX gene. Experiments performed in vitro will identify the target(s) of RBP
repression and will test if RBP cobinding with TFIID occludes binding by a third
factor, TFIIA, required for activation. Possible interaction between RBP and SP1
will be examined using GST-pull down and coimm unoprecipitation experiments. If
RBP interacts with SP1, the SP1 and RBP protein domains involved in this
interaction will be identified. Possible interaction between RBP and general
transcription factors required for activation will be probed for in a similar
manner. Finally, the molecular mechanism by which RBP functions to repress
transcription will be identified in a reconstituted transcription assay. The
results from these studies will lay the groundwork for studying the means by
which repression is relieved to allow optimal activation of viral pIX gene
expression. %%% The role of transcriptional activation in regulating gene
expression in eukaryotes has been amply documented. In contrast, the regulatory
role of transcriptional repression in eukaryotes has been appreciated only
lately based on the identification and role of several factors that function to
inhibit transcription. The focus of this research is the cellular protein RBP,
which was originally isolated as a presumed recombinase. The actual functional
role of RBP as transcription factor was uncovered within the last three years.
This research will exploit the viral pIX gene to understand the means by which
RBP represses transcription in mammalian cells. The results from these studies
will lay the groundwork for studying the means by which repression is relieved
to allow optimal activation of viral pIX gene expression. ***