* 9723934
* Adhesion/Recognition Molecule Contactin in Neural           Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Barbara Ranscht, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

ABSTRACT IBN-9723934 RANSCHT Brain function critically depends on the wiring of
nerve fibers into a complex neuronal network. This network is established during
embryonic development as neurons extend processes, called axons, that carry on
their distal tip a mobile structure, the growth cone. The growth cones of each
neuron type sense cues in their cellular environment to navigate to, recognize
and form functional contacts with specific target cells, such as other neurons
or effector organs such as muscle, glands or skin. In order to recognize the
guidance cues in their environment and seek out the proper cells to contact,
growth cones explore their surroundings with an array of molecular sensors.
Contactin, a cell adhesion/recognition molecule discovered by Dr. Ranscht, is
one of the molecular sensors exposed on the growth cone surface and is therefore
a strong candidate to mediate growth cone recognition. To test the function of
contactin in the establishment of axon connections in developing embryos, Dr.
Ranscht's laboratory has recently generated contactin-deficient mice by
manipulating the mouse genome. In support of the hypothesis that contactin is
required for the formation of neuronal circuitry, the mutant mice show
neurological defects: Their movements are severely uncoordinated and
characteristic of those of patients diagnosed with ataxia. The mutant animals
die shortly after birth. As the phenotype of contactin mutant mice is indicative
of defects in neuronal circuits controlling motor behavior, Dr. Ranscht will
produce a detail map of contactin distribution in brain areas controlling and
modulating motor functions. Specifically, she will identify the neuron
populations that use contactin for axonal pathfinding and clarify which of the
identified contactin-binding proteins are distributed in the surroundings of
contactin-positive neurons. To understand which molecular interactions are
disrupted in the contactin mutant mice, the distribution and expression levels
of contactin-binding proteins will also be examined in these mutants. Results
from this project will contribute to understanding the role of contactin and its
molecular interactions in neuronal circuits controlling motor functions.