* 9723384
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Arrestin Phosphorylation inthe Photoresponse
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 01/31/2002
* USD 298,146.00

PI: Smith IBN-9723384 The first cellular step in vision is phototransduction,
when light energy is captured by molecular mechanisms that finally lead to a
nerve signal to the brain. A cascade of biochemical reactions occurs in the
photoreceptor cell, and one of the key steps is the activation of a class of
proteins called G-proteins. The activation occurs by phosphorylation, the
addition of a phosphate group to protein; subsequent deactivation involves
dephosphorylation. One of the proteins regulating the rate and amount of
phosphorylation is called arrestin. While much research has studied the
activation of the light signal, few have worked on the way the signal is turned
off, and that is the focus here. This collaborative project combines approaches
from molecular biology, biochemistry and cellular physiology to investigate the
up- and down-regulation of G-protein linked membrane receptor molecules. The
system used is the photoreceptor of the horseshoe crab, Limulus, which has been
a model for invertebrate photoreception for decades and also provides excellent
comparisons to our knowledge of vertebrate phototransduction. Results from this
work will add critical understanding about regulation of visual processes, and
have an impact extending beyond photoreception and vision to signal transduction
in cell communication and to cellular biology in general.