* 9723617
* Temperature--Not Chromosomes--Determines the Gender of      Certain Lower Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Crews, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

In many egg-laying reptiles, the incubation temperature of the egg determines
the sex of the offspring, a process known as temperature-dependent sex
determination (TSD). How temperature both stimulates and inhibits genetic
cascades to determine gonadal sex and channel sexual development is the focus of
this application. The PI's working hypothesis is that incubation temperature
modifies the endocrine microenvironment of the embryo such that steroid hormones
serve as the proximate trigger for sex determination. This laboratory has
developed the red-eared slider turtle as an animal model system and demonstrated
that male and female gonadal development are separate pathways influenced by
steroids, steroid-augmenting molecules, and steroid-interfering molecules.
Female determination is caused by estrogens whereas male determination is caused
by nonaromatizable androgens. Experiments are designed to determine if
temperature accomplishes sex determination by acting on genes coding for steroid
hormone receptors and aromafast, a key steroidogenic enzyme. The PI will
continue the cloning and sequencing of the aromatase. To identify the patterns
of expression and transcriptional regulation of selected specific genes during
the critical periods of sex determination, the PI will utilize homologous
antisense probes for estrogen receptor and aromatase of mENAs in in situ
hybridization and ribonuclease protection assays at the beginning, during, and
following the temperature-sensitive period. The ability to manipulate sex in TSD
species by incubation temperature, exogenous hormones, and other agents provides
unparalleled experimental control, thereby enabling more detailed analysis of
the normal pattern of gene expression during sex determination than is possible
with other amniote vertebrate species having sex chromosomes. Except for the
trigger, the sex determining cascade appears to be similar between vertebrates
having genotypic sex determination and those with TSD. The work on TSD draws
attention t o the fact that temperature and steroid hormones can play a pivotal
role in sexual development in an amniote vertebrate and is thus important for
several reasons. First, it has long been assumed that steroid hormones of
maternal or embryonic origin are not involved in gonad formation in mammals and
birds. The work with TSD reptiles indicates that this conclusion may be
premature. Second, since TSD may represent the evolutionary precursor to sex
chromosomes, potential temperature and steroid effects in sex determination may
be present, but partly or wholly masked, in homeotherms. Third, temperature has
not been adequately investigated as a factor in steroid hormone action in
homeotherms despite numerous studies documenting how both hormone responsiveness
and hormone action are markedly dependent on temperature.