* 9723137
* Neural Correlates of Ingestion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Anna Kleinhaus, New York Medical College
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Lay Abstract PI: Kleinhaus, Anna Proposal Number: IBN-9723137 This project
examines the neural mechanisms underlying feeding behavior as a model for
examining how the nervous system switches between behaviors in an adaptive,
goal- directed fashion. Feeding in most organisms includes an appetitive phase
and a comsumatory phase. The appetitive phase includes detection of food and
arousal, followed by directed locomotion. This aspect of the behavior is
dependent upon the integration of signals from multiple sensory systems that
provide information about the external environment. The consumatory phase
consists of ingestion of the meal. This aspect of the behavior is generated by
the orderly activity of interconnected neurons the activity of which yields the
coordinated activity of muscles. This project identifies the individual neurons
responsible for these behaviors and way they are connected to generate the
behaviors associated with different phases of feeding. Experiments determine
whether the same neurons are involved in both aspects of feeding or whether
there are separate neurons for each phase. The project furthers the
understanding of the way that the nervous system uses and adapts neurons to
different functional roles and switches from one class of activity to another as
complex behavior unfolds.