* 9723193
* Progression and Spacing of Heterocyst Differentiation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Coleman Wolk, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

Wolk 9723193 Anabaena, a filamentous cyanobacterium, carries out oxygenic
photosynthesis and aerobic N2-fixation in two types of cells, vegetative cells
and heterocysts, respectively. Comprised wholly of vegetative cells in the
presence of fixed nitrogen, filaments respond to nitrogen deprivation by having
5 to 10% of their cells, at semi-regular intervals, differentiate into
heterocysts. This organism offers one of the few opportunities to study the ways
in which a prokaryote regulates structural cellular differentiation, and a
nearly unique opportunity to study prokaryotic formation of multicellular
patterns. A number of developmental regulatory genes and genes involved in
synthesis of heterocyst-specific structures have been identified, and certain of
their interdependencies identified. However, the detailed mechanisms that
regulate the progression of the differentiation process once that process has
been initiated remain largely unknown, and no overall regulatory strategy has
been discerned. hepA is a gene that is activated specifically in immature
heterocysts starting several hours after nitrogen stepdown and whose activity is
required for normal formation of a principal structural element of heterocysts,
the outer, polysaccharide layer of their envelope. Aspects of the regulation of
hepA will be investigated. Experimental evidence indicates that the pattern of
spaced heterocysts results from an inhibition, by mature and developing
heterocysts, of the differentiation of nearby cells into heterocysts, and
suggests that the inhibition is mediated by the elaboration of some
differentiation-inhibiting substance that moves outward along a filament.
Because the differentiation of heterocysts is organized by inhibition, it
appears appropriate for Anabaena to have genes whose products inhibit the
initiation or progression of differentiation. However, a mutation in such a gene
could lead all vegetative cells to start to differentiate into heterocysts, a
result that might heretofore have been recog nized only as a lethal mutation.
Analysis of a restricted class of conditional mutations will show whether there
are such genes that control differentiation in Anabaena. Results obtained with
these conditional mutations can elucidate mechanisms that underlie cellular
differentiation and (or) multicellular pattern formation. The oxygen in the
earth's atmosphere came initially from the growth of oxygen-producing
cyanobacteria. This oxygen prevented the assimilation of nitrogen gas. Certain
filamentous cyanobacteria overcame that impediment by inventing multicellular
division of labor: spaced cells in a filament became heterocysts, cells unable
to photosynthesize and grow, but able to fix nitrogen gas in an oxygen-
containing environment. Thus arose what may have been the first multicellular
pattern, and Anabaena, still an outstanding example of bacterial
multicellularity. Heterocyst formation is being analyzed because it provides an
example of bacterial differentiation that may be regulated in a unique fashion,
and because of the important contribution of heterocysts to global nitrogen
fixation. Analysis of the regulation of hepA and the use of conditional mutants
represent approaches to understanding how differentiation progresses.
Conditional mutation may also assist mechanistic analysis of pattern formation.