* 9723828
* RUI: Infrared Spectroscopy as a Probe of Molecular Mechanismin the Hydrogenases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Kimberly Bagley, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9723828 Bagley Low temperature infrared difference spectroscopy will be used to
delineate the molecular mechanism of hydrogen binding and activation in
hydrogenases. Previous infrared spectroscopic studies on the NiFe hydrogenases
have shown that this class of enzymes display anomalous, intense infrared bands
arising from one intrinsic carbon monoxide molecule and two intrinsic cyanide
molecules coordinated to the active site Fe ion. These anomalous infrared
signatures will be used for further study of the various redox states of the
enzyme; for exploration of the nature of the similarities in the active sites of
the NiFe and Fe hydrogenases as detected using infrared spectroscopy;
determination of the nature of carbon monoxide binding in the NiFe and Fe
hydrogenases; and examination of the role amino acids play in the activation of
hydrogen. The overall goal of this work is to understand the mechanism
underlying the hydrogenases' ability to split molecular hydrogen into protons
and electrons. Understanding this process has important consequences for the
development of cheap and stable catalysts for use in hydrogen production and
fuel cells. In addition, the development of methodologies for handling infrared
samples under strictly anaerobic conditions as required in this research should
prove of general utility in infrared studies of other oxygen sensitive metallo-
proteins. The research will involve participation of undergraduate students.
Participation in this project will afford undergraduate chemistry students a
unique opportunity to apply skills and knowledge they have learned so far while
contributing to a project in modern physical biochemistry. ***