* 9723969
* Termination of Mammalian mRNA Polyadenylation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* David Bear, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9723969 Bear Polyadenylation of messenger RNA (mRNA) is an essential process in
gene expression. The length of the poly(A) tail has been correlated with mRNA
stability, translation and intracellular transport. This research will
investigate the mechanism by which the mammalian nuclear poly(A) binding
protein, PABII, in conjunction with the cleavage/polyadenylation specificity
factor, CPSF, function to terminate polyadenylation of mRNA. Poly(A) tails in
the nuclei of mammalian cells are 200-300 nucleotides long. Without PABII and
CPSF, poly(A) polymerase will polymerize tails of more than 1000 nucleotides in
vitro. Preliminary electron microscopy studies carried out in our laboratory
demonstrate that PABII forms a nautilus-shaped 21 nm oligomeric particle when
bound to synthetic poly(A). A single PABII particle of similar size and shape is
found together with CPSF at the 3' end of mRNA in an in vitro polyadenylation
reaction. A combination of biochemical and biophysical approaches will be used
to understand the relationship between the structure of the PABII particle and
termination of polyadenylation. The central hypothesis that PABII binds in a
contiguous array to the nascent poly(A) tail during synthesis, eventually
forming a nautilus-shaped particle of discrete stoichiometry which leads to the
dissociation or inactivation of the cleavage/polyadenylation specificity factor
(CPSF) and or poly(A) polymerase. The result is a transition from fast
processive polymerization to slow dispersive polymerization thereby limiting the
length of the poly(A) tail. The quaternary structure of the PABII particle will
be studied using a combination of fluorescence spectroscopy, nuclease digestion,
chemical cross-linking, and scanning transmission electron microscopy. Snapshot
blotting and immuno-electron microscopy will be used to examine how the PABII
particle, CPSF and poly(A) polymerase change in size, shape and location during
the various stages of the polyadenylation reaction. %%% Polyadenyl ation of
messenger RNA (mRNA) is an essential process in gene expression. The length of
the poly(A) tail has been correlated with mRNA stability, translation and
intracellular transport. This research will investigate the mechanism by which
mRNA poly(A) tails in the nuclei of mammalian cells is limited to lengths of
200-300 nucleotides. ***