* 9723254
* A Comparative Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding    Multi-Species Mycorrhizal Functioning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* John Dighton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 02/29/2000
* USD 70,002.00

Dighton 9723254 The PIs understanding of how biodiversity and ecological
function are linked is not well understood. Ectomycorrhizal (plant-fungal)
associations of tree roots provide an ideal model to study this linkage because
ectomycorrhizal fungi are (i) widespread, (ii) may have different potentials to
acquire nutrients and (iii) are affected by anthropogenic stresses, such as
pollution. This project will be the first to detail effects of species diversity
and composition of ectomycorrhizal fungi on tree seedlings growth and nutrient
uptake. The PI will compare the ability of single and multiple infections of
ectomycorrhizas to take up essential nutrients and determine whether this
capacity is influences by mycorrhizal community structure. In this initial phase
of the work the PIs' will prove their ability to use the two main proposed
methodologies, that: (i) measuring the kinetics of P uptake into ectomycorrhizal
mycelia in culture and on infected root tips; and (ii) production of tree root
systems with defined community structures of 1, 2 and 4 species combinations of
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Under the current budget, the PI will use only
radioactive 32p in the uptake studies as it can be measured using on-site
facilities Also because the PI can not purchase a climate-controlled growth
cabinet, results from the initial trials may show a greater variability than
originally intended.