* 9723858
* Interaction of the Plasma Melatonin Rhythm with other Hormone Rhythms During Development and on Various Light/Dark Cycles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Mary Wright, College of Our Lady of the Elms
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 131,751.00

Metamorphosis of the amphibian tadpole is a developmental program driven mainly
by an increased secretion of thyroid hormones, although other hormones, such as
adrenal corticoids, prolactin, and melatonin may accelerate or inhibit its
progress. Many hormones exhibit rhythmicity, and peak in the blood at specific
times of the day. Differences in the timing of the peak level of various
hormones could be critical to the regulation of metamorphosis. However, the
rhythm of hormones in the plasma of tadpoles is not known. Using
radioimmunoassay, this project will study the circadian rhythmicity of the
metamorphic hormones mentioned above in the plasma of tadpoles from early to
late stages of development. Tadpole development rate is also dependent on the
light/dark cycle, as are plasma melatonin levels, which are higher in the dark.
Melatonin inhibits the thyroid gland of tadpoles, as well as the tissue response
to thyroxine. This research will also focus on the relationship between the
light/dark cycle and thyroxine and melatonin levels and rhythms. This work will
further understanding of the role of hormones in development, especially the
influence of melatonin. Since the secretion of melatonin is related to light and
darkness, the research will also help us to understand the influence of the
environment on amphibians. This is a problem of much concern in view of the
recent appearance of frog abnormalities, some of which appear to be
developmental in origin. The work will be done at an undergraduate institution
with the collaboration of undergraduate researchers, who will be introduced to
the scientific process in preparation for professional and scientific careers.