* 9723398
* Maturation of GnRH Neurons by Neurotrophic Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Andrea Gore, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

PI: Gore, A. Proposal Number: IBN-9723398 The overall goal of this research
proposal is to characterize the development of the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) neurosecretory system in the mouse, and to study the maturation
of these cells using a cell line model. GnRH is the key hormone regulating
reproduction; it is produced in neurons whose cell bodies reside in the preoptic
area anterior-hypothalamus (POA-AH) of rodent brains. This peptide hormone is
released into blood vessels which project to the pituitary gland; there, GnRH
stimulates synthesis and release of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH)
and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These latter hormones in turn affect the
synthesis and secretion of ovarian and testicular steroid hormones. The release
of GnRH changes developmentally, particularly at birth and puberty, and an
increase in pulsatile GnRH release is the critical factor for the onset of
puberty. Because the GnRH neurosecretory system is already established before
birth, it is believed that changes in inputs to GnRH neurons are responsible for
the alterations in GnRH synthesis and release that occur during development.
Growth factors produced by glia (non-neuronal elements in the brain) such as
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) appear to play an important role in the
changes in GnRH release and biosynthesis that occur during development. It is
the intention of this proposal to characterize the molecular and anatomical
changes in the GnRH system in relation to the IGF-1 system during the early
developmental period. In Aim 1, the role of IGF-1 on GnRH biosynthesis will be
studied in developing male and female mice. The anatomical relationship between
GnRH neurons and IGF-1-producing glia will also be ascertained. A mutant mouse
strain which lacks IGF-1 (the IGF-1 knockouts) will be evaluated as to the
effects of the absence of IGF-1 on hypothalamic development. In Aim 2, the
immortalized hypothalamic GT1-7 cell line, which synthesizes and secretes G nRH,
will be used to examine the effects of IGF-1 on the "maturation" of these
immature cells. It is the intention of this Aim to make the GT1-7 cells more
like a normal GnRH neuron in the brain. Data provided by these studies should
provide insights into the role of the neurotrophic factor IGF-1 in the
development of the GnRH system which ultimately results in the onset of
reproductive maturation. The results should also lead to a better understanding
of the general mechanisms by which brain development occurs and is regulated.