* 9723160
* Mate Location Tactics, Vision, and Thermoregulatory Behaviorin Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ronald Rutowski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 63,472.00

9723160 Rutowski In the course of their lives, animals are often faced with
conflicting demands on their behavior and how these conflicts are resolved
within an individual's life and over evolutionary time are important questions
in the study of behavior. For example, when active, many insects use a variety
of behavioral mechanisms to regulate their body temperature within a preferred
range. However, thermoregulatory adjustments occur while animals are engaged in
other activities, such as searching for mates. The interaction between these
adjustments and the simultaneous performance of other activities are not well
understood. This study addresses how thermoregulatory behavior patterns interact
with visual mate-location efforts in a butterfly of the Sonoran desert. Males in
this species of butterfly occupy and defend perching sites in the morning where
they perch and wait for females to appear. During the morning perch preferences
change as temperatures rise to maintain body temperature in their preferred
range. When cool, males perch on the ground; however, as the morning progresses
and temperature rises, males switch to cooler perches about 1 m off the ground.
This study examines the impact of this thermally-driven change in perch
preference on males' abilities to detect passing females and competing males. If
perch preference leads to changes in how the butterfly's visual system is
positioned in space relative to the flight paths of conspecifics, this may
effect the likelihood that passing conspecifics will be detected. To address
this question, several research approaches will be taken. Information will be
gathered on the flight paths of females and intruding males, variation in visual
acuity across the field of vision, and changes in male body position and
orientation. Studies of visual system acuity involve a complex pseudopupil
analysis procedure, which will be done in collaboration with a researcher at the
University of Lund in Sweden, one of few places in the world where such analysis
can be done. Another experimental approach will be to use a model flying device
(a motorized dummy butterfly with wings attached) at field sites in Arizona to
assess directly how and why the probability of detecting conspecifics changes
with perch preference. Ecological variables such as background contrast will be
of special interest. The end results should be a better understanding of how
insects see their world, and a novel integration of behavior, physiology, and
ecology that will permit a more comprehensive understanding of the immediate and
evolutionary resolution of conflicting behavioral demands in animals.