* 9723825
* Biochemistry of Hemoglobins and Oxygen Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,12/31/2004
* Austen Riggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2004
* USD 303,000.00

9723825 Riggs Technical The project focuses on the hemoglobins (Hbs) of chicken
and lamprey which exhibit a deoxygenation-dependent self association. The PI
seeks to determine by X-ray crystallography the conformational changes in
chicken Hb that result in tetramer-tetramer dimers. The oxygen equilibria of
chicken and lamprey Hbs will be measured as a function of concentration, and the
self association will be measured by light scattering and sedimentation
equilibrium. The self association of lamprey Hb will be studied with the aid of
four mutants already constructed that will be used to test three different
hypotheses concerning the nature of the interface responsible for self
association. The Hb of the hummingbird will also be studied to determine whether
the Hbs have evolved to have an enhanced supercooperativity to meet the
extraordinary metabolic demands of hummingbird flight. Non technical The
physiological function of proteins is often modulated by close interactions
between proteins that form a complex. Thus, complex formation alters the
properties of the protein. It is central to the understanding of this process
that one determine the nature of the protein-protein interface responsible for
the altered properties. This will lead to an understanding of the extraordinary
physiological adaptation that enables self-associating hemoglobins to deliver as
much as 30% more oxygen to the tissues than would otherwise be possible. This is
an important adaptation in birds and in the primitive lamprey that greatly
increases the quantity of oxygen that is delivered to the tissues.