* 9723003
* Genes of Nitrogen Metabolism In Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Lawrence Reitzer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/2001
* USD 333,000.00

9723003 Reitzer, Lawrence J. The immediate objectives of this research are to
characterize the pathways of aspartate and arginine catabolism and their
function in Escherichia coli. The regulation of the previously undescribed
arginine succinyl transferase (AST) pathway suggested that it not only degrades
arginine, but also other amino acids during nitrogen-limited growth. The gene
for one AST pathway enzyme was identified, and it appears to be the first of a
five-gene ast operon. The products of this operon will be characterized, the
genes disrupted and overexpressed, the effects on amino acid catabolism
determined, and the promoter characterized. If ast mutants still utilize
arginine, the remaining pathway of arginine catabolism will be genetically
analyzed. Preliminary results suggest that aspartate is degraded by the AST
pathway and a previously undescribed pathway. Mutants blocked in the second
pathway have been isolated, the lesion mapped, and complementing DNA isolated.
The complementing DNA will be further subcloned, the genes identified, and their
regulation analyzed. Analysis of this region's nucleotide sequence suggests that
it contains only one (54-dependent operon. This operon codes for a minor citrate
synthase isozyme, which appears to be active. This citrate synthase has the
potential to coordinate carbon and nitrogen metabolism, therefore, its function
will be characterized, regardless of its role in aspartate catabolism. In
summary, this research focuses on nitrogen metabolism - specifically, the
pathways of arginine and aspartate catabolism, which appear to have multiple
functions, possibly including the coordination of carbon and nitrogen
metabolism. When considered within the context of the second phase of the E.
coli genome project, the analysis of gene function, this research will further
an understanding of metabolism in E. coli, which will provide a framework for
the genes and metabolism of other organisms with sequenced genomes. Bacteria and
other living organisms c onsist primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. Nitrogen constitutes about 10% by weight of most organisms, and the
rate of its acquisition from the environment frequently limits growth. The
availability of the complete sequence of all the genes of some model organisms,
such as Escherichia coli, permits the complete analysis of certain aspects of
metabolism. This research analyzes the means which E. coli acquires and uses
nitrogen from the environment. It also analyzes the specific tasks that are
performed when certain sources of nitrogen become available. Such basic
understanding of metabolism could suggest methods to harness bacterial
biochemistry to perform useful tasks, such as the synthesis of useful chemicals,
or to control bacterial growth in some situations.