* 9723298
* Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology of the Stress Response and Stress Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Martin Feder, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 232,625.00

Feder 9723298 A major issue in ecological and evolutionary physiology is the
relationship among the traits of complex organisms, organisms' ability to
exploit diverse environments, and species' persistence in time. The proposed
investigation examines the heat-shock protein Hsp70 in Drosophila to address
this issue. In response to heat or other stresses, nearly all organisms express
heat-shock proteins (Hsps), highly-conserved proteins that contribute to stress
tolerance by functioning as molecular chaperones. Research supported by a
previous NSF award has established that experimental manipulation of copy number
of the hsp70 gene of Drosophila, which encodes Hsp70, is sufficient to cause
changes in thermotolerance. The proposed research will build upon this finding
to examine three related issues whose simultaneous resolution is possible in few
other systems: (1) The physiological mechanism of Hsp70 function; i.e., how
thermal stress disrupts function and how Hsp70 protects against heat damage or
aids recovery from it. This issue will be examined in the larval gut of
Drosophila, which is especially susceptible to heat damage. (2) The fitness
consequences of Hsp70 expression, which will be examined by comparing survival
and offspring production when Drosophila strains differing in Hsp70 expression
are exposed to natural thermal stress. (3) The evolutionary basis for variation
in Hsp70, which will be examined by measuring Hsp70 expression, hsp70 copy
number, and the temperature threshold for Hsp70 expression in natural and
experimental populations. To accomplish these goals, the proposed research will
examine genetically engineered and natural variation in Drosophila. The
projected outcome of the proposed research has immense potential to integrate
molecular, genetic, functional, and evolutionary perspectives to advance
understanding of adaptation.