* 9723935
* Identification of Cis-Elements and Trans-Acting Factors     Involved in the Regulation of Alternative Splicing of       Protein Kinase C Beta
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Denise Cooper, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9723935 Cooper The long-range goal of this project is to understand the
mechanisms regulating physiological responses to insulin. Studies from this
laboratory demonstrate that peptide hormones, such as insulin and IGF-1,
influence alternative splicing of PKC(II mRNA within minutes. The switch in mRNA
is accompanied by altered metabolic and mitogenic responses. Peptide-regulated
RNA splicing may be an important feature of the response to physiological
stimuli. In response to regulation of PKC(II splicing, glucose uptake is altered
in skeletal muscle cells by insulin. RNA splicing is governed by the regulation
of factors that inhibit or activate the use of 3' or 5' splice sites. For PKC(II
to be encoded, an additional exon is included in the mRNA. If this exon is
skipped, PKC(II is encoded. Activation of an additional 5' splice site was
identified for PKC(II in insulin-responsive skeletal muscle cells. The
sequential activation of more than one splice site by a hormonal stimulus could
allow for the unmasking of other regulatory features for gene expression. To
examine the mechanisms of hormone-induced alternative splice, a minigene
corresponding to regions spanning the last exon common to both PKC(I and (II,
(c, the intervening intron, the (II exon with its 3' flanking intron, and its
3'untranslated region will be constructed. The construct would contain the
genetic information necessary for regulation of exon inclusion by insulin
following its expression in L6 rat skeletal muscle cells. Cis-elements such as
pyrimidine tracts, exon splicing enhancers (ESE), stem loops, and serine-
arginine rich (SR) protein association sequences will be included in the
minigene. Development of an insulin responsive minigene will provide a valuable
model for examining splicing of mRNA by hormone and growth factor signaling
cascades. Previous reported minigenes were constructed from simpler genes and
were not regulated by extracellular signaling receptors. The regulation of mRNA
splicing by pepti de hormones is an emerging field that links signals from the
cell surface to the nucleus to alter post-transcriptional regulation of gene
expression. This report of insulin altering PKC(II expression is the first
characterization of hormone-regulated alternative pre-mRNA splicing. The
development of an insulin-responsive minigene will provide a valuable tool for
examining the effects of insulin on physiological processes since unknown
critical elements can be identified in future studies through reduction and
condensation of portions of the minigene not essential for insulin regulation of
exon inclusion and mutational analysis of known regulatory sequences. The lone-
range goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms regulating
physiological responses to insulin. Development of an insulin responsive
minigene will provide a valuable model for examining splicing of mRNA by hormone
and growth factor signaling cascades, and a valuable tool for examining the
effects of insulin on physiological processes.