* 9723455
* Transcriptional Regulation of dpp Signaling Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Allen Laughon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9723455 Laughon Members of the Smad protein family have been identified as
central components of TGF-( signaling pathways. These pathways allow cells to
respond to short- and long-range signals that affect many aspects of pattern
formation and growth in higher animals, including control of cell proliferation.
In response to signaling, Smads are phosphorylated and transported from
cytoplasm to nucleus, where they activate transcription of target genes. This
lab has recently discovered that Drosophila Mad protein, a founding member of
the Smad family and the homolog of vertebrate Smadl, is a sequence-specific DNA
binding protein. DNA binding activity and the ability to oligomerize are
localized within a conserved N-terminal domain, while the conserved C-terminal
domain inhibits DNA binding. This research will focus on understanding the role
of Smad-DNA interactions in determining the regulatory specificity in TGF-(
pathways, and in determining the threshold responses of individual genes to
short- or long-range signals. The first aim is to characterize the DNA binding
specificities of Mad, Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4. The functional differences between
Smads suggest that they may differ significantly in DNA binding specificity. DNA
binding specificities of Smads will be characterized by analysis of binding to
wild-type and mutated natural binding sites, and by binding site selection. The
second aim is to identify amino acids within the Smad DNA binding domain that
are responsible for any differences in DNA binding specificity. Such specificity
determinants will be identified by creating a series of Mad-Smad2/3 chimeras and
testing these for specificity of DNA binding and reporter activation. The third
aim is to determine how the affinity of Mad for its binding sites affects
threshold responses to Dpp signaling. Visualization of reporter expression in
Drosophila wing imaginal discs, will be used to investigate how responses to
short and long-range Dpp signaling are affected by mutations tha t increase or
decrease the affinity of target enhancers for Mad. The effects of altering the
number of Mad binding sites will also be determined. %%% Members of the Smad
protein family have been identified as central components of TGF-( signaling
pathways. These pathways allow cells to respond to short- and long-range signals
that affect many aspects of pattern formation and growth in higher animals,
including control of cell proliferation. This lab has recently discovered that
Drosophila Mad protein, a founding member of the Smad family and the homolog of
vertebrate Smad1, is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein. This research will
focus on understanding the role of Smad-DNA interactions in determining the
regulatory specificity in TGF-( pathways, and in determining the threshold
responses of individual genes to short- or long-range signals. ***