* 9723288
* RUI: Interactions of Neurofilament Proteins During Filament Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Jeffrey Cohlberg, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/2002
* USD 273,325.00

9723288 Cohlberg Research will be conducted on the pathway and mechanism of
assembly of mammalian neurofilaments (NFs) from their constituent proteins and
the role of phosphorylation in regulating the assembly process and the
properties of the filaments. The goals of the research are to identify and
quantitatively characterize the interactions which determine the specificity of
interaction of neurofilament proteins and are responsible for filament
stabilization, and to gain information about the parameters which characterize
the dynamic properties of NFs. In large caliber neurons of the central nervous
system, NFs are composed of three "NF triplet" proteins, termed NF-H (high),
NF-M (middle), and NF-L (low) according to their molecular weights. In certain
neurons, other proteins, including alpha-internexin, are present in NF.
Neurofilament (NF) proteins contain alpha-helical rod domains flanked by
nonhelical head and tail domains. They aggregate to form coiled coil dimers,
which then aggregate further to form NF-L/NF-M and NF-L/NF-H heterotetramers,
which in turn serve as intermediates in the assembly of filaments. It is not
certain whether the coiled coil dimers are heterodimers or homodimers. Disulfide
cross-linking will be used as a probe to detect the formation of heterodimers
from homodimers, and the kinetics of monomer exchange and its dependence on
solvent conditions will be characterized. The stabilities of various
heterodimers containing both full-length proteins and their rod domains will be
investigated by sedimentation and cross-linking studies, and the roles of
various proteins domains in the association of dimers to tetramers will be
characterized. The roles of the various domains in the formation of
heterotetramer assembly intermediates will be investigated by the use of
nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The principal question to be
answered is whether specific interactions among rod domains are fully
responsible for th e specificity of protein association at this level (LM and MH
complexes are formed, but not MH) or whether the head and tail domains also play
a role. Furthermore, the roles of the various protein domains in determining the
specificity with which proteins associate to form filaments will be examined by
filament reconstitution experiments and analyzed by filament pelleting
experiments and by examination of reconstituted filaments by electron
microscopy, including immunogold labeling studies. Finally, NF proteins will be
modified by the covalent attachment of fluorophores, and the assembly and
disassembly of filaments and the exchange of proteins between filaments will be
followed by fluorescence energy transfer measurements. All of these studies will
include experiments on alpha- internexin as well as the NF triplet proteins. A
key attribute of eukaryotic cells is the presence of filamentous structures
inside the cells, collectively termed the cytoskeleton, which provide a
structural framework for the cytoplasm and its functions. The three major types
of cytoskeletal "elements" in cells, distinguished by their molecular
composition and structural features, are the actin- containing microfilaments,
the 10-nm diameter intermediate filaments, and microtubules. Neurofilaments (NF)
are those members of the family of intermediate filaments (IFs) that form part
of the cytoskeleton in neurons (cells of the nervous system). They are found
primarily running longitudinally down the long cellular projections known as
axons, along with microtubules, and they are thought to be responsible for
promoting the radial growth (thickening) of axons, establishing axonal diameter,
and maintaining the structural integrity of the axon and its resistance to
compressive forces. In large caliber neurons of the central nervous system, NFs
are composed of three "NF triplet" proteins, distinguished by their molecular
weights (heavy-, middle-, and low-weight). In certain neurons, add itional
proteins, e.g., alpha-internexin, are present in NFs. The proteins are
synthesized in the cell body and move down the axon in a process known as slow
axonal transport, eventually leaving the moving phase and becoming incorporated
into the stationary filament network of the axon. A number of diseases of motor
neurons involve abnormal NFs, and overexpression of either the light or heavy
weight NF in transgenic mice leads to pathology very similar to amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS, or "Lou Gherig's Disease"). Very little is known about
how these NF proteins assemble to form functional filaments. This research will
provide vital information on the chemical and physical properties of NF protein
components and their interactions with each other, which will help us better
understand filament assembly and transport in living neuronal cells. ***