* 9723897
* Quantitative Methods for Studying Cell Signaling            Mediated by Multisubunit Immuno-receptors
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Carla Wofsy, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2001
* USD 198,018.00

9723897 Wofsy Methods of mathematics and statistics, in conjunction with
experimental work in two cell biology laboratories, will be used to clarify the
early biophysical and biochemical events that occur when extracellular signaling
molecules interact with specific receptors on cell surfaces, to initiate and
regulate cellular responses. Common features of cell signaling in different
physiological systems have emerged from intensive experimental work over the
past decade. In general, the extracellular signaling molecules induce the
aggregation of cell surface receptors, and for many receptors, the first
detectable cellular response to receptor aggregation is the phosphorylation of
the amino acid tyrosine on the receptor and other cellular proteins.
Intracellular enzymes then interact with the newly phosphorylated sites and
mediate further biochemical and cellular responses. The proposed work attempts
to clarify the initial events in the signaling cascade: receptor aggregation and
tyrosine phsophorylation, for the multi-subunit receptors of the immune system.
Part of the work involves analysis of point patterns on newly available cell
surface images, reflecting the spatial distribution of cell surface receptors.
This project continues a collaboration designed to use such images
quantitatively to make inferences about the mechanisms and effects of receptor
aggregation. The development and application of additional statistical methods
of point pattern analysis to understand the relationship between different
aggregation states and cellular responses will also be done. The second
collaboration addresses mechanisms by which aggregated receptors mediate the
phosphorylation of tyrosine on receptors and other substrates. These studies
will provide models for the mechanisms of the early events in cell signaling,
which should lead to experiments that can test them. %%% A number of cell
surface receptors respond to ligand binding by aggregation, which is then
followed by phospho rylation of tyrosine residues in the receptor and other
cellular proteins. The research here will use mathematical modeling of
experimental systems to clarify these initial events in the signaling cascade
for receptors of the immune system. ***