* 9723945
* Subunit Interactions in the Chloroplast ATP Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Richard Mc Carty, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 11/30/2000
* USD 315,000.00

9723945 McCarty In photosynthesis light energy is converted to chemical energy,
much of it in the form that can be used as food. The synthesis of adenosine
5?-triphosphate from adenosine 5?-diphosphate and inorganic phosphate is an
essential reaction in photosynthesis. This energy requiring reaction is
catalyzed by a remarkable enzymatic machine, known as the ATP synthase. This
enzyme is an aggregate of nine different proteins and a total of about 20
polypeptide chains. Using biochemical and biophysical approaches as well as
site-directed mutagenesis, the functions of the proteins in the chloroplast ATP
synthase will be probed. For example, the involvement of specific proteins in
catalysis and in regulation of activity will be further defined. Insights into
the structure of the ATP synthase will also be obtained. The ATP synthase is
very stable, despite its complexity. Noncovalent protein-protein interactions
are responsible for this stability. Which interactions among the proteins
contribute most to the stabilization of the enzyme will be studied. The proposed
work has significance beyond reaching a further understanding of photosynthesis.
Mitochondria and the plasma membrane of some bacteria contain an ATP synthase
that is similar to the chloroplast enzyme. Thus, studies on the chloroplast ATP
synthase are directly relevant to those on oxidative phosphorylation. The
investigation of the stability of the chloroplast ATP synthase also assumes
importance in that it is an excellent model system for the study of protein-
protein interactions. Protein-protein interactions are fundamental to all of
life?s processes.