* 9723182
* Development of a Database of Protein Motions and Associated Tools
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mark Gerstein, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2001
* USD 307,470.00

The goal of this proposal is to construct a working database of protein motions.
This database will be made into a publicly accessible WWW community resource, of
general use to the molecular biophysics community. It will meet the needs of
researchers trying to understand the principles of protein structure and
function (since motions are often the link between structure and function). The
database will be associated with a classification of protein motions, based on
the packing at mobile interfaces. The construction of this database has recently
become feasible because of a number of developments: the great increase in the
number of solved protein structures, the creation of an infrastructure of linked
biological databases, and work showing how packing can be used to rationalize
mechanisms for protein motions. The development of the database will proceed in
two phases with two objectives in each phase (one computational and the other
biological). The principal objective in the first phase will be to establish a
working, prototype database of protein motions. Motions in this database will
initially be arranged hierarchically in terms of size (i.e. fragment, domain,
and subunit) and then packing. The packing classification will depend on whether
or not the motion involves sliding over a continuously maintained interface. To
achieve the first objective it will be necessary to develop a standardized
nomenclature and conceptual- information model for protein motions. This will
include information such as the number of hinges, the magnitude of the rigidbody
rotation, and the number and size of the mobile interfaces. Building upon the
framework established in the first phase, the second phase of the project will
expand the database and associated motions classification. The goal will be to
have an entry for every known protein motion. In addition, "inferred motions,"
in sequence and structure homologues of a protein with known motion, will also
be included. To han dle the large amount of data this will involve analyzing and
to help "populate" the database, an automatic conformation comparison tool will
be developed. This will rapidly align and compare two arbitrary protein
conformations, identifying rigid core regions, flexible hinges, interface
packing differences, and so forth. It will also determine whether these
structures have any sequence or structure homologues that share their motion.
The expansion of the database will require a more sophisticated structure for
describing the relationships between motions and a more detailed motion
classification scheme than the size-packing hierarchy initially used. The
motions classification will be expanded through detailed geometric analysis and
calculation, principally focusing on the packing at mobile interfaces.