* 9723563
* Molecular Genetic Characterization of Epidermal             Cell Interaction Mutants of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Susan Lolle, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 10/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Pruitt 97-23563 The long term goal of this research project is to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms by which epidermal cells interact with each other and with
pollen. Toward this end a comprehensive genetic analysis of mutants showing
ectopic fusion of above ground organs in Arabidopsis has been undertaken. To
date 30 independently isolated mutations causing this fiddlehead (fdh)-like
phenotype have been mapped and partially characterized. These 30 mutations
putatively identify 9 different complementation groups. Cytological, biochemical
and molecular characterization of the fdh-1 mutant demonstrated that fdh-l
mutant plants differ from their wild-type counterparts in only two ways. First,
fdh-1 plants exhibit changes in the lipid composition of the crude wall
(including the cuticle), and second, exhibit markedly enhanced wall permeability
relative to wild-type plants. These findings suggest that differences in wall
composition may be important in regulating the responsiveness of the epidermis
to contact with other epidermal cells. In addition to this contact-mediated
fusion response, fdh-l plants are capable of interacting with pollen.
Furthermore, experiments utilizing pollen from Arabidopsis and closely related
species reveal that pollen will germinate and grow on the fdh-l shoot surface
whereas pollen from hydration-defective mutants will not. Taken together these
data suggest that fdh-l plants express factors on the shoot surface that mediate
not only epidermal cell-cell interactions but also pollen recognition and that
the observed specificity of the interaction with pollen parallels that of wild-
type stigmatic papillar cells. The objectives for the upcoming research period
are: 1) to complete the genetic and phenotypic characterization of the fusion
mutants in this collection, 2) to isolate some of the affected genes and 3) to
screen for mutations in other genes involved in the regulation of this
developmental pathway.