* 9723606
* Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in  Human Hemoglobin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Gary Ackers, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2000
* USD 345,000.00

9723606 Ackers Hemoglobin (Hb) has long served as a prototype for understanding
mechanisms of allosteric regulation. However, the great majority of structural
and functional data has been limited to the fully-oxygenated or deoxygenated
end-states, and to the functional properties that are averaged among the 8
intermediates along the ligation pathway. Cooperativity contributions by these
intermediates using three O2 analogs that were known to drive the quaternary
structural transition (T ( R) which accompanies oxygenation have been
determined. For each analog system, the free energy contributions to
cooperativity by the 8 intermediates followed a common thermodynamic partition
function that was also consistent with global O2 binding properties of the
native molecule. A molecular code was deduced from other analog systems, and
strongly reinforced the findings: (a) the Hb tetramer functions as a three-state
molecular switch to control O2 affinity; (b) cooperativity follows the specific
combinations of ligated vs. unligated subunits and not solely the number of
sites occupied. A combination of techniques, including quantitative low-
temperature isoelectric focusing, analytical gel permeation chromatography,
stopped-flow kinetics, haptoglobin kinetics and high-precision O2 binding will
be employed. Mutational mapping of the dimer-dimer interface will be conducted
to assign quaternary structures of key species. This new stage of the research
will provide the first unequivocal delineation of the roles played by the
intermediates of all reaction sequences in the binding cascade of native HbO2
under conditions where they are simultaneously regulated by native heterotropic
effectors. The new understanding of allosteric behavior that is being developed
under this program will provide a framework for the more detailed structural and
dynamic analyses that will eventually comprise an ultimate understanding of the
hemoglobin mechanism. Moreover, the general strategy developed for this problem
should also be applicable to the 'functional codes" of other protein assemblies
that are regulated by mulltiple states of ligand binding. ***