* 9723615
* Analysis of Galectins as Splicing Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Ronald Patterson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

9723615 Patterson Galectins are a family of eukaryotic lectins consisting of
eight family members: galectin-1 through galectin-8. The galectins are defined
by two distinguishing characteristics: high affinity for (-galactoside-
containing glycoconjugates, and conserved amino acid residues in the
carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) of the polypeptides. At least two
galectins (1 and 3) exhibit nuclear as well as cytoplasmic localization. Recent
evidence indicates that the nuclear galectins colocalize with both snRNP and
non-snRNP (SC35) splicing cofactors in HeLa nuclei. Thus, nuclear galectins are
functionally redundant in splicing activity and exhibit the same distribution in
nuclei as other splicing factors. We also have shown that galectin-depletion
inhibits the formation of active spliceosomal complexes which suggests galectins
are required at an early step in the splicing pathway. This research will
determine whether galectin splicing function is due to direct association with
splicing complexes or an indirect mechanism. Splicing complexes will be directly
analyzed by two methods to determine whether either galectin is stably
associated with these macromolecular structures. Additional experiments are
designed to determine whether the CRD of the galectins is required for splicing
activity. Mutations in the conserved amino acid residues of the CRD of
galectin-1 abolish lactose-binding. These mutant polypeptides will be evaluated
for their ability to restore splicing activity to galectin-depleted extracts.
Lastly, one further approach to elucidate a mechanism of action for galectins in
splicing is to identify their ligand/partner and determine whether the ligand(s)
is a known or new splicing factor. Four candidate molecules are possible as
ligands: an unidentified (-galactoside-containing glycoconjugate; a protein
structurally mimicking galactose/lactose that binds to the CRD; a protein that
interacts with some region other than the CRD; a pre-mRNA splicing substrate or
an RNA-conta ining splicing factor. Interestingly, glycoconjugates capable of
binding to galectins have not been identified in nuclei. We will use the yeast
two-hybrid system to identify and characterize the ligand(s) for nuclear
galectins. Ligands isolated by this sensitive genetic approach will be evaluated
by biochemical techniques for ligand-galectin interactions and used in
depletion/reconstitution protocols to determine if they are required for pre-
mRNA processing. %%% Galectins are a family of eukaryotic lectin proteins
consisting of eight family members: galectin-1 through galectin-8. At least two
galectins exhibit nuclear as well as cytoplasmic localization. Nuclear galectins
appear to be functionally redundant in pre-mRNA splicing and exhibit the same
distribution in nuclei as other splicing factors. This research will determine
whether galectin splicing function is due to direct association with splicing
complexes or an indirect mechanism. ***