* 9723643
* Studies Towards Understanding the Functional Significance   of Multiple GnRHs in Vertebrate Brains
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Yonathan Zohar, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

PI: Zohar, Y. IBN-9723643 Gonadotropin releasing hormones (GnRH's) are
decapeptides produced in the brain that are integral for reproduction in all
vertebrates. These neurohormones function by regulating gonadotropin synthesis
and release in the pituitary. The discovery, however, that in all vertebrates,
multiple forms of GnRH coexist in the brain of a single species, indicates that
during evolution GnRH's may have acquired additional functions that are not
related to reproduction. The differential roles of the multiple GnRH's are not
yet fully understood, and their relative involvement in reproduction has yet to
be defined. Nine distinct forms of GnRH have been described thus far in
vertebrates, out of which six are fish-specific. Although two to three forms of
GnRH are now believed to be present in the brains of all vertebrates, perciform
fish were the first, and to date, the only vertebrates in which three forms have
been definitively identified in the brain of a single species. These three GnRH
forms have been completely characterized both at the peptide and nucleotide
level. Therefore, at present, perciform fish represent the best available model
for studying the reproduction-related significance of GnRH multiplicity in
vertebrates. The primary objective of the proposed research is to understand
which of the multiple forms of GnRH are involved in the control of reproduction,
and to elucidate the relative reproduction-related roles of these forms. The PI
will use striped bass and gilthead seabream, both perciform fish possessing
three GnRH forms as experimental models. The reproductive endocrinology of these
fish has been studied extensively, and all biochemical and genetic tools
required for the proposed studies are readily available. Three hypotheses will
be tested: 1) That gene expression and peptide levels of those GnRH's that are
involved in the regulation of reproduction vary at different stages of gonadal
development; 2) That the gene expression an peptide levels of those forms that
are involved in reproduction are responsive to environmental changes that
influence gametogenesis; and, 3) That gene expression and peptide levels of
reproductively-relevant GnRH's are regulated by gonadal steroid feedback. The
results of these studies will contribute to the global understanding of the
functional significance of GnRH multiplicity in all vertebrates including
mammals. It is also expected that this research will pave the way for future
studies concerned with the regulation of biosynthesis and release of GnRH forms
relevant to reproduction , at the organisimal, cellular and molecular levels.
Finally, as reproductive failure in farmed fish appears to be due to GnRH
disruption, the results of this research may have significant implications for
commercial fish farming.