* 9723709
* Development of a Computerized Metabolic Map
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Bill Watson, Saint John's University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2002
* USD 455,761.00

The investigators will develop a World Wide Web site and database that will
allow users to view and analyze metabolic pathways. It will be developed from
their existing stand alone system which allows pathway selection, display, and
assignment of reactions to different biological species. Their prototype Web
site (http://pathways.stjohns.edu) allows viewing and editing biochemical
reactions. Beyond incorporating all features from the stand-alone system into
the new Web site, proposed extensions will provide new database and pathway
analysis tools. The investigators will implement several new features such as
variable hierarchies, a resolution of the polymer problem, and generalized
compound classifications. Moreover, they will establish mathematical analysis
modules for constructed metabolic pathways; these modules will allow the Web
site users to employ Metabolic Control Analysis as well as standard enzyme
kinetics calculations. In research concerning uncertain pathways, the Metabolic
Control Analysis module will analyze for the possibility of branching, for
channeling, and for moietyconserved cycles (e.g., NAD/NADH). This work will
serve three communities: 1 the experimenter who may not be expert in the
analysis itself, or who may be interested in a different pathway than the one
that is usually under consideration; 2 the theoretician who wishes to verify
hypotheses rapidly beyond pencil and paper calculations and to study much larger
pathways, thereby leading to more critical thinking about metabolic regulation;
and 3 the student who would not be able to use such analyses in the absence of
an established and easily accessed system. User interaction will include
construction of the pathway, updating the database, and a forum for discussion
with other users. It will be possible to conduct many separate analyses on the
pathways, using either existing data that may be found within the system, or
data provided by the user. The graphical presentation of the pathways as well as
the results of the mathematical analysis will greatly benefit both theoreticians
and experimental scientists, expanding their scientific intuition as unforeseen
possibilities are rigorously examined within the framework of metabolic
pathways. The graphical display of chemical structures of metabolites (e.g.,
substrates, cofactors, and inhibitors) will allow atom-by-atom isotopic tracing.
The applications of the proposed database and WWW site to biochemical education
are manifold. Within a formal classroom structure, students of many biological
disciplines may generate or access important known metabolic pathways. Students
may also extend their knowledge of metabolism through independent study on the
Web site, whether by verifying laboratory data for known pathways or by
investigating hypothetical pathways. It is conceivable that textbooks in
Metabolic Control Analysis may be written, utilizing this Web site as an
instructional module.