* 9723846
* BAC:  Complex Predictive Pursuit by the Eye Compared to a   Cerebellar Model of Pursuit
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ronald Kettner, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 299,563.00

ABSTRACT: IBN - 9723846 Complex Predictive Pursuit by the Eye Compared to a
Cerebellar Model of Pursuit - R. E. Kettner. One of the most remarkable
characteristics of all animal life is the fluidity and coordination of movement
that reaches high levels in skilled athletes and dancers, but is also present in
everyday action. This ability is particularly remarkable given the slowness of
individual neurons in the brain. The brain increases its effective processing
speed by performing many computations in parallel, but this does not appear to
remove long delays in processing visual information. The problem is particularly
acute when one attempts to explain how the eye is able to track a target moving
rapidly along a complex trajectory with essentially zero lag. If eye motion were
controlled solely by changes in the current location of the target, one would
expect the eye to lag the target by the 100 ms delay required to process visual
input. Rather, it appears that the system is able to compensate for delays by
predictive control. That is, it predicts how the eye should move based on highly
delayed information. This project will conduct experiments in monkeys to
determine the limits of eye movement prediction under a variety of conditions:
(1) motion along circular and complex trajectories when target velocity is
either constant or variable, (2) motion along a circular trajectory interrupted
by a right-angle change in target direction at either predictable times and
locations compared with identical target deviations at unpredictable times and
locations, and (3) motion along circular and complex trajectories when the
target is briefly turned off. The project will also continue the development of
a biologically-realistic neural-network model of predictive eye control based on
regions of the brain's cerebellum known to be involved in pursuit eye movements.
This model uses a much larger number of internal units than other pursuit models
(440 input mossy fibers, 6 000 internal granule cells, 2 Purkinje cell outputs)
to generate complex predictive pursuit. The model learns new trajectories in a
biologically- reasonable fashion by modifying granule-to-Purkinje cell synapses
using visual error signals (from climbing fiber inputs). The behavioral data,
neural response properties, and anatomical connections are all based on
experiment. Data obtained in the above experiments will be used to test, and if
necessary, modify the model. In addition, model performance will be compared
with results from studies in other laboratories. Random target motions will be
tested that can only be performed using visual input. New simulations will also
test how well the model performs when the frequency of a learned trajectory is
changed, and whether the model can learn more than one trajectory at the same
time. All of this work should provide important information about the role of
prediction in motor control, as well as increase our understanding of how brain
systems accomplish predictive control.