* 9723045
* RUI: Identification of tRNA Maturation Proteins in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/18/1998
* Cindy Wolfe, Mississippi College
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 08/18/1998
* USD 153,150.00

9723045 Wolfe Transfer RNA is synthesized as a precursor in the nucleus where it
undergoes a series of maturation steps that include the cleavage of 5' and 3'
sequences, base modifications, the removal of intervening sequences, and the
addition of the oligonucleotide CCA to the 3' terminus. Transfer RNA is then
exported to the cytosol where additional bases are modified and the 3'CCA
terminus is repaired. In the mitochondria, precursor tRNA undergoes a similar
maturation process. Many of the components of the maturation pathway in both the
nucleus and mitchondria have not yet been identified. This research will
identify new components of the tRNA maturation pathway, examine the organization
of these proteins in a putative tRNA maturation complex, and to study protein
interactions important to efficient maturation of tRNA. Crosslinking and
immunoprecipitation experiments will utilize known maturation proteins as
anchors to isolate and identify other components of the tRNA maturation pathway.
Since Trm1p, Mod5p and Cca1p function in the maturation of nuclear and
mitochondrial pre-tRNA they will be utilized as anchors to biochemically isolate
chemical amounts of tRNA maturation complexes from both organelles. Crosslinking
techniques will allow the isolation of proteins that along with the anchor
protein interact with pre-tRNA. Components of these complexes will be identified
by peptide sequence analysis. Peptide sequence information will then be used to
search the yeast genomic data base for the corresponding gene. A two hybrid
selection will be employed to determine the pattern of interactions between the
newly identified proteins in the tRNA maturation complex. Genetic experiments
will be conducted that exploit the central role of Ccalp in tRNA metabolism.
ATP(CTP): tRNA nucleotidyhxansferase (Ccalp) is the only tRNA maturation enzyme
characterized thus far that is essential for maturation of all cellular tRNAs.
Ccalp localizes to the nucleus, mitochondria, and cytosol where it catalyzes the
addition of the oligonudeotides CCA to the 3' end of nuclear and mitochondrial
precursor tRNA. In the cytosol Cca1p repairs CCA end-shortened tRNAs. A genetic
synthetic lethal screen will be carried out to identify essential Ccalp
interactions that occur in a specific cellular compartment but may not be
detected by biochemical means. Experimental data obtained from these biochemical
and genetic approaches will yield new information concerning the identity of
tRNA maturation proteins, the organization of tRNA maturation complexes and the
protein interactions essential to tRNA metabolism in the cell. Transfer RNA is
synthesized as a precursor in the nucleus where it undergoes a series of
maturation steps. In the mitchondria, precursor tRNA undergoes a similar
maturation process. Many of the components of the maturation pathway in both the
nucleus and mitchondria have not yet been identified. Data obtained from these
biochemical and genetic experiments will yield new information concerning the
identify of tRNA maturation proteins, the organization of tRNA maturation
complexes and the protein interactions essential to tRNA metabolism in the cell.