* 9723090
* Molecular Genetics of Arabidopsis Titan Mutants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* David Meinke, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2001
* USD 315,000.00

Meinke 9723090 The long-term goal of the PI's research is to identify large
numbers of genes with essential functions during plant embryogenesis through the
isolation and characterization of embryo-defective (emb) mutants of Arabidopsis.
The PI's laboratory has played an active role in promoting the use of this model
organism for research in plant developmental genetics. In this proposal a novel
class of emb mutants, called titan mutants, is described which exhibit a
dramatic phenotype that should facilitate the analysis of cell cycle control
during seed development. The common feature among these mutants is that
endosperm nuclei become gigantic and highly polyploid. The PI proposes here a
combination of descriptive, genetic, and molecular studies designed to identify
TITAN genes, explain the mutant phenotype, and determine what role these genes
play in regulating cell cycles. Descriptive studies will provide further details
on nuclear and cytoskeletal organization in titan seeds. Genetic studies will
focus on completion of gene mapping, construction of double mutants, analysis of
marker gene expression, and characterization of additional titan mutants.
Molecular cloning of TTN genes is a major focus of the proposal. Emphasis will
be placed first on ttn3 because it appears to be tagged. The PI also proposes to
isolate TTN1 through map-based cloning. How double fertilization leads to the
establishment of distinct patterns of mitosis and cytokinesis in the embryo and
endosperm is a central question in plant reproductive biology. Results obtained
from this project should provide valuable insights into cell cycle regulation
and embryo-endosperm interactions in angiosperms. Although research on cell
cycle regulation in yeast and Drosophila should provide a wealth of information
applicable to plants, analysis of Arabidopsis mutants such as those described
here will be needed to establish the precise mechanisms of cell cycle control
employed throughout plant development.