* 9723681
* Homeotic Regulation of Decapentaplegis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Juan Botas, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2000
* USD 330,000.00

Botas 9723681 The goal of this proposal is to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which genes control the development of organs and body parts. The
proposed work focuses on Hox genes because of their fundamental role in pattern
formation and their extraordinary conservation during evolution. Hox genes are
used by animals as diverse as worms and mice to control the sizes and shapes of
body parts along the major body axis. These master regulatory genes encode
homeodomain proteins that regulate the activity of target genes that are mostly
unknown. To investigate how Hox genes control pattern formation requires to
define the target genes and regulatory sequences recognized by Hox proteins in
the developing embryo. One target of Hox regulation in Drosophila is
decapentaplegic (dpp), a gene encoding a member of the TGF-( family of proteins.
A small (674 bp) enhancer in dpp was defined that mediates direct positive
regulation by the Hox gene Ultrabithorax (Ubx) and direct negative regulation by
the Hox gene abdominal-A (abd-A). The objectives of the present proposal are: 1)
To understand the molecular basis of posterior prevalence. We will investigate
whether differences in intrinsic binding affinities or competition for unknown
co-factors underlay posterior prevalence. 2) To identify factors required for
dpp homeotic regulation. A concerted series of genetic and molecular experiments
will be conducted to identify factors conferring Hox specificity in viva. 3) To
understand the mechanisms by which ABD-A activates and represses transcription.
ABD-A directly represses transcription from one portion of the dpp674 enhancer,
but it is able to activate transcription from another portion. Experiments are
designed to distinguish these two possibilities: a) ABD-A is both a repressor
and an activator depending on the context of the binding sites. b) ABD-A is a
repressor that indirectly activates transcription through intermediary proteins.
These studies on the molecular mechanisms of Hox func tion will lead to a better
understanding of the genetic control of morphogenesis.