* 9723667
* Regulation of Cellular Interactions by Extracellular        Matrix Proteolysis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Jerry Hedrick, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

Lindsay 9723667 Following fertilization, the egg extracellular matrix is
modified to prevent further sperm contact with the egg, thus maintaining the
diploid state of the zygote. Using Xenopus laevis as a model system a block to
polyspermy mechanism has been identified which involves the limited proteolysis
of extracellular matrix (egg envelope) glycoproteins by proteases released from
the activated egg. The known molecules involved are: 1) an envelope glycoprotein
component which undergoes limited proteolysis at fertilization (gp69); 2) a
chymotrypsin-like protease (ovochymase), which is localized to extracellular
matrix fibers within the perivitelline space of the egg (the space between the
plasma membrane and the overlying envelope); and 3) a trypsin-like protease
released from the egg which activates ovochymase. In the last grant period,
ovochymase and gp69 were cloned, the trypsin-like protease was purified, and it
was revealed that ovochymase is not directly responsible for gp69 hydrolysis as
originally hypothesized. Specific objectives for the proposed research are to:
(1) Purify and characterize the egg protease directly responsible for gp69
hydrolysis; (2) Determine the role of ovochymase in the protease cascade; (3)
Clone the trypsin-like protease for structure/function studies; (4)
Immunolocalize the trypsin-like protease within the inactivated egg; and (5)
Determine the function of gp69 hydrolysis in sperm binding and/or envelope
hardening. The results of this study will provide an increased understanding of
the regulation of sperm-egg interactions through proteolytic processing of the
extracellular matrix, a mechanism which is fundamental to animal development.