* 9723273
* Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Patricia Wadsworth, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 07/31/2001
* USD 393,119.00

9723273 Wadsworth MT dynamic behavior has been shown to be regulated in living
cells, and the parameters of MT turnover varies with cell type and stage of the
cell cycle. Recently, it has been shown that microtubule turnover in epithelial
cells is greatly suppressed when cells establish apical/basolateral polarity and
is stimulated following treatment with a mitogenic growth factor (hepatocyte
growth factor, or HGF) (which disestablishes polarity). In the first Aim of this
project, the behavior of individual microtubules will be measured in the leading
edge and non-leading lamellar regions of motile (growth factor-treated)
epithelial cells to test the hypothesis that MT dynamic turnover is regionally
regulated within the cell. These measurements will directly show if MT behavior
varies among different specific regions of the cell, and if so, which parameters
are altered. In addition, the correlation of MT dynamics to the establishment of
cell polarity will be determined by measuring dynamics before and after
polarization of motile cells. In the second Aim, the molecular basis for the
stimulation of MT turnover in HGF-stimulated cells will be determined. Tubulin
will be immunoprecipitated from extracts of control and HGF-treated cells using
anti-tubulin antibodies, and any molecules that co-immunoprecipitate with
tubulin dimers will be identified and characterized. In addition, MTs will be
assembled in vitro from extracts of control and HGF-treated cells, using taxol
to stimulate net polymerization, and MT-associated proteins (MAPs) will be
released from the MTs using salt and/or ATP. The composition, phosphorylation
and quantity of MAPs in control and treated cells will be compared. In the third
Aim, molecules that suppress MT turnover in polarized epithelial cells will be
identified. To accomplish this goal, a rapid, quantitative, in vitro
polymerization assay will be developed to screen fractions of an epithelial cell
lysate for factors that suppress net microtubule growth. The effect of the novel
proteins thus identified will be directly demonstrated by microinjection into
living cells and measurement of the parameters of dynamic instability. The
results of these experiments will provide new information regarding the
molecular mechanisms that regulate microtubule turnover as cells respond to
growth factors and as they differentiate. Microtubules (MTs) are polymers of the
subunit protein tubulin, and are one of the three major classes of cytoskeletal
structures in eukaryotic cells. Their function is critical to a variety of
fundamental cellular processes, such as cell division, flagellar and ciliary
motility, intracellular trafficking of subcellular particles, and cell shape
regulation. Individual MTs are inherently dynamic, alternating stochastically
between periods of growth (polymerization) and rapid shortening
(depolymerization). MT dynamic behavior has been shown to be regulated in living
cells, and the parameters of MT turnover varies with cell type and stage of the
cell cycle. This project will elucidate some of the biological consequences of
MT dynamics, and will elucidate the biochemical mechanisms by which cells
regulate the dynamic instability of MTs. ***