* 9723274
* Regulation of Photosynthetic Electron Transport Genes in    Chlamydomonas Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* David Stern, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 274,000.00

9723274 Stern Photosynthetic electron transport is largely carried out by multi-
subunit complexes, whose constituents are encoded by nuclear and chloroplast
genes. The synthesis of these complexes relies on the coordinate gene expression
in these two organelles. A particularly intriguing aspect of this
interdependence is that many of these nuclear genes regulate the synthesis of a
specific chloroplast gene product. This regulation is carried out largely at the
post-transcriptional level, mediating processes such as RNA processing, RNA
stability, translation, and macromolecular complex assembly. This research will
focus on nuclear regulatory genes and their RNA targets in the chloroplasts of
the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, particularly those that
encode subunits of the cytochrome b6/f complex of the electron transport chain.
The cytochrome b6/f complex mediates electron transfer between the plastoquinone
pool and plastocyanin, and is subject to developmental and environmental
regulation. The specific goals of this project are first, to analyze two
mutations that impair the stability of the chloroplast petA and petD mRNAs,
which encode cytochrome f and subunit IV, respectively. Second, chloroplast
ribosome recognition elements in mRNA will be functionally defined. The analysis
of nuclear gene products and mechanisms that control mRNA stability will be
carried out simultaneously using molecular genetics and biochemistry. Molecular
approaches will be used to investigate the mechanism by which degradation occurs
in mRNA stability mutants, and to clone the gene identified by one such
mutation. Biochemical approaches will take advantage of in vitro systems to
analyze the details of RNA-protein interactions, focusing on the ability of
these stability factors to recognize specific RNA sequences, and perhaps to
carry out other functions, such as RNA processing. The analysis of the subunit
IV mRNA stability factor, which we hypothesize to encode an mRNA 5' untranslated
reg ion-binding protein, will be facilitated by using a molecularly tagged
allele of this locus to clone the nuclear gene encoding this protein. To analyze
ribosome recognition elements, two regions of mRNA close to the translation
initiation codon will be tested for a possible role in ribosomal RNA
recognition. One of these regions is a Shine-Dalgarno element whose existence in
chloroplast mRNAs is not yet firmly established. The other region consists of
the three nucleotides immediately upstream of the initiation codon. Mutagenesis
of these elements, and potential pairing partners in ribosomal RNA, .will be
used to test the proposed interaction of these two RNA molecules. The overall
goal of this research is to contribute to our understanding of chloroplast gene
regulation, in a way that may be broadly applicable to photosynthetic
eukaryotes. Some of the results may illuminate evolutionary strategies used by
the nucleus to seize control of this cytoplasmic organelle. %%% Photosynthetic
electron transport is largely carried out by multi-subunit complexes, whose
constituents are encoded by nuclear and chloroplast genes. The synthesis of
these complexes relies on the coordinate gene expression in these two
organelles. A particularly intriguing aspect of this interdependence is that
many of these nuclear genes are regulatory and control the synthesis of a
specific chloroplast gene product. Therefore, genes once expressed autonomously
in the prokaryotic ancestor of this organelle now require specific nuclear gene
products for their activity. This research focuses on nuclear regulatory genes
and their RNA targets in the chloroplast of the unicellular green alga
Chamydomonas reinhardtii. The research will contribute to our understanding of
chloroplast gene regulation, in a way that may be broadly applicable to
phosynthetic eukaryotes. Some of the results may illuminate evolutionary
strategies used by the nucleus to seize control of this cytoplasmic organelle.
***