* 9723086
* Structural Enzymology of Allosteric Threonine Deaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Edward Eisenstein, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9723086 Eisenstein This research aims to forge a quantitative mechanism for the
allosteric regulation of substrate binding and catalysis in a family of
pyridoxal phosphate-dependent threonine deaminases. The approach consists of
analyzing complementary information from structural, genetic, thermodynamic and
kinetic studies to yield more accurate insights into the fundamental
interactions between subunits that give rise to cooperative ligand binding and
feedback regulation. Refining the crystal structure to 2.3 angstroms in the
presence of feedback modifiers and substrate analogs will shed light on the
structural basis for the allosteric transition. Variations in the energetics of
dimer-tetramer assembly for mutant variants in combination with ligand binding
studies will reveal changes in subunit interaction energies that are linked to
cooperative ligand binding. Additionally, sigmoidal isoleucine and valine
binding to fully active, dimeric variants will reveal the cooperative free
energies associated with heterotropic effector binding. Heterodimeric hybrid
enzymes containing different arrangements of functional catalytic and regulatory
sites will be used to assess whether heterotropic effectors promote global or
only local regulation. Substrate and solvent isotope effects in steady state and
pre-steady state kinetics will be used to establish the effects of isoleucine
and valine on the rate-limiting step(s) in catalysis. This research aims to
provide complementary information from diverse experimental strategies to
develop a molecular level understanding of the regulation of catalysis in the
threonine deaminase family of pyridoxal phosphate-requiring allosteric enzymes.
The biological activity of allosteric proteins is modulated by small molecules
called effectors. Binding of effector molecules results in the propagation of
widespread structural changes that lead to biologically important changes in
function. This tenet provides a central paradigm in biological chemistry, which
ul timately will guide the design of control features into novel proteins.