* 9723735
* Identification and Characterization of Agrobacterium and    Plant Proteins Interacting with Proteins of the             Agrobacterium T-complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Luca Comai, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 367,000.00

Nester 9723735 The interaction between Agrobacterium tumefaciens and plants is
the only documented case of genetic engineering in nature. Several aspects of
the molecular mechanism by which Agrobacterium tumefaciens interacts with and
genetically transforms a wide variety of higher plants are well understood. The
virulence (vir) regulon of a large tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid of Agrobacterium
is activated by a number of signal molecules synthesized by wounded plants,
resulting in the production and transfer of a nucleoprotein complex, the
T-complex, from the bacterium to the plant cell. The T-complex consists of the
T-DNA (a single-stranded DNA segment of the Ti plasmid), VirD2 (the pilot
protein covalently bonded to the 5' end of the T-DNA), and VirE2 (the single-
stranded DNA binding protein which envelops the T-DNA). Once transferred into
the plant cell, the T-complex finds its way into the plant nucleus where the
T-DNA is integrated and expressed, leading to the overproduction of plant growth
regulators and ultimately tumor formation. However, how the T-complex is
transferred across the bacterial envelope, how the T-complex is trafficked once
within the plant cell, and how the T-DNA is integrated into plant chromosomes
through non-homologous recombination remain poorly understood. This project
initiates a research program that has two objectives: to understand the
interaction between the T-complex and its transport apparatus within
Agrobacterium, and to identify plant factors involved in the transfer and
integration of the T-DNA inside the plant cell. Since the specificity of the
T-DNA transfer process is determined by the protein components of the T-complex,
efforts will focus on identifying the Agrobacterium as well as the plant
proteins interacting with the two protein components of the T-complex, VirD2 and
VirE2. Several molecular tools for studying protein-protein interactions will be
used to identify and study Agrobacterium proteins which recognize and interact
with either VirD2 or VirE2 or both and thereby facilitate the transfer of the
T-complex from the bacterium to the plant cell. These include the yeast two-
hybrid system, cross linking, and co-immunoprecipitation. This study will also
identify the signal domains of VirD2 and VirE2 which interact with the bacterial
transport apparatus. These studies are expected to provide insights into
unexplored areas of the molecular interaction between Agrobacterium and its
host, such as the sequential events of the T-complex transfer in both the
bacterium and the host plant cell. This will make the Agrobacterium-plant crown
gall system a model system not only for studying microorganism-eukaryote
interactions but also for studying and probing nucleoprotein trafficking and
translocation in bacteria as well as higher plants. The understanding of the
host factors involved in the T-DNA transfer and integration process will also
likely lead to improved methods for genetically engineering recalcitrant plant
species.