* 9723970
* Control of Organelle Inheritance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Ursula Goodenough, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2002
* USD 297,152.00

9723970 Goodenough Like most sexual eukaryotes, the green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii transmits its organelle DNA to its sexual progeny in a uniparental
fashion, with all 4 products of meiosis inheriting the chloroplast DNA
contributed by the mating-type plus (mt+) parent and all 4 inheriting the
mitochondrial DNA contributed by the mating-type minus (mt-) parent. These non-
Mendelian patterns, first noticed by Sager over 40 years ago, have been shown to
be the result of the selective degradation of minus chloroplast genomes and plus
mitochondrial genomes in the early zygote, but nothing is yet known about how
the selection or the destruction process occurs at a molecular level in this or
any other system. Most studies have focused on the uniparental inheritance of
chloroplast DNA. The dominant Protector/Destroyer model for the operation of
this system proposes that the mt+ locus encodes Protector(s) which binds to
and/or modifies chloroplast DNA in the plus gamete. A Destroyer function then
degrades all non-protected, minus-derived genomes in the zygote. Key to this
model is the observation that when mt- gametes also carry an mt+ locus, they
differentiate as minus gametes, but, when they are mated, their chloroplast DNA
is not degraded in the zygote, the result being uniparental (BP) inheritance of
chloroplast markers. This observation indicates that the mt+ locus encodes
gene(s) involved in protecting chloroplast DNA from degradation, and documents
that these genes can be expressed even when the cells undergo minus gametic
differentiation.. We have recently cloned the mt+ (and the mt-) locus and have,
we believe, identified the one gene in the locus that is necessary for plus
gametes to mate. There remain blocks of DNA with no identified function. The
working premise of this proposal is that these sequences contain genes involved
in chloroplast DNA protection. The goal of the proposed research is to identify
and characterize these genes and hence better understand how protection i s
achieved. We propose a two-stage screen. 1) Plus-specific genes in the cloned
mt+ sequences are first identified by northern analysis. 2) The genes are then
transformed into mt+ recipients, and the transformants are tested for their
capacity to engage in BP inheritance. The first state of this screen has been
carried out successfully in pilot experiments. A mt+- linked gene with plus-
specific expression has been identified in northern blots and its cDNA has been
sequenced. The gene product has features several suggesting that it is a
transcriptional regulator. Animal and fungal lineage's have devised
uncharacterized mechanisms to monitor their mitochondrial genomes; plant
lineage's keep track of both mitochondrial and chloroplast chromosomes. During
the first few hours of zygote development formed by the fusion of gametes of
plus and minus mating type cells of Chlamydomonas, the chloroplast genomes
contributed by the mt- parent are destroyed and the mitochondria genomes
contributed by the mt+ are destroyed. The results of this work will allow
greater insight into this remarkable process of genetic discrimination.