* 9723022
* Model Choice and Improvement for Bayesian Analysis of       Generalized Linear Mixed Models and Bayesian Multiple       Polygene Mapping in Pedigreed, Outcross Populations
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Ina Hoeschele, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2001
* USD 250,768.00

The main focus of this project is to develop statistical methods for mapping
genes affecting polygenic and multi factorial traits (referred to below as
Quantitative Loci or QTL) in large, complex pedigrees. The project has three
interrelated objectives: (i) We are expanding our QTL mapping software to the
analysis of multi-generational pedigrees, to choice among models with different
numbers of QTL polymorphism, and to discontinuous but polygenic (disease)
phenotypes; (ii) we are comparing and providing tolls for model checking and
choice for Bayesian analysis of Generalized Linear Mixed Models (GLMMs) in
general and QTL models in particular, as well as investigating alternative
sampling algorithms necessary to implement these methods, and (iii) We are
investigating strategies for the fine mapping of QTL to enable positional
cloning of important QTL and to increase the efficiency of marker-assisted
selection in livestock. The availability of mderate resolution maps in livestock
an high resolution maps in humans has created a substantial demand for
statistical methods and tools which make optimum use of the available data and
are capable of handling large, complex pedigrees, unknown number of QTL, and
unknown nature of genetic variation at QTL. Current methods do not yet have all
of these capabilities. However, the importance of methods and software extends
far beyond livestock. They are critical to understanding and mechanisms and
evolution of polygenic and multifactorial traits, designing more effective
breeding regimes for domesticated plants and animals, and understanding and
treating inherited human diseases. This work is supported by the Computational
Biology Activity and the Program Population Biology (Bio).