* 9723921
* Molecular Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon       Degradation by Mycobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Gerben Zylstra, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 02/28/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9723921 Zylstra Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) constitute a class of
aromatic hydrocarbons consisting of two or more fused benzene rings in linear,
angular, and cluster arrangements. Since many of the aromatic hydrocarbons found
in the environment have a natural pyrolytic origin they must have been in
contact with microorganisms throughout evolutionary periods of time. It is not
surprising therefore that microorganisms have evolved that are capable of
degrading aromatic compounds. Almost all of what is known about the metabolism
of PAHs is based on fast-growing gram negative organisms and naphthalene (two
rings) and phenanthrene (three rings) as model substrates. Slow-growing gram
positive organisms such as Mycobacterium have been shown not only to degrade
naphthalene and phenanthrene but also to degrade PAHs consisting of four or more
aromatic rings. In fact, this class of organisms is perhaps the best studied
group for their ability to mineralize high molecular weight PAHs. Unfortunately,
however, very little is known about the ability of these organisms to metabolize
PAHs. Catabolic pathways have been proposed but these are based on the
identification of only a few intermediate compounds that have been identified in
culture supernatants. This project involves the use of molecular genetics and
biochemistry to investigate the ability of Mycobacterium strains PYO1 and PYO5C
to degrade high molecular weight PAHs in more detail. A clone for the initial
dioxygenase in the catabolic pathway(s) has been obtained. Assuming that the
genes for PAH degradation are clustered, the remaining genes in the pathway can
be located by nucleotide sequencing. Sequence analysis coupled with biological
analyses with expressed, cloned genes and with knock-out mutants will identify
the function of each identified open reading frame. These experiments will
result in the determination of every step in the catabolic pathway with the
identification of every catabolic intermediate. In the case that the genes fo r
PAH degradation are not linked in Mycobacterium then genes will be identified
through transposon mutagenesis of the Mycobacterium strain. This will be aided
by the fact that an insertion sequence has been identified in and cloned from
the target Mycobacterium strain. Mycobacterium species of bacteria and their
relatives are unique in their ability to degrade highly-recalcitrant, stable
polycyclic aromatic compounds in the environment. However, little is known about
the molecular and biochemical basis of this activity. This project is designed
to investigate the ability of Mycobacterium strains to degrade polycyclic
compounds at the gene and enzyme level. A thorough knowledge of how
Mycobacterium degrade these compounds will aid in the design of bioremediative
processes for removing polycyclic compounds from the environment.