* 9723657
* Interactive Insect Neuroanatomy Databases for the World Wide Web
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Nicholas Strausfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 424,228.00

This project will continue the development of "Flybrain," an interactive
database of the central nervous system of Drosophila and describes specific aims
for both levels of database construction. At the deep, infrastructural level
(level one), the specific aims of the project include increased automation of
data integration and transfer; optimization of interactive viewing and virtual
dissection programs; creation of programs to display physiological records; and
design and implementation of a concept-based search engine. Level two specific
aims focus on the addition of a second core Arias of the thoracic and abdominal
central nervous system of Drosophila and the implementation of parallel
databases, two devoted to the brains of neurobiologically important insect
groups, the other focusing on the evolution of arthropod brains. These
developments will provide topical and much needed access to detailed graphical
data on the organization of brains and nervous systems of the dominant metazoan
Phylum, to the benefit of a wide international community of neuroscientists and
evolutionary biologists, as well as new tools for database management and
manipulation of three-dimensional data. The implementation of professionally
managed neuroscience databases on the World Wide Web provides immediate and
extremely efficient access to graphic data on the structure and function of
central nervous systems that are particularly relevant to modern research. These
databases range from interactive atlases of human brains, through databases on
the nervous systems of zebra fish, Aplysia, nematodes, and fruit flies (this
project). Three mirror sites in the United States, Germany, and Japan have
collaborated in the design and implementation of the project which has made
unexpectedly rapid progress in the first 16 months of its National Science
Foundation funding. Major advances were achieved in the first funding phase at
two levels of database development: 1) the design and implementation of a stable
framework and robust mechanisms to acquire, organize, manage, search, and mirror
large amounts of image data with minimum maintenance and 2) the installation of
comprehensive, annotated searchable atlases of wild- type Drosophila brain with
links to allied data such as reconstructed single neurons, pathways, and
schematics, as well as homologous structures of other insects. New methods have
been implemented for retrieving information from a highly linked network of data
modules. Novel graphical representations reveal new ways to view and manipulate
two- and three-dimensional structure.