* 9723583
* A Planning visit to China: U.S.-China Collaborative Research in the Southern Ocean
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Cynthia Pilskaln, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 04/30/1998
* USD 8,900.00

9723583 Pilskaln This award supports a visit to China by U.S .researchers
Cynthia Pilskaln, Fei Chai, and Richard Barber to plan future research
collaborations in the Southern Ocean. The trip will allow the U.S. P.I.s to
develop a joint U.S.-China research program in the Southern Ocean, taking
advantage of annual cruises by the Chinese to their Antarctic Research Station.
The Chinese counterpart is Dong Zhaoqian, Director of the Polar Research
Institute, Shanghai. During the planning visit, the P.I.s will meet with Chinese
scientists and government officials to discuss and develop mutual scientific
interests and devise a joint research plan. The P.I.s will also visit the newly
constructed polar research vessel, Xue Long, to see first hand the research
instrumentation available and to discuss sampling and at-sea analysis procedures
with the ship's crew and technicians. The Southern Ocean is comparatively
unsampled; this lack of data is an obstacle to improved understanding of global
climate. Use of the regularly scheduled Chinese research vessel trips to the
Antarctic could provide an important additional platform for data acquisition,
but arranging such joint programs requires face to face meetings and development
of detailed understandings. This planning visit is an important initial step in
a potentially valuable cooperation.