* 9723312
* Enzymatic Studies on the Initial Steps of Anaerobic Toluene and Xylene Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Alfred Spormann, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* nicole peterson
* 12/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9723312 Spormann This research will investigate novel enzymes catalyzing the
first step in anaerobic degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Recent work showed
that the inital step in degradation of the methyl-benzenes toluene and m-xylene
is the addition of the methyl carbon to the double bond of fumarate.
Benzylsuccinate synthase, which catalyzes the addition of toluene to fumarate,
will be studied as the prototype for this reaction. This enzymatic addition
represents a novel biochemical reaction to activate aromatic hydrocarbons.
Further, the activity may also define a novel class of enzymes that catalyze the
formation of carbon-carbon bonds by a heretofore unknown reaction mechanism.
Benzylsuccinate synthases may be of primary importance in anaerobic
mineralization pathways in a range of different bacterial species. Research in
this proposals directed towards gaining a better understanding of these unusual
enzymatic reactions. This project will include purification of benzylsuccinate
synthase and investigation of the enzyme's reaction mechanism. In addition to
characterizing a novel class of enzymes, the results of this research will have
important implications for our understanding of anaerobic pathways used by
petroleum hydrocarbon-mineralizing bacteria. Because of the absence of molecular
oxygen under typical conditions in fuel-contaminated aquifers, anaerobic
bacteria capable of degrading petroleum hydrocarbons, such as toluene and the
xylene isomers, are of key importance. Investigations of the key enzymes of
these pathways may lead to the development of molecular tools that may assist in
monitoring file abundance and activity of relevant microbes in situ. This
research will investigate novel enzymes catalyzing the first step in anaerobic
degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. These compounds are significant
environmental pollutants. Until recently it was thought that degradation of such
compounds required oxygen. Recent work showed that the inital step in
degradation of toluene and m-xylene, novel. In addition to characterizing this
novel class of enzymes, the results of this research will have important
implications for our understanding of anaerobic pathways used by petroleum
hydrocarbon-mineralizing bacteria. Because of the absence of molecular oxygen
under typical conditions in fuel-contaminated aquifers, anaerobic bacteria
capable of degrading petroleum hydrocarbons, such as toluene and the xylene
isomers, are of key importance. Investigations of the key enzymes of these
pathways may lead to the development of molecular tools that may assist in
monitoring the abundance and activity of relevant microbes in situ, and aid in
bioremediation.