* 9723114
* Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Weisblat, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

Weisblat 9723114 Glossiphoniid leeches such as Helobdella robusta, are useful
for in depth analyses of developmental processes for two reasons: first, they
are relatively simple animals with large, accessible embryos that are suited for
combined cellular and molecular techniques. Second, since leeches belong to the
phylum Annelida, an otherwise poorly studied group, the results obtained are
useful for making interphyletic comparisons. Such comparisons are essential to
distinguish general developmental processes from phylum-specific ones, and also
to learn how evolutionary modification of developmental processes leads to the
appearance of diverse animal types. For example, annelids and arthropods
resemble each other (and differ from mollusks) in that they both have segmented
body plans. In both annelids and arthropods, segmental tissues arise from
longitudinally oriented, ventrally situated arrays of cells, termed the germ
band (in arthropods such as the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster) or germinal
plate (in annelids). In leech, the germinal plate arises in strict head-to-tail
(rostrocaudal) progression by repeated divisions of specialized embryonic stem
cells called teloblasts. Homologs of several genes involved in rostrocaudal
patterning of Drosophila seem to be expressed in homologous patterns during
rostrocaudal patterning of leech. This suggests that the molecular genetic
processes of differentiation and morphogenesis in later development will be
quite similar in the two phyla. But the early Helobdella embryo is strikingly
different from the early Drosophila embryo and strikingly similar to molluscan
embryos. Thus, the question of how cell fates are determined in the early leech
embryo is of considerable interest. The first part of this proposal contains
experiments designed to further previous investigations of how distinct fates
are assigned to particular cells in the developing embryo, with emphasis on the
assignment of mesodermal and ectodermal fates to individually iden tified cells
at fourth cleavage. The focus in this work is on characterizing the patterns of
expression and development roles of leech homologs to evolutionarily conserved
regulatory genes from Drosophila, such as nanos, dorsal, twist, snail, and numb.
A second area of interest is the morphogenetic cell movements leading to
germinal plate formation in Helobdella. Columns of segmental founder cells
coalesce into the germinal plate having moved over most of the surface of the
embryo; these movements are accompanied by the spreading of a squamous
epithelium in a process called epiboly. The experiments in the second part of
this proposal are designed to elucidate the cellular processes involved in these
movements and to compare the mechanisms of epiboly in leech and fish.
Specifically, we seek to test the hypothesis that the segmental founder cells
and epithelium are "towed" vegetally by forces originating within the endodermal
precursor cells; if so, we further seek to distinguish between possible modes of
generating the towing movements, such as "cortical treadmilling" and "cortical
contractile wave" processes.