* 9723454
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Cell-Signalling           in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Eleanor Maine, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2001
* USD 335,000.00

Maine 9723454 This proposal aims to understand the molecular basis of inductive
cell-signalling during developmental and how the cell-signalling process elicits
a specific cellular response. In particular, the proposal investigates the
mechanism responsible for promoting mitosis in the C.elegans germ line.
Currently, it is understood that the somatic distal tip cell (DTC) signals the
distal germ line, promoting mitosis and/or preventing meiosis. Three components
of the signalling pathway are known: LAG-2, a ligand produced by the DTC; GLP-1,
a germline transmembrane receptor; LAG-1, a germline transcription factor. This
evolutionarily conserved signalling pathway plays a general role in development
and growth control of metazoans. Many questions remain to be answered about the
nature of intercellular signalling mediated by GLP-1. Additional pathway
components need to be identified as do targets of pathway activity. To address
these questions, genes that interact genetically with glp-1 have been identified
and studied. Sog mutations suppress and ego mutations enhance the glp-1 mutant
phenotype components (e.g., lag-1) and/or with each other (e.g., ego-1 and
ego-6). This proposal focuses on three genes that promote GLP-1 mediated
signalling in the germ line, ego-1, ego-3, and ego-6. Each gene has a
pleiotropic mutant phenotype consistent with activity in more than one aspect of
development. These gene products also may function in GLP-1 mediated signalling
in the embryo. The proposed experiments will investigate the specific role of
each gene in development. Genetic studies will determine the requirement for
each gene during development, whether aspects of the phenotype are
interdependent, and when each gene product is active. To obtain a broader
understanding of ego gene activity in signal transduction, tests for genetic
interactions with other known or suspected signalling pathway components will be
performed. Molecular studies will determine the nature of each ego gene produ ct
and confirm the time and place of gene product activity during development. Time
permitting, possible physical interactions between the products of genetically
interacting genes (e.g., ego-1 and ego-6) will be investigated.