* 9723329
* RUI:  Sphingolipid Metabolism in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Daniel Lynch, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9723484 Lynch The previous characterization of enzymatic reactions involved in
sphingolipid metabolism in plants serves as a foundation for the proposed
research. The intracellular locations of the individual enzymatic steps involved
in sphingolipid synthesis and turnover will be determined in bean and corn
tissues using cell fractionation and marker assays. The specific sphingolipid
content and composition in the isolated membrane fractions will also be
determined. The transfer of labeled sphingolipids through the cell will be
tracked by coupling in vivo labeling of sphingolipids and fractionation
procedures. Using this approach, information on the route and kinetics of
intracellular sphingolipid transport will be obtained. The topology of
glucosylceramide synthesis in intact membrane vesicles will be investigated by
examining the sensitivity of the reaction to proteolytic enzymes. As well, the
role of steryl glucoside as the glucose donor for this reaction will be further
investigated. Finally, the enzymatic reaction catalyzing the synthesis of
ceramide phosphorylinositol, the biosynthetic precursor for inositol
phosphorylceramides, will be demonstrated and characterized in microsomal
preparations from bean and corn. Subsequently, its subcellular distribution and
topology will be characterized. The proposed research will provide an integrated
view of plant sphingolipid metabolism, intracellular transport/compartmentation,
and the topology of key enzymes thought to be involved in establishing the
asymmetric transbilayer distribution of glucosylceramide in the plasma membrane.
It will also provide new information about the first step in the synthesis of
inositol phosphorylceramides, a diverse class of complex sphingolipids in
plants. Sphingolipids are present in all organisms except bacteria and are known
to function as structural components in cells and as regulators of various
biological processes. Little is known, however, about the function and
metabolism of sphingolipids in plants. The proposed research, a continuation of
previous work supported by the NSF, will provide an integrated view of where and
how sphingolipids are produced, transported, and degraded in the cell. It will
also investigate, for the first time, the synthesis of inositol
phosphorylceramides, a novel and diverse class of complex plant lipids. The
results from these studies will contribute to understanding the role of these
unusual lipids in plant growth and development.