* 9723478
* The National Bryophyte Information Service:  Implementation of a Scalable, Community Testbed for Botanical Collections  Data Management
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Robert Magill, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 299,957.00

This award will establish the National Bryophyte Information Service (NBIS), a
distributed, Internet-based information service and testbed facility for the
botanical research community. The mission of the NBIS is: (1) to provide
immediate support for bryophyte collections data access that is urgently needed
by several biodiversity projects and (2) to create a long-term, sustainable
testbed for continuing research on biodiversity database and information system
interoperability and scalability. This initiative is a multi-disciplinary and
inter-institutional collaboration. Missouri Botanical Garden (www.mobot.org),
the New York Botanical Garden (www.nybg.org) and the Bishop Museum
(www.bishop.hawaii.org) will partner on research focussed on hybridizing Web and
database technologies to improve access, interoperability, and scalability of
biodiversity information systems. In order to provide simultaneous, integrated
access to bryology research data in multiple systems we will design and
implement a multidatabase federation. In addition, we will develop policies and
mechanisms to support community curation of the databases and will deploy an
individualized Web interface configuration service for researchers. The project
will also participate in the Biological Collections Schema Library Project
(www.bishop.hawaii.org/asc-cnc) and will, in part, utilize the Object Protocol
Model database software from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. These
activities address an identified need to improve the social, access, and content
scalability of biological databases. It also addresses one of the most important
"Grand Challenge" problems facing bioinformatics, the problem of information-
resource interoperability. We propose straightforward and effective solutions
that can yield short-term benefits to the bryology community and, in the long
term, complement and extend related theoretical and empirical bioinformatics
research. This project is being jointly supported by the National Science
Foundation and the US Geological Survey Biological Resources Division as part of
the development of the National Biological Information Infrastructure
(www.nbs.gov/nbii).