* 9723871
* Single Neuron Computation:  Dendritic Information ProcessingStudied with High Speed Laser Scanning Methods
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Peter Saggau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 06/30/2001
* USD 405,940.00

Abstract for NSF proposal: IBN - 9723871 A significant problem for biomedical
research of nerve tissue is the local stimulation of dendrites with bioactive
substances such as neurotransmitters. The methods for electrical stimulation
that are commonly used can only reach electrically excitable membranes and
cannot directly activate the receptors of neurotransmitters. There exist
chemically inactivated and photolabile substances that allow for adequate
chemical stimulation. These so called caged compounds can be activated by
disruption of their molecular cage with a flash of ultra-violet light. However,
current photolysis systems used for this purpose lack speed and/or spatial
accuracy. Multisite photolysis with high spatio temporal resolution of caged
compounds would permit experiments in isolated nerve tissue that closely
resemble the situation in the intact nervous system. This capability would add a
new dimension to neuroscience and related biomedical fields. It is proposed to
develop an optical stimulation system to locally release caged bioactive
compounds by means of a pulsed, scanning UV laser beam. This novel system will
make use of a scanning principle that allows for ultrafast, accurate, and
computer-controlled random-positioning of laser beams. The proposed solution
will exceed the capability of previous photolysis systems in its flexibility and
spatio-temporal resolution by using acousto-optical effects to control position
and intensity of the laser beam. With such devices, positioning and modulation
times are in the microsecond range, permitting simultaneous multi-site release
of caged compounds and thus multi-site stimulation.