* 9723754
* Regulation of Two Clusters of Nitrogenase Genes of the      Cyanobacterium Anabaena
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Teresa Thiel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/2002
* USD 325,000.00

Thiel 9723754 Cyanobacteria of the genus Anabaena have evolved specialized cells
called heterocysts that function exclusively for nitrogen fixation. Some
strains, notably Anabaena variabilis, have multiple genes that encode different
nitrogenases. There are three clusters of genes in A. variabilis that encode
three nitrogenases: a V-dependent nitrogenase (vnf) and two molybdenum-dependent
nitrogenases, one that functions under aerobic conditions (nil1) and one that
functions only under strictly anaerobic conditions (nif2). These genes are
tightly regulated; however, very little is known about their regulation except
that it is probably not via the (54- NifA system described in other nitrogen-
fixing bacteria. Thus, an understanding of nitrogenase gene regulation in A.
variabilis can broaden our understanding of mechanisms of procaryotic gene
regulation. The goal of this research is to identify the cis elements and trans-
acting factors that function in the environmental control of the nif1 and vnf
genes that function under aerobic conditions in heterocysts of A. variabilis.
The objectives are to 1 ) identify and characterize a putative repressor made in
Mo-grown cells that controls V-nitrogenase gene expression, 2) identify the DNA-
binding site for the putative repressor and determine the nucleotides that are
important for repression, 3) identify and characterize a putative repressor made
in ammonium-grown cells that controls nif1 and vnf expression in the presence of
fixed nitrogen, and 4) identify the DNA-binding site for this regulatory
protein. Nitrogen fixation, the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen gas to
ammonia by the enzyme nitrogenase, is found exclusively in bacteria, including
many cyanobacteria. Nitrogen fixation sustains the growth of not only these
bacteria, but also of many plants that receive nitrogen by associations with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. In all organisms nitrogen fixation is tightly
regulated. Very little is known about nitrogen regulation in many agriculturally
impo rtant nitrogen-fixing bacteria, including the cyanobacteria. The primary
objective of this research project is to use the tools of molecular genetics to
understand how the cyanobacterium, Anabaena variabilis, controls two sets of
genes, nif1 and vnf, that allow these cells to fix nitrogen under diverse
environmental conditions.