* 9723151
* Formation of On/Off Retinal Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Leo Chalupa, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 10/31/2000
* USD 285,000.00

9723151 CHALUPA In the vertebrate retina the ON and OFF pathways, which signal
increments and decrements of light, are anatomically segregated from each other
into separate layers at maturity, but not early in development. During the
previous period of NSF funding for this project, Dr. Chalupa's laboratory
discovered that treating the developing retina with 2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate
(APB), the selective blocker of bipolar cell activity, prevents the normal
stratification of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) dendrites into ON and OFF
sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer, where synaptic contacts are made
between the bipolar cells and RGCs. This finding suggested the hypothesis that
activity in the bipolar cells regulates the retraction of RGC dendrites, which
are initially present in both strata, or "multistratified." The current project
will extend these findings by addressing three specific aims. The first aim is
to establish whether the multistratified RGCs, resulting from APB treatment,
respond to both the onset and offset of visual stimuli. This would provide
functional evidence that blockade of the afferent activity during development
results in an intermingling of ON and OFF retinal pathways. The second aim is to
determine the temporal relationship between the ingrowth and segregation of
bipolar cell terminals and the time course of RGC dendritic stratification.
Segregation of ON and OFF bipolar cell afferents prior to the stratification of
RGC dendrites would lend further support to the hypothesis that retinal
afferents regulate the normal stratification of RGC dendrites. The third
specific aim is to investigate synaptic connectivity between developing bipolar
cells and multistratified RGCs by using the whole-cell patch-clamp technique to
record synaptic activity in these neurons while stimulating their retinal
afferents. These recordings will provide a direct test of the hypothesis that
such retinal synapses are functional early in development. The successful
completion of this research project will further our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying the formation of ON and OFF retinal pathways.