* 9723000
* Feature Extraction for Dolphin Identification:  Automated   Database Indexing Using Field Photographs
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Bernd Wursig, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2001
* USD 546,160.00

This project will construct a database of dorsal fin images of Tursiops
truncatus (bottlenose dolphins) sighted near the Texas and California coasts,
and software to automatically identify individual dolphins based on fin
morphology. The system will be used to match individuals in new photographs to
existing known individuals by finding the database member that most resembles
the new input data. An existing resource of many thousands of images of dolphins
will be processed by the system and will constitute the largest searchable
database of dolphin sightings available. The database will provide new
information regarding the site fidelity and migratory patterns of dolphins. The
system will be developed for immediate use in marine biological research, and
will be demonstrated and tested using images of the dorsal fins of dolphins.
However, the system will be sufficiently versatile for many other applications
requiring identification of individual animals. The project will be conducted by
two collaborating teams of investigators: computer scientists and biologists.
Each team has specific objectives, but their coordinated work will result in a
computer-based biological research tool that will be useful to investigators
conducting studies requiring the identification of individuals within a
population. The computational objectives of the project will be to: 1.Extract
the individuals' fin shapes from photographic data; 2.Calculate of
characteristics of the shape that can be used to distinguish one individual from
another; 3.Create of a database of images, indexed by the features extracted
from the images; 4.Provide capabilities for entering data, building, searching,
and modifying databases, with a convenient user interface. The software system
will be offered to biologists needing to identify individuals of any species on
the basis of photographic data. The image processing portion of the system will
be suitable for recognizing a profile of a bo dy part, such as a fin or an ear,
having distinctive irregularities. The database system, however, will not be
limited to descriptions of profile shapes, but will be applicable to any
situation where some distinctive aspect of an animals appearance can be
measured. The dolphin database will be made available to investigators
interested in behavioral biology of cetaceans, and to ecologists interested in
the environmental influences acting upon abundance and distribution patterns.