* 9723876
* Neurochemical Analysis of Motivated Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Robert Meisel, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 292,623.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Principal Investigator: Meisel, R. Proposal Number:
IBN-9723876 Neurochemical Analysis of Motivated Behavior The long-term goal of
this project is to explore how chemical systems in the brain control motivated
behavior. Among motivated behaviors, ingestive behaviors such as feeding and
drinking have formed the focus of such studies. To develop general principles to
explain the control of motivated behaviors, the results from studies on a
variety of behaviors (e.g., reproductive behavior, aggression) are needed. To
date, little is known about the neurochemistry of the motivational components of
female mating behavior. We have pursued studies showing a link between the
mesolimbic dopamine system and the control of the incentive (e.g., reward)
properties of female mating behavior, using hamsters as our experimental model.
The studies in this proposal are designed to further pursue this link between
neural dopamine pathways and female sexual behavior in three specific ways.
First, we intend to continue microdialysis studies demonstrating proximal
relationships between female reproductive function and extracellular dopamine
levels in the nucleus accumbens. We have demonstrated that experienced female
hamsters show higher, and more sustained extracellular dopamine levels during
interactions with males compared with inexperienced females. As sensitization of
responsiveness is one property of dopamine neurons repeatedly activated with
drugs, we will explicitly test whether this augmentation of nucleus accumbens
dopamine levels in experienced female hamsters reflects a sensitized response of
these neurons to stimuli received during mating encounters. This would be the
first such demonstration of sensitization of dopamine neurons resulting from the
expression of a naturalistic behavior. Our second goal is to provide a broader
neurological perspective on the relationship be tween dopamine and female mating
behavior. To date, the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum are the only brain
regions in which in vivo measurements of dopamine during mating encounters have
been taken. We intend to extend this analysis to other behaviorally-relevant
dopaminergic terminal fields, such as the frontal cortex, medial preoptic area,
and amygdala. In the context of these experiments we will determine the degree
to which dopamine in each of these areas is related to the expression of female
mating behavior or some other factor associated with social encounters. A key
issue in the interpretation of these behavioral findings centers around the
degree to which individual dopaminergic neurons project to multiple targets.
That is, do similarities or differences in dopaminergic activity in each
terminal field derive from the activity of the same or different dopamine
neurons. This is an unresolved issue for any species, and we propose to
determine quantitatively the degree to which individual dopamine neurons
innervate multiple terminal fields. Together these studies will provide a
framework for defining how functional dopaminergic pathways regulate different
components of female reproductive behavior, providing a basis for developing
generalizations of the role of dopamine in motivated behavior.