* 9723493
* Characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana Mutants with       Enhanced Disease Susceptibility
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Donald Nuss, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9723493 Glazebrook Technical section Mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with a
phenotype of enhanced disease susceptibility (eds) were isolated and some were
identified as alleles of NPR1 and others as alleles of PAD genes. NPR1 genes are
known to be involved in the regulation of systematic acquired resistance and the
PAD genes in the phytoalexin synthesis, a known defense response. In addition
the EDS4 gene controls expression of the defense genes PR1 and PR5 in response
to infection by a bacterial pathogen. Thus, the eds mutations define genes with
important roles in plant defense against pathogen attack. The characterization
of eds mutants will lead to identification of novel genes that play major roles
in plant disease resistance. The EDS genes will be mapped and characterized in
relation to their effect on defense gene expression and establishment of
systemic acquired resistance. The range of pathogens that are affected by the
eds mutations will be determined and EDS4 will be cloned using a map-based
approach. Non-technical section The responses by which plants defend themselves
from pathogen attack have not been subjected to rigorous genetic analysis, in
part because the plant hosts have been used in molecular and biochemical
analysis of disease resistance are difficult subjects for genetic studies due to
large or polyploid genomes and long generation times. The use of the model
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, has made genetic studies feasible. Therefore, a
powerful approach is now available for identifying regulatory factors and other
defense response components in plants that are not already correlated with a
known biochemical or molecular genetic response ***