* 9723001
* Mutational Analysis of Photosystem I Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Alan Myers, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 233,000.00

9723001 Chitnis 1. Technical Photosystem I, the light-driven plastocyanin-
ferredoxin oxidoreductase, is a heteromultimeric pigment-protein complex in the
photosynthetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Based on X-ray
crystallographic, spectroscopic and genomic information, the investigator
proposes to characterize molecular recognition during interprotein electron
transfer and binding of quinone cofactors by photosystem I proteins. On the
reducing side of photosystem I, PsaD is essential for docking of ferredoxin.
Using molecular genetics and protein chemistry, the investigator has identified
basic residues that are exposed on the ferredoxin-interacting surface of PsaD.
He will use site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical studies to examine the
role of these basic residues in interaction with ferredoxin. Photosystem I
contains two phylloquinone molecules, one of which serves as the redox center A1
which transfers electrons from the A0 chlorophyll a to the FX iron-sulfur
cluster. Based on the available structural and spectroscopic information, the
investigator proposes that the conserved YW sequences in the last stromal loop
of the PsaA and PsaB proteins are essential components of the phylloquinone-
binding sites. Mutations in these residues will be generated to identify the A1
binding subunit. The investigator will manipulate the phylloquinone biosynthetic
pathway using molecular genetics. He will delete the menB gene that encodes
naphtholate synthase. The resulting mutants will be used to examine
phylloquinone in vivo 2. Non Technical Electron transfer reactions are crucial
steps in photosynthesis, respiration, and many other biochemical pathways.
Energy generation in a cell is dependent on electron transfer across membranes.
The investigator will study the molecular basis of protein interactions and
function during photosynthetic electron transfer. This research will attempt to
unravel the mechanisms of efficient capture of light energy and its storage by
living systems. Ox ygenic photosynthesis in plants, algae and cyanobacteria is
the major source of biological energy and oxygen on the earth. The
investigator's work will increase the knowledge of photosynthesis and will
provide information that can potentially be used for genetic manipulation
photosynthesis in crop plants