* 9723308
* Studies of Tetrachlorohydroquinone Dehalogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Shelley Copley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2001
* USD 343,638.00

9723308 Copley Tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ) dehalogenase is found in
Sphingomonas chlorophenolica, a Gram-negative soil bacterium that completely
degrades pentachlorophenol, a widely used wood preservative. This enzyme
catalyzes two successive reductive dehalogenations to convert TCHQ to
trichlorohydroquinone and then to dichlorohydroquinone. The reducing equivalents
for each step are provided by two molecules of glutathione. Previous work in the
investigator's laboratory has shown that TCHQ dehalogenase is evolutionarily
related to enzymes in the theta class of the glutathione S-transferase (GST)
superfamily and that it, like the GSTs, catalyzes the nucleophilic attack of
glutathione upon an electrophilic substrate to form a glutathione conjugate.
However, TCHQ dehalogenase has additional capabilities that allow it to convert
glutathione conjugates to reduced products by replacement of the glutathionyl
moiety with a hydrogen. This study focuses on the catalytically important
processes that are unique to TCHQ dehalogenase. Catalytic acids and bases will
be identified and their pKa values determined. The role of a 20-amino acid
insert that is not present in GSTs and that may provide part of a second
glutathione binding site will be explored. Pre-steady state kinetic experiments
will be carried out to characterize catalytic events and conformational changes
taking place during a single-turnover. Finally, efforts to crystallize the
enzyme will continue. Chlorinated organic compounds, including many pesticides,
are important environmental pollutants. A number of these compounds are
persistent in the environment, toxic and/or carcinogenic, and some may disrupt
endocrine function in humans and wildlife. Biodegradation of these compounds
requires removal of chlorine atoms. This type of reaction is catalyzed by
microbial enzymes called dehalogenases. Tetrachlorohydroquinone dehalogenase
catalyzes a key step in the biodegradation of pentachlorophenol, a widely used
wood preservative. Th e investigator will study the mechanism of this enzyme and
its relationship to a broad class of detoxification enzymes that catalyze
reactions that are similar in some respects. This work will lead to a greater
understanding of the evolution of enzymes for biodegradation of toxic
chlorinated organic compounds.