* 9723844
* Functional Group Interactions in DNA-Protein Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Larry McLaughlin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9723844 McLaughlin Recognition events involving enzymes, proteins or even simple
ligands and sequences of single or double-stranded DNA are, in the simplest
analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
interactions present at the macromolecular interface. This research will
determine the nature and the contribution of such intermolecular interactions to
the observed high-affinity binding in such complexes by probing individual
functional group contacts. Isosteric nucleoside analogues will be employed to
introduce incremental changes in functional group character by what amounts to
"atomic mutagenesis", and the effects of such incremental changes upon binding
affinity, catalytic activity or simple structural parameters will be
determined.. The analogues involve the "deletion modification" of a native
nucleoside in which a specific functional group - amino, carbonyl, imino or
methyl - is excised and replaced with a hydrogen atom. The most useful analogues
are those which do not otherwise alter native inter-strand hydrogen bonding or
other helix-stabilizing effects. This research will expand the current
repertoire of analogues available to probe macromolecular recognition processes
by developing analogues to probe contacts to functional groups present in the
minor groove of a B-form DNA duplex as well as those to the internucleotide
phosphodiester residues. These analogues also will permit the study of critical
structural parameters such as the importance of the minor groove spine of
hydration for the stability of B-form DNA duplexes, and the relation of this
spine of hydration to the DNA curvature effect present in oligo A-T sequences.
Three sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid complexes will be examined during
the course of this project. The important eukaryotic transcriptional pre-
initiation TBP-TATA box complex in which protein interacts with the A/T rich
recognition sequence by binding solely through the DNA minor groove will be
investigated using newly developed minor groove base analogues. The Gene-4
proteins responsible for the RNA primase activity in bacteriophage T7 will be
examined with respect to the nature of recognition and catalysis by the T7
primase enzyme at the CTG recognition site on single-stranded DNA, as will the
functional group requirements on the conserved but non-transcribed C residue and
the transcribed T and G residues of the template. A new study of the integrase
protein of ( bacteriophage will begin with a probe of the mechanistic details
using 5'-phosphorothioate linkages as suicide substrates for the recombinase
enzyme. These studies will help to further the understanding of DNA structure as
well as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic acid
interactions by elucidating the location and relative importance of functional
group interactions that contribute to overall specificity and affinity in such
complexes. %%% Recognition by enzymes, proteins and even simple molecules of
(ligands) sequences of single or double-stranded DNA are, in the simplest
analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
interactions. This research will help to further the understanding of DNA
structure as well as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic
acid interactions by elucidating the location and relative importance of
functional (atomic) group interactions that contribute to overall specificity
and affinity in such complexes. ***