* 9723636
* Mechanisms and Integration of Signal Pathway: A Role for    Calpains?
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Dorothy Croall, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 08/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9723636 Croall In order to survive cells must sense and respond to changes in
their environment. Environmental cues trigger a variety of events within cells.
The concentration and movements of calcium ions are essential regulators of many
of these cellular responses. Proper control of intracellular calcium is
essential because at thigh levels calcium can lead to cell damage or death.
Calcium accomplishes it effects through binding to specific proteins such as
calmodulin and calpain. Calmodulin, named for its ability to bind calcium and to
modulate the activity of other cellular components, is an important mediator of
calcium signals and its mechanism of action is relatively well understood. The
calpains are proteolytic enzymes that are regulated by calcium binding.
Proteolytic enzymes modify cellular proteins such that the target protein is
destroyed or is altered in its function. Calpains can modify those proteins,
called pumps or channels, that directly allow calcium ion movement and therefore
calpains may be involved directly in helping cells to regulate calcium signals.
Through its action on other key regulator proteins and enzymes, calpains might
also help to integrate cellular responses that involve calcium with other events
that do not. Although the activity of calpain is controlled by calcium its
action may be prevented by another protein (calpastatin) that specifically
inhibits these enzymes. Although calpastatin does not bind calcium directly it
binds to calpain only when calpain has bound calcium. Thus the interactions
between these two proteins is important in regulating calpain function. By
comparison with calmodulin, there is little known about how calcium regulates
calpain structure, function or its interactions with other proteins. Thus the
immediate goals for this proposal are to understand more about the biochemical
mechanisms that regulate calpain. This project aims to answer two major
questions: 1) how does calcium binding to calpain regulate the enzymatic
activity? 2) can a calpastatin insensitive calpain be generated by exploiting
what is known about the interaction between calpain and calpastatin? An enzyme
with this property will be useful, in future studies, for determining the role
of calpains in cells. These goals will be accomplished through techniques of
protein chemistry and expression of recombinant DNA molecules to generate
modified enzymes or enzyme fragments for study. This knowledge will provide
information on the role of calpain in critical cellular processes. %%% Calcium
is important in the regulation of many essential intracellular processes. Many
of the effecPts of calcium occur after it binds to specific proteins. One of
these proteins is calpain. Calpains are proteolytic enzymes that are regulated
by calcium binding, and in turn modify other cellular proteins in ways which
often alter their function. Little is known of the mechanism by which calcium
modifies calpain, and this project will study the biochemical mechanisms that
regulate calpain and the role of calcium in these processes. ***