* 9723895
* Mechanisms Underlying Plant Cell Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* James O'Leary, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9723895 Verbeke The process of cellular differentiation is of fundamental
significance to our understanding of plant growth and development, yet
experimental studies in this area have been rare. During development, each cell
must somehow determine its position relative to others, and must differentiate
accordingly. However, almost nothing is known about the mechanisms by which
cells establish their positions and subsequently give rise to appropriate cell
types. Although cell and tissue differentiation must certainly be the result of
selective expression of the genome, a critical problem has been our inability to
make the connection between phenotype and genotype. At a time when knowledge of
gene structure and even function seems to be increasing exponentially, there is
still little known about how these genes actually cause cells to differentiate
and form tissues, organs, and organisms. Determination is a reflection of the
state of differentiation of individual cells. For this reason, it may be quite
useful to study cells which display a high degree of determination, as indicated
by a resistance to redifferentiate. Plant epidermal cells are such entities. In
the absence of wounding (and usually in spite of wounding), plant epidermal
cells are developmentally incompetent to redifferentiate or change their fate.
However, fusing floral organs are naturally occurring exceptions to this rule.
The overall goal of the work described here is to learn more about the controls
of plant cell differentiation. These experiments represent an ongoing
characterization of the cell-to-cell communication events and signals which
convey positional information. The specific question to be addressed will focus
on characterization of the chemical identity of the redifferentiation factors.
The periwinkle system described here is one of only a few plant systems in which
dire ct experimental evidence documenting cell-cell interaction in the form of
diffusible factors has been shown. This is also the first clear documentation in
a plant system that two apparently identical organs in the same flower may be
inherently and critically different from one another.