* 9723073
* Summer Course:  Molecular Basis, Physiology, and Diversity  of Microbial Adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Kathleen Kendrick, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* nicole peterson
* 11/30/2001
* USD 98,000.00

9723073 Tabita Research in microbiology, during the early 1970s, led to
development of the recombinant DNA technologies that spawned the explosive
growth of the multi-billion dollar biotechnology industry. Paradoxically, in the
1980s, despite the continued need for research, and for a labor force skilled in
microbial systems for industry, medicine, agriculture food production,
environmental control, and renewable-energy, academic programs in microbial
physiology, metabolism and biodiversity declined rapidly in the United States.
By the 1990s, the demand for microbial physiologists to develop, exploit or
counter-attack novel microorganisms was intense. In response to this problem and
expedite the development of a cadre of trained microbial physiologists a summer
course entitled "Mechanisms of Microbial Adaption" was taught at the Ohio State
University. This course was developed during 1994 and taught in July '95, '96
and '97. Funds requested are to allow the course to continue, and to be taught
in July '98, '99 and 2000. The course will maintain the format of both lecture
and laboratory components, and will be targeted at beginning-level graduate
students more senior scientists who are not currently working in the area of
microbial physiology and faculty members from academic institutes seeking to
build/rebuild expertise in microbial physiology. The emphasis will continue to
be practical training in fermentation, enzymology, metabolic pathway
biochemistry, molecular regulation, and in the growth and handling of anaerobes
and anaerobic systems, with hands-on experience with a wide range of modern
instrumentation. Lectures will be provided by both O.S.U. faculty, and by guest
experts who also spend time in tutorial discussions with the students. The guest
lectures and informal but intense immersions in scientific discussions build a
sense of excitement and community during the course, and also establish the
foundations for long-term interactions between the course graduates and senior
sci entists. Each year the course will be taught over a two week period, to
about 12 students selected from an applicant pool, with the goal of providing
this unique training opportunity to as diverse a cadre of students as possible.
Research in microbiology, during the early 1970s, led to development of the
recombinant DNA technologies that spawned the explosive growth of the multi-
billion dollar biotechnology industry. Paradoxically, in the 1980s, despite the
continued need for research, and for a labor force skilled in microbial systems
for industry, medicine, agriculture, food production, environmental control, and
renewable-energy, academic programs in microbial physiology, metabolism and
biodiversity declined rapidly in the United States. In response to this problem,
a summer course entitled "Mechanisms of Microbial Adaption" will be taught at
the Ohio State University. The course will have both lecture and laboratory
components, and will be targeted at beginning-level graduate students, more
senior scientists who are not currently working in the area of microbial
physiology, and faculty members from academic institutes seeking to
build/rebuild expertise in microbial physiology. The emphasis will continue to
be practical training in fermentation, enzymology, metabolic pathway
biochemistry, molecular regulation, and in the growth and handling of anaerobes
and anaerobic systems, with hands-on experience with a wide range of modern
instrumentation.