* 9723250
* Voltage-gated Calcium Channel Regulation and Function in    C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* william schafer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2001
* USD 341,997.00

IBN-9723250 PI: Schafer Voltage-gated calcium channels control the entry of
calcium into neurons and muscle cells. As such they serve as key regulators of
calcium-dependent processes such as muscle contraction, communication between
neurons, and learning. The importance of voltage-gated calcium channels for
nervous system function is underscored by the fact that several devastating
genetic and autoimmune diseases, such as sporadic ALS, are caused by calcium
channel defects. Yet despite the scientific and medical importance of these
channels, several key questions about calcium channel biology remain unanswered.
For example, the functions of the individual proteins that make up the channel
are not completely understood, nor is it clear how these proteins are assembled
to make a working channel. The mechanisms through which calcium channel activity
is regulated also remain largely uncharacterized. In the proposed studies, these
questions will be addressed in the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans using a
combination of genetic and biochemical approaches. C. elegans has a simple and
anatomically well characterized nervous system that is highly amenable to
genetic analysis. Mutants defective in the genes for the calcium channel
subunits will be used to define the roles of these proteins in the assembly,
localization, and functional activity of the calcium channel. Mutant worms will
also be identified that will define new genes required for regulation of calcium
channel activity. These studies should provide important insights into general
mechanisms for the regulation of voltage-gated calcium channels in neurons.