* 9723157
* RUI: Early Stages in Levivirus Infection of Caulobacter     Crescentus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jeanne Poindexter, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2001
* USD 320,555.00

9723157 Poindexter The objectives of the proposed studies are to identify cell
components of the Gram-negative bacterium Caulobacter crescentus that
participate in the entry of spherical ssRNA viruses (Leviviridae bacteriophages)
into susceptible cells. The investigation will examine the hypothesis that
pilin, in association with a specific outer membrane (OM) protein, provides
adsorption sites for infecting virions, that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or a
protein(s) of the OM effect uncoating of the virion, and that the liberated
viral RNA penetrates to the cytoplasm through OM-cytoplasmic membrane adhesion
zones. To test this hypothesis with respect to adsorption and uncoating, a
battery of phage-resistant mutant clones of the bacterium will be isolated and
characterized with respect to their respective abilities to adsorb virions, to
uncoat them so that viral NA is freed and becomes infectious for spheroplasts of
susceptible cells, and themselves to be penetrated by viral RNA when converted
to spheroplasts. The mutants will be employed in comparative studies of protein
and LPS components of cell envelopes prepared from susceptible and from
resistant C. crescentus cells. In a separate type of experiment, the influence
on phage infectibility of various levels of plasmolysis, which disrupts adhesion
zones, will be determined with phage-susceptible strains. Leviviruses share a
greater number of genetic and structural properties with certain plant and
animal viruses than do any other bacteriophages. It is anticipated that
elucidation of the role of the cell in the entry of this type of bacteriophage
will reveal further similarities among ssRNA viruses and thereby enhance both
the understanding of infection by such viruses in diverse cell types, and the
usefulness of Levivirus infections as prokaryotic experimental models of these
infections in eukaryotic systems. The results may also provide evidence of
adhesion zones as a path for entry of exogenous nucleic acid into Gram-negative
bacte ria, with implications for both transformation and conjugative transfer of
genetic material. Because phage receptors appear only transiently in the cell
cycle of C. crescentus, identification of participants in phage entry could
further eludidate the reorganization of the cell envelope that occurs during
this unique, endogenously-regulated prokaryotic cellular differentiation. Lay
abstract: This project addresses the question of how bacterial viruses
(bacteriophages) infect susceptible host bacterial cells The entry of viruses
into Gram-negative bacteria is a formidable biological challenge, since these
bacteria are surrounded not only by a plasma membrane but also by a rigid cell
wall and an outer membrane. The studies will proceed as projects conducted by
undergraduate student-scientists and will provide for them a technically diverse
and sophisticated, but intellectually accessible and stimulating introduction to
experimental cell biology. ***