* 9723227
* Characterization of a Novel Circadian Clock in Drosophila   Excretory Organ
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,01/31/2003
* Jadwiga Giebultowicz, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reynaldo Patino
* 01/31/2003
* USD 436,000.00

Circadian rhythms are ubiquitous in the living organisms, synchronizing life
functions at the biochemical, physiological, and behavioral levels. The rhythms
generating mechanisms. collectively known as circadian clocks, are not fully
understood in any organism. Research in the fruit fly Drosophila has led to
major insights into the molecular bases of the circadian mechanism. Two clock
genes, period and timeless, have been shown to play central roles in the
function of the brain-centered clock, which controls behavioral rhythms of adult
flies. Using those genes as markers, the PI has identified a new circadian clock
in the fly excretory organ, the Malpighian tubules and established that this
clock can function in the absence of the brain. The PI plans to study the
relationships between the peripheral clock in the excretory organ and pacemakers
in the central nervous system. Experiments will involve organ transplants and in
vitro cultures, using novel strains of transgenic flies carrying luciferase
reporter, which allows real time continuing measurement of mRNA levels of clock
genes. The PI wishes to establish the degree of autonomy of the peripheral clock
in the Malpighian tubules and to test how other tissues affect its function. The
PI will also probe the nature of the photoreceptor that mediate the resetting of
the clock by light and investigate the functional role of the clock in the
excretory organ. In this pursuit, the PI seek to answer a fundamental question
of whether the circadian system in Drosophila is a centralized one, comprised of
a single dominant clock that would control all rhythmic functions, or is a
decentralized system with several independent clocks located in different
tissues and controlling subsets of physiological functions. Malpighian tubules
are uniquely accessible to both physiological and molecular genetic
investigations. The broad scope of this proposal will allow thorough
characterization of the circadian clock in this tissue. providing impetus for
future resear ch aimed at understanding how already identified clock genes
receive environmental input on one hand, and produce rhythmic outputs on the
other.