* 9723360
* Genetic Analysis of Recombination and Synaptonemal Complex  Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Paul Gyula Szauter, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/1999
* USD 168,000.00

9723360 Szauter Meiosis is a complex cellular process common to all sexually
reproducing eukaryotes. The first division of meiosis has two unique features:
recombination and the reductional segregation of homologous chromosomes. These
processes are related, in that chiasmata are the result of recombination and are
required for proper chromosome segregation. They are held together by a
structure called the synaptonemal complex A mutation which eliminates
recombination and synaptonemal complex assembly was found in Drosophila
melanogaster and the chromosome region containing the mutation, c(3)G, was
isolated. The gene will be localized within the cloned region and tested by
complementation. When isolated, the gene will be sequenced. A working
hypothesis, that c(3)G is a DNA repair gene, if confirmed will support the model
which suggests that the formation of recombination intermediates is a
prerequisite for synapsis in Drosophila. Despite extensive studies of meiosis in
Drosophila, the underlying mechanism(s) involved is still not known. Drosophila
has a life cycle more closely resembling those of other sexually reproducing
multicellular eukaryotes than does yeast, (which is the other model organism for
this process) and so information gained from this system may be more generally
applicable to higher organisms.