* 9723302
* Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Beta-Glucosidases and Alpha-Hydroxynitrile Lyases Involved in Cyanogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jonathan Poulton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

Poulton Rosaceous stone fruits (Prunus spp.) are among many commercially
important crops that cause cyanide poisoning in humans and livestock through
release of hydrogen cyanide from cyanogenic glycosides by endogenous beta-
glucosidases and alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases. Black cherry (P.serotina)seeds are
highly cyanogenic because they are rich source of the cyanogenic diglucoside ( R
)- amygdalin and its catabolic enzymes amygdalin hydrolase (AH), prunasin
hydrolase (PH) and ( R )-mandelonitile lyase (MDL). A major objective of this
research is to improve our understanding of the spatial and temporal regulation
of cyanogenesis in plants, thereby contributing toward the long-term goal of
reducing the toxicity of these plants to animals including man. The Prunus
cyanogenic system is complex in that all three enzymes exist as multiple forms,
the exact nature and physiological significance of which require clarification.
Whether individual isoforms of each catabolic enzyme carry out different
functions or exhibit differential expression, either temporally or spatially,
remains largely unclear. To address these questions, additional AH, PH and MDL
genes will be obtained by RT-PCR and screening of black cherry cDNA and genomic
libraries. Sequencing these genes will provide basic information about their
structure and also identify unique regions for use as isoform-specific probes in
analyzing the expression of individual genes by Northern analyses, ribonuclease
protection assays, and in situ hybridization. The second goal of this project is
to generate important information about the functioning of beta-glucosidases and
FAD-containing alph-hydroxynitrile lyases, thus facilitating future efforts to
engineer the substrate specificities of these enzymes for biotechnological
purposes. After expressing recombinant AH and PH in the Pichia pastoris
expression system, amino acid residues that confer substrate specificity upon
these hydrolases will be identified by domain swapping and site-directed mut
agenesis. Many important food plants, including cherries, cassava, lima beans
and sorghum, liberate the respiratory poison hydrogen cyanide when ingested or
mechanically damaged. Each year, this phenomenon of cyanogenesis accounts for
numerous cases of acute and chronic cyanide poisoning of animals including man.
A major objective of this research is to better understand the factors that
control cyanide production, thereby contributing toward the long-term goal of
reducing the toxicity of these plants. Genes encoding three enzymes that release
cyanide in black cherry will be isolated and characterized. Analysis of their
DNA sequences will reveal unique regions that will be used to study where and
when each gene is active within this species. A second objective is to
investigate how beta-glucosidases, a class of enzymes which breaks down sugar-
containing compounds, distinguish between substrate molecules upon which they
can potentially act. Two of the black cherry enzymes under study here are beta-
glucosidases. Although closely related to each other, these enzymes degrade
different substrates, presumably due to subtle variations in their protein
structures. Beginning with the above DNA sequences, this research will use
molecular methods to elucidate these structural differences. This will
facilitate future efforts to engineer the substrate specificities of these and
other beta-glucosidases for biotechnological purposes.