* 9723660
* Evolution of Developmental Processes Governing              Head Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Hans Bode, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 290,000.00

Bode 9723660 During the last 10-15 years a great deal has been learned about the
genes and processes that regulate the development of an embryo into a
functioning animal. One of the most interesting aspects of the accumulating
knowledge is that a common set of regulatory genes involved in a common, or
related, set of mechanisms underlie many of the developmental processes of the
metazoans studied so far. These common features raise interesting and important
questions as to how early during evolution did these genes arise? Were they
already present in the Ur-metazoan? What developmental mechanisms and
developmental processes did they participate in? And, to what extent were the
mechanisms and processes invented early and conserved through animal evolution?
One approach to these issues is to study these genes and their functions in
organisms that belong to groups of animals that arose very early during metazoan
evolution, such as the cnidaria, whose members include jellyfish, sea anemones,
and the freshwater hydra. Of these, hydra, is particularly useful since the
developmental processes (pattern formation, control of the proliferation and
differentiation of the several cell types) are well-understood. Further, a
number of genes known to regulate developmental events in many vertebrates and
invertebrates have also been isolated, and in part, characterized in hydra. The
overall aim of the proposed work is to determine if the genes and mechanisms
underlying the development of the head of hydra are similar to those found in
the development of the heads of vertebrates and insects. One such gene has
already been found. Cnotx a hydra homologue, of the members of the Otx family
has been characterized and shown to be involved in the development of the
tentacles, a particular structure of the hydra head. There is also evidence that
homologues of the Dlx and Emx families exist in hydra, or a close marine
relative. Genes of these families play important roles in the patterning of the
head in vertebrates and arthropods. The detailed aims are two. One is to examine
in the role of the Coots gene in patterning of the hydra head in detail as well
as to investigate its role in cell cycle traverse, a role that preliminary
evidence suggests it has. These efforts will be pursued with a variety of
approaches including examining alterations of expression patterns during tissue
manipulations and functional studies. The other is to isolate and characterize
the role of other genes involved in head development in hydra. The focus will be
on genes of the families mentioned above.