* 9723034
* Comparison of Developmental DNA Elimination in Tetrahymena  Species
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Piroska Huvos, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* linda hyman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 85,000.00

9723034 Huvos The evolution of two genomic regions which are known to contain
segments of DNA that undergo developmental DNA deletions in T. thermophila will
be examined. One region contains a single developmentally eliminated segment,
the other region contains two such segments. The three segments have different
characteristic features, i.e. are likely to belong to different classes of
rearrangements. A comparison will be made of these two regions between T.
thermophila and two or more of its close relatives. Preliminary analysis of the
two regions has been undertaken using the Southern hybridization technique.
Results from this analysis indicate that in these regions a variety of
evolutionary scenarios are possible in the species intended for study.
Comparative analysis of homologous regions where there is a rearrangement in T.
thermophila, but not in its relative (or vice versa) is the major target of this
work. Examination of such regions will lead to the understanding of the
molecular events that generate or disrupt developmental rearrangement sites
during evolution, and will indicate whether these evets are associated with
insertion of developmentally eliminated sequence elements. These results will be
compared to recent studies on the evolution of DA deletions in a distantly
related group of ciliated protozoans which contain different types of
developmentally eliminated sequences. Rearrangements homologous to those found
in T. thermophila will be used to identify conserved features of the
developmentally eliminated sequences that may be involved in the process of
rearrangement and to examine the sequence heterogeneity generated at the
deletion junctions. The results will be experimentally tested by manipulating
the sequences. Programmed DNA rearrangements occur as part of normal development
in a variety of organisms, including the mammalian immune system. Unprogrammed
rearrangements are an important force in the evolution of genomes and are
associated with pathological states, suc h as oncogenesis. Development in
ciliated protozoans involves extensive programmed genome reorganization which
makes these organisms good models for investigating such rearrangements. The
study of evolutionary changes of programmed elimination events in these
organisms provides an opportunity to explore the relationship between programmed
and unprogrammed rearrangements.