* 9723526
* Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference,       Madison, WI, August 5-10, 1997 and August 1999.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Carol Gross, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 15,000.00

Russel 9723526 The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference,
traditionally held at Cold Spring Harbor and now being held alternate years at
the University of Wisconsin in Madison and at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
is a central forum for presentation of new results in prokaryotic molecular
genetics. On the order of 200-300 participants attend, representing laboratories
throughout the world, and most present either short talks or posters. Its
breadth makes it an important focus for the exchange of information in this era
of scientific specialization. Topics covered include fundamental work on
bacterial replication, recombination, repair, transposition, control of gene
expression, translation, signalling, heat shock, protein folding and secretion,
cell development and division, and pathogenesis. For many graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, this is the first large meeting at which they have an
opportunity to speak. Due to its highly interactive nature, the meeting provides
an important opportunity for these young scientists to meet and talk to the
senior scientists they know from the literature. In response to the large
numbers of students who attend the meeting and the diversity of topics covered,
established and distinguished scientists are now invited to chair each session.
This has strengthened the meeting because each chairperson gives a short
introduction in which he or she summarizes some of the key facets of the field
to be covered and provides a conceptual framework for the major questions that
the talks will address. As an additional benefit, publicizing the judiciously
chosen chairpeople and session topics in announcements of the meeting,
encourages the submission of abstracts in exciting new areas and stimulates
attendance by a larger constituency. Funds are provided for a few key
chairpersons and participants who require financial assistance to attend the
meeting.