* 9723840
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Femtosecond Nonlinear     Spectroscopy of Photosynthetic Light Harvesting
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Graham Fleming, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1999
* USD 31,123.00

9723840 Fleming This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
between Dr. Graham Fleming of the University of Chicago and Dr. Minhaeng Cho of
Korea University on "Femtosecond Nonlinear Spectroscopy of Photosynthetic Light
Harvesting." The goal of the project is to extend current theories of nonlinear
spectroscopy, such as the photon echo, to include the influence of molecular
dynamics. The three pulse echo peak shift method will be studied theoretically
and applied experimentally to bacterial and plant systems to investigate: 1)
degree of electronic delocalization, 2) energy transfer mechanisms, and 3) how
the couplings of chromaphores to the protein environment influence electronic
coupling. The collaboration between Dr. Fleming and Dr. Cho will enable a
combined experimental and theoretical study of nonlinear spectroscopy applied to
photosynthetic light harvesting. Dr. Fleming's laboratory has the capability of
generating experimental data on the bacterial and plant antenna photosynthetic
systems, while Dr. Cho has the theoretical expertise to develop the theoretical
formalisms and computer codes to model these data. The study is timely because
of the rapid advances in the structural biology of photosynthetic systems and in
the techniques of nonlinear spectroscopy. It is expected that this study will
result in a better understanding of the photosynthetic process and will form the
basis for applying nonlinear spectroscopy as a probe of a wide range of chemical
and biological dynamics. ***