* 9723408
* Metabolism of Abscisic Acid
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Jan A. D. Zeevaart, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2000
* USD 130,000.00

9723408 Zeevaart Biosynthesis of the plant growth substance abscisic acid (ABA)
is stimulated during water stress so that there is a large increase in the ABA
content during drought. Following rehydration, ABA is rapidly degraded to
phaseic acid (PA). This project deals with both the biosynthesis and catabolism
of ABA. The research is focused on two key reactions: 1) the oxidative cleavage
of epoxycarotenoids (C40) by a dioxygenase to form xanthoxin (Cl5), a precursor
of ABA, and C25- epoxy-apocarotenoids; and 2) the oxidative deactivation of ABA
to PA, catalyzed by ABA 8'- hydroxylase, a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. The
research is based on the hypothesis that the cleavage reaction is the key
regulatory step in ABA biosynthesis. Experiments will be conducted to test this
hypothesis at the mRNA and protein levels in water-stressed bean leaves and
ripening avocado fruits, two systems that accumulate large amounts of ABA. Genes
encoding the cleavage enzyme will be cloned by the polymerase chain reaction
with degenerate primers of conserved domains in dioxygenases. Leaves will also
be treated with ABA or ABA analogs prior to wilting to determine whether
expression of the gene encoding the cleavage enzyme is subject to negative feed-
back regulation. The strategy to clone ABA 8'-hydroxylase is based on
differential expression of the 8'-hydroxylase in control and ABA-treated tissue.
Putative cDNA clones for 8'-hydroxylase will be expressed in yeast and assayed
for their ability to convert ABA to PA. Effects of tissue water status and ABA
levels on expression of 8'-hydroxylase will be investigated. Abscisic acid (ABA)
is a plant hormone that is involved in a number of physiological processes, such
as closure of stomata, seed maturation and dormancy, and amelioration of
environmental stresses (drought, salinity, low temperature). The cloning of two
genes for key steps in ABA metabolism will provide powerful tools to manipulate
ABA levels in plants. By raising their ABA levels, plants may be bett er adapted
to grow under stressful conditions. This could be used to increase crop yields
in unfavorable climates.