* 9723091
* Carbon Catabolite Regulation in Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Tina Henkin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 360,000.00

Henkin 9723091 The mechanisms for carbon catabolite regulation in Gram-positive
bacteria such as Bacillus subtilis are not well-understood, but are known to
differ from the systems found in Escherichia coli and its relatives. During
growth in high levels of a readily utilized carbon source such as glucose,
expression of genes encoding enzymes for utilization of secondary carbon sources
is repressed by CcpA, a DNA binding protein which recognizes conserved operator
sites in the promoter regions of target genes. Under these conditions. CcpA also
activates transcription of the ackA gene, which is involved in excretion of
excess carbon in the form of acetate. Activation involves binding of CcpA
protein to a sequence identical to the operator sites for repression: for ackA,
the target. site for CcpA-dependent activation is located upstream of the
promoter. The molecular mechanism for transcriptional activation of ackA by CcpA
is unknown, and elucidation of this mechanism is a major goal of this project.
These studies will involve investigation of cis-acting sequences required for
activation, DNA binding studies, and analysis of the effect of RNA polymerase
mutations. The second major goal of this project is the identification of
additional genes subject to transcriptional activation by CcpA. Characterization
of new target genes will provide information about the global role of CcpA as a
regulator of carbon metabolism in B. subtilis, and will also provide insight
into the mechanism of transcriptional activation through analysis of conserved
features. The third major goal of this project is the analysis of the mechanism
for the response of CcpA activity to carbon source activity. This project will
provide new information about molecular mechanisms for metabolic control in
microorganisms, and mechanisms for transcriptional activation. Homologs of the
B. subtilis carbon catabolite regulatory protein CcpA have been identified in a
variety of Gram-positive organisms, indicating that the information o btained
here is likely to apply to a number of experimental systems less directly
amenable to genetic analysis. A greater understanding of carbon metabolism and
regulation will also improve the utility of Bacillus systems for industrial
production.