* 9723947
* Interaction of Two Neuromodulators in Olfactory Bulb and    Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,03/01/1999
* Michael Hasselmo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 03/01/1999
* USD 305,442.00

Michael E. Hasselmo PROJECT SUMMARY Computer modeling techniques are required to
understand how neurochemicals with subtle and broadly distributed effects alter
brain function. In the proposed research, computer models of the olfactory
system (the brain system for odor perception) will be used to aid in
understanding the action of the neurochemicals acetylcholine and norepinephrine
on the function of cells can affect the processing of odor memories. OBJECTIVES
Research will focus on the following central questions: 1. How do the combined
effects of noradrenaline and acetylcholine in the olfactory system affect the
capacity of memory? Computer simulations will be used to model two components of
the olfactory system: the olfactory bulb and olfactory cortex. Models will be
used to analyze how modulation of inhibitory effects by acetylcholine and
norepinephrine in the olfactory bulb and cortex increases the number of odor
memories that can be stored by allowing them to be coded by separate populations
of cells. 2. How does regulation of noradrenaline and acetylcholine in the
olfactory system affect behavior in an odor learning task? Computer models will
be used to analyze recent behavioral experiments in this laboratory testing how
rats respond to odor pairs which share components (odor A with odor B, odor A
with odor C) versus how they respond to odor pairs that do not share components
(odor A with odor B, odor C with odor D). The model will generate predictions
about how the response to odor pairs with shared components should differ
depending on whether the response to odor pairs is based on the familiarity of
the odor pair, or on whether the odor pair has been paired with a reward. 3.
Does acetylcholine more strongly suppress spread of activity at synapses that
have been recently increased in strength? Computer models show that storage of
odor memories in the olfactory system appears to function more effectively when
acetylcholine suppresses the spread of activity at recently strengthened
synapses. This prevents recently stored memories from interfering with storage
of new memories. In slices of olfactory cortex, we will test whether drugs that
activate acetylcholine receptors more strongly suppress spread of activity at
synapses which were recently strengthened by repetitive stimulation. 4. Computer
models will be used to analyze the effect of acetylcholine and norepinephrine on
fast and slow oscillations of activity in the olfactory system. The interaction
of oscillations in the olfactory bulb and olfactory cortex will be analyzed,
with an emphasis on feedback connections from the olfactory cortex back to the
olfactory bulb.