* 9723145
* Regulation of Biogenesis and Topogenesis of Acetylcholine   Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Joav Prives, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2001
* USD 362,065.00

IBN-9723145 Joav Prives PI SUMMARY These studies are designed to analyze the
means by which muscle cells regulate the intracellular assembly and delivery to
the cell surface of a neurotransmitter receptor, the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (AChR). These receptors are crucial components for transmission of
impulses across the synapses between motor neurons and muscle cells. Located on
the subsynaptic surface membrane of muscle cells, AChRs function as
acetylcholine-gated ion conducting membrane channels at the neuromuscular
junction. Like genetically related receptors, each AChR is a complex comprised
of five separate membrane spanning protein subunits. The molecular mechanisms by
which AChR is assembled from its subunits is still undefined, as are the
pathways that target AChR to restricted cell surface domains at postsynaptic
regions of the muscle membrane. Elucidation of these mechanisms will lead to a
more fundamental understanding of the regulation of signaling across synapses.
The intracellular mechanisms that direct the folding of newly made subunits and
their subsequent assembly into pentameric AChRs will be studied in cultured
muscle cells that are genetically programmed for efficient expression of these
receptors on the cell surface. An alternative experimental system - nonmuscle
cells that have been transfected with the AChR subunits - will be utilized for
the dissection of key regulatory aspects of the assembly process. Planned
experiments are based on recent findings that AChR subunits are folded and
assembled in an intracellular compartment termed the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
with the participation of calnexin, an ER resident molecular chaperone that
interacts with newly synthesized polypeptide chains to prevent their aggregation
and misfolding, and possibly to mediate oligomerization. The proposed studies
are aimed at identifying the structural features that determine calnexin binding
to AChR subunits and the m olecular mechanisms by which calnexin facilitates
AChR assembly. The concentration of AChR into high density patches in the muscle
membrane region directly adjacent to nerve endings is crucial for efficient
neuromuscular transmission of impulses. Like the intracellular assembly of AChR,
the formation and maintenance of high density surface AChR clusters under nerve
endings requires highly regulated interactions between AChR and other proteins.
The regulation of the surface distribution of AChR will be studied in muscle
cell cultures, using an experimental approach that combines biochemical analysis
of protein - protein interactions and high resolution immunofluorescence
microscopy. These studies will focus on defining those signaling pathways that
direct the redistribution of AChR into high density patches in response to
neuronal cues. By focusing on the mechanisms that control AChR assembly and
surface topography, the proposed studies should provide important insights into
the regulatory pathways that modulate the functional state of synapses.
Moreover, because several of the fundamental characteristics elucidated in the
case of AChR have proven applicable to other members of the ligand-gated ion
channel family, AChR studies will be valuable toward understanding the molecular
basis of communication between excitable cells across synapses.