* 9723102
* Conference:  13th International Congress of Developmental   Biology, July 5-10, 1997, Snowbird, Utah
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Janet Rossant, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1998
* USD 20,000.00

Rossant 9723102 Funds are requested for partial support of the 13th
International Congress of Developmental Biology, to be held at Snowbird, Utah,
July 5-10, 1997. This meeting represents an important opportunity to bring the
international community of developmental biologists to the United States and
should allow unparalleled opportunities for international and interdisciplinary
interactions. This meeting is being organized by the Society for Developmental
Biology and replaces the annual meeting of the Society for 1997. It is co-
sponsored by the International Society of Developmental Biologists, which
coordinates the ongoing series of International Congresses held in different
countries every four years. The meeting will have 600-800 registrants and will
provide opportunities to hear the latest work from international leaders in the
field, as well as from younger scientists, whose work will be chosen for oral
presentation from the abstracts. There will be two poster sessions, allowing
everyone a chance to present their work to an international audience. The topics
of the plenary sessions have been chosen to represent some of the most exciting
areas of current developmental biology research, including signalling pathways
in development, neural patterning, lineage analysis, asymmetries and segregation
of determinants, gene regulation, development and evolution, and organogenesis.
Multidisciplinary approaches will be emphasized and speakers will be drawn from
those working on a wide range of systems, including plants and animals.
Continuing the success of issue-oriented workshops at the recent annual SDB
meetings, the participants will hold workshops on education, funding, and future
directions in science, drawing on the wider perspective provided by the
international audience. The enthusiastic response to our invitations to speak at
this meeting and the interest already generated in the community promise to make
this a highly successful gathering. Developmental biology research is at an
exciting stage where fundamental discoveries in many different systems are
coming together to provide an integrated view of developmental organization
across evolution. This Congress provides a timely opportunity to survey the
state of the art and provide directions for the future.