* 9723231
* Intracelllar Signaling During the Meiotic Maturation of     Starfish Oocytes: Are PKN and Rho activated?
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Merrill Hille, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 09/30/2000
* USD 258,750.00

Abstract 9723231 Hille The animal ooctye during its growth stores proteins and
messenger RNAs that are required for meiosis, fertilization and the rapid
cleavages of the egg that follows fertilization. After growth oocytes are
usually arrested in prophase I of meiosis until stimulated by a maturation
hormone that activates the stored components in a process called meiotic
maturation. Because of the availability of stored proteins and messenger RNA, no
transcription of new messerger RNA occurs during meiotic maturation of any
animal embryo. Proteins in many complex biological pathways are activated during
meiotic maturation including the maturation promotion factor (MPF), which leads
to the breakdown of the nuclear membrane and the meiotic reduction of
chromosome; proteins that stimulate protein synthesis; and those that are
required to recruit stored mRNAs. This proposal is concerned with the activation
of stored proteins that stimulate oocyte maturation. This laboratory had
identified a protein kinase C-like activity, which appears prior to MPF activity
and prior to the increase in protein synthesis rates, and possibly represents
one of the earliest enzymes activated in the maturing starfish oocyte. A protein
kinase C-related enzyme that is a homologue of mammalian PKN gene and has
abundant transcripts in starfish oocytes, has been cloned by this laboratory.
Experiments by other laboratories suggest that mammalian PKN is activated by
unsaturated fatty acids in vitro and by Rho in vivo, and not by the traditional
phorbol ester activators of the protein kinase C family. This grant application
hypothesizes that the early protein kinase C-related activity in the starfish
ooctyes is due to starfish PKN. The research aims to determine: whether PKN is
present in immature oocytes, when it is activated during meiotic maturation, the
function of PKN, and the mechanisms for its activation. Information gained from
this research will expand the knowled ge of signal transduction pathways for the
activation of maturation in oocytes, and will serve as a prototype of a signal
transduction pathway in differentiating cells. %%% This research is studying the
activation of stored proteins that are important in the maturation of starfish
oocytes. This investigator is looking at an enzyme identified in her laboratory,
which has similarities to a known mammalian enzyme which is important in signal
transduction pathways. This research will provide new information on the
signaling mechanisms in oocyte development. ***