* 9723452
* Mechanisms of LysR-type Protein-Mediated Regulation of Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Gail Hatfield, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9723452 Hatfield Much attention is currently being focused toward understanding
how the transcriptional efficiencies of promoters are influenced by the
superhelical density of the DNA template. In bacteria it has been shown that the
transcription process alters the local super helical density of the chromosome;
positive DNA supercoils are generated in front of a transcribing RNA polymerase
and negative DNA supercoils are generated in its wake. Moreover, the local
negative DNA supercoiling generated behind a transcribing RNA polymerase can
activate transcription initiation from a nearby divergent promoter site.
Although divergent promoter arrangements are common in all organisms, the
physiological significance of these divergent promoters is not fully understood.
In bacteria, the most common positive regulators of gene expression are the LysR
family of proteins. Members of the LysR family are characterized as sequence-
related, co-inducer responsive, transcriptional activator proteins that activate
transcription of a target gene(s) and autoregulate their own synthesis. The IlvY
protein is a LysR family protein that negatively regulates the expression of its
own structural gene, ilvY, and, in the presence of a small molecule co-inducer,
positively regulates the expression of a divergently transcribed ilvC gene which
encodes the second enzyme of the parallel L-isoleucine, L-valine biosynthetic
pathway. It recently has been demonstrated that this activation of transcription
is significantly influenced by the superhelical density of the DNA template. On
the basis of this observation and other preliminary evidence, it has been
hypothesized that as co-inducer levels increase more co-inducer binds to a
performed IlvY-operator DNA complex and further activates ilvC transcription.
This increased ilvC promoter activity generates negative supercoils in its wake
and enhances the transcriptional activity of the nearby, divergent, ilvPY
promoter. This increased ilvPY promoter activity results in hig her IlvY
production and greater IlvY occupancy at the tandem operator sites. Under this
condition the ilvC gene can be induced to a higher maximal level of expression
because of higher IlvY occupancy at the tandem operator sites. Thus, this
transcriptional-coupling between the divergent ilvPC and ilvPY promoters
provides a sensitive and energetically economical mechanism to adjust IlvY and
isomeroreductase (ilvC gene product) production with substrate-inducer levels
which reflect the demands of the cell for isomeroreductase activity for branched
chain amino acid biosynthesis. This research will test the predictions of this
transcriptional-coupling hypothesis and to elucidate the protein-protein and
protein DNA interactions important for IlvY protein-mediated activation of
transcription from the ilvC gene. It is anticipated that the results of this
research will provide fundamental information for understanding the roles of DNA
supercoiling-dependent structures in gene expression, will enhance the current
level of understanding of the mechanism of action for other LysR-type gene
activators, and will be of general interest for investigations of divergent
promoter systems in lower and higher eukaryotic systems. %%% Much attention is
currently being focused toward an understanding of the roles of DNA
supercoiling-dependent (chromatin) structures on gene expression. In bacteria,
the most common positive regulators of gene expression are the LysR family of
proteins which activate transcription of a target gene(s) and autoregulate their
own synthesis. This research will provide fundamental information for
understanding the roles of DNA supercoiling-dependent structures in gene
expression, will enhance the current level of understanding of the mechanism of
action for other LysR-type gene activators, and will be of general interest for
investigations of divergent promoter systems in lower and higher eukaryotic
system. ***