* 9723008
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic       Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2000
* USD 375,000.00

9723008 Holten The bacterial reaction center (RC) is the membrane-bound pigment-
protein complex where light energy is converted into chemical potential energy.
This conversion occurs via a series of fast and highly specific electron
transfer reactions that separate charge across the membrane with a quantum yield
of (100%. The ultimate goal of this work is to arrive at a comprehensive
understanding of the primary charge separation process at the molecular level.
To this end, transient absorption spectroscopic measurements spanning the
femtosecond to seconds time scales as well as other spectroscopic techniques
will be used to directly probe the intermediate states of charge separation and
the rates of their formation and decay. The research will focus on site-directed
mutants containing one or more mutations near the cofactors. Numerous unresolved
issues will be addressed, including the involvement of specific chromophores in
the pathway of electron transfer, the origin of the directionality of electron
transfer via one of two parellel transport chains (L and M), and the factors
that ensure the favorable balance between the rates of charge separation and the
rates of competing charge recombination processes. The overall goal of this
research is to understand the molecular mechanisms of the primary charge
separation process in bacterial photosynthesis. The principles uncovered by this
research should also apply to the primary photochemistry in reaction centers
from other organisms, including PSII in plants. Finally, the research should
positively impact broader topics in biophysics including biological electron
transfers and the role of a protein, both static and dynamic, in modulating the
functional properties of its cofactors. ***