* 9723154
* The Genetic and Molecular Basis of Sex Determination in     Ceratopteris
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jo Ann Banks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 569,405.00

9723154 Banks Technical section Gametophytes of the fern Ceratopteris richardii
are sexually dimorphic, either hermaphroditic or male. The determinant of sex in
this and other ferns is antheridiogen, a gibberellin-like pheromone that is
secreted by the hermaphroditic gametophytes and which promotes male development
of other sexually undetermined gametophytes. The plant hormone abscisic acid
blocks the antheridiogen response. Several key regulatory genes involved in sex
determination have been identified by generating and characterizing mutations
that alter the normal sex of the gametophyte. A genetic analysis of these
mutants defines a regulatory network of at least eight interacting genes that
are involved in determining sex type. Among these are two major sex-determining
genes, TRA-1 and FEM-1, whose activities are required to promote the
differentiation of female and male traits, respectively. Each gene also
negatively regulates the expression of the other such that the sex of the
gametophyte ultimately depends on which gene is expressed first. Antheridiogen
activates a signal transduction pathway defined by the HER genes which affects
the sex of the gametophyte by regulating the activity of TRA-1.This model of sex
determination will be tested by continuing the genetic and morphological
analysis of new and existing sex-determining mutants. One such gene, a
Ceratopteris homolog of KNOTTED-1 is likely to also be involved in meristem
development in the hermaphrodite and a target of repression by antheridiogen
during male development. Several genes that are up-regulated in response to
exposure to exogenous antheridiogen have also been isolated and the functions of
these genes will be determined. A final objective is to develop an
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation system in the fern. If successful, the
Ac/Ds transposable elements of maize will be introduced and their ability to
transpose in the fern will be tested. If they are mobile, mutants induced by
transposon tagging will be sought . Non-technical section How sex is determined
in plants is an important developmental question whose answer may ultimately
have practical applications in agriculture and plant breeding. The proposed
studies will provide a basic understanding of the genes involved in sex
determination and the signaling pathway for known pheromonal and hormonal cues.
***