* 9723752
* The Chemical Basis of Viral Assembly and Disassembly
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 09/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

MCB 9723752 Mark Young (Montana State University) The Chemical Basis of Viral
Assembly and Disassembly ABSTRACT 1. Technical This study uses the cowpea
chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV), a member of the bromovirus group of the
Bromoviridea family, as a unique model system to determine the detailed chemical
role protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions play in the assembly,
maturation, and disassembly processes of a virus. An icosahedral virus, CCMV is
constituted by a four component positive sense stranded RNA genome and capsids
containing 180 identical coat protein subunits, each of 19.8KD. The specific
objectives of this proposal are to: (1) Determine the critical viral RNA-coat
protein and coat protein-coat interactions that act as molecular determinants
regulating virion architecture and stability; and (2) Determine the ability of
the N-terminus of the coat protein to undergo a structural transition from the
interior of the virion to the exterior of the virion in order to form a channel
for the passage of virion RNA during disassembly. The experimental approach
combines molecular and structural tools. Genetic mutations with altered virion
architecture and stability are generated and examined for their effect on virion
assembly and disassembly in vitro and in vivo, so that critical components can
be identified. The results of this research will have significant implications
for a broad range of animal, plant, and insect viruses and should provide the
basis for strategies for preventing viral infections. 2. Non-technical
Understanding the chemical basis of protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid
interactions is one of the major goals of modern biology. Virion assembly,
maturation, and disassembly is particularly suitable for determining the
underlying principles of these interactions. The objective of this study is to
determine how the detailed molecular interactions occurring during virus
assembly and disassembly influence and regulate virus infectivity. The spherical
, cowpea chlorotic mottle virus is the subject of this research project.
Biochemical and structural approaches to the analysis of genetic mutants are
used to identify the critical components. The findings should contribute to the
basic knowledge of how viruses are formed and disrupted, and provide essential
information for the design of strategies to prevent viral infection to plants
and animals.