* 9723889
* Initiation and Asymmetry Formation in Feather Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Cheng-Ming Chuong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1999
* USD 110,000.00

Chuong 9723889 The long term objective of this laboratory is to understand the
molecular mechanism of pattern formation in embryonic development. Along these
lines, Dr. Chuong has been using feather morphogenesis as a model and studying
its molecular mechanism. In this pilot proposal, he will focus on signals
involved in periodic patterning of feather primordia. He suggests that initial
cell aggregates form randomly and are unstable. Through a reaction diffusion
mechanism, only some aggregates survive to become feather primordia. The final
number, size, and inter primordia space reaches an equilibrium regulated by
positive and negative signals. Preliminary data suggest that FGFs may be
candidates of positive signals, while BMPs may be candidates of negative
signals. Candidate molecules for these events will be tested using novel feather
reconstitution procedures and retroviral infection. The role of cell density on
feather bud density, size and interbud spacing will be analyzed. The corollary
of the reaction diffusion mechanism is that the primary row and sequential
propagation of feather primordia is not essential. This will be tested using DiI
labeling of feather primordia followed by dissociation and reconstitution. The
work will shed new light on the molecular basis and modeling of periodic pattern
formation for feathers and other organs.