* 9723407
* Workshop:  Information Management in the Ecological         Sciences in Albuquerque, NM, August 11-14, 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* James Gosz, Ichauway, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 45,000.00

This two-day training workshop, "Data and Information Management in the
Ecological Sciences," will address environmental information management
challenges identified by research scientists of the Ecological Society of
America and the Organization of Biological Field Stations (OBFS). The workshop
will be held in conjunction with the 1997 annual meeting of the Ecological
Society of America in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The workshop is endorsed by ESA's
Long-Term Studies Section, OBFS, and the National Center for Ecological Analysis
and Synthesis, and will be additionally supported (logistics) by the Long-Term
Ecological Research Network Office at the University of New Mexico. Workshop
participants include directors of field stations and marine laboratories or
their appointed representatives, individuals or organizations engaged in long-
term ecological studies, and individuals directly involved in the management of
ecological data and information. Workshop objectives are to introduce attendees
to data and information management concepts, protocols, and relevant technology.
Specific topics include: hardware, software, communication and networking
strategies, data entry, quality assurance/quality control, scientific databases,
metadata, data archival, World Wide Web, site implementation strategies,
managing climate data, data analysis and scientific visualization tools, as well
as a series of roundtable discussions of related issues. In addition to seminars
and hands-on training at the workshop, relevant materials and workshop
proceedings will be collated and "published" via the World Wide Web to ensure
broad dissemination of information. In addition, all organizational, agenda,
paper abstract information, etc. will be on the WWW by the time of the workshop,
August 8, 1997. See www.lternet.edu for the link.