* 9723918
* Gender Differences in Non-Reproductive Brain Areas
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Janice Juraska, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/2001
* USD 175,593.00

PI: Juraska, J. IBN-9723918 Recent advances in imaging techniques have made the
measurement of the gross structure of the human brain more accessible than ever.
Factors being examined include sex differences in brain structure, spurred by
the sex differences in brain size and the possibility of links to sex
differences in cognitive behavior. However, an often overlooked problem is that
gross size is not a directly meaningful entity for brain function; rather it is
neurons and their interconnections that are the basis for neural function. One
notable example of this is the controversy surrounding possible sex differences
in the size of the splenial portion of the human corpus callosum. In rats, like
humans, males have a larger overall brain size than females, and there are sex
differences in non-reproductive behaviors. The well studied rat brain is an
excellent model for understanding possible neural bases for sex differences in
gross brain size and their functional implications. The goal of the present
proposal is to understand the origins of sex differences in the cerebral cortex.
The gonadal steroids may be playing a role in sculpting both neuron number
through the death of neurons in the cortex and axon number through the
withdrawal of axons in the corpus callosum. The emphasis is on the visual cortex
(Oc1) and the concomitant portion of the corpus callosum, the splenium, in order
to build on previous work from my lab that indicates that there are more neurons
and glia in the Oc1B (binocular) area in male than female rats and our recent
work on the late time course of axon withdrawal in the splenium of the rat
corpus callosum. As a source of natural variation, sex differences can be a
valuable investigative tool for aiding in the understanding of developmental
processes, models of brain function and the cognitively mediated functions being
visualized with imaging techniques. There are also medical applications. Many
developmental disorders such as dyslexia and stutt ering are found more in one
sex than another. In addition, there are sex differences in response to brain
damage in both children and adults, in the incidence of mental illness and in
the response to drugs. Most of these dimorphisms involve brain areas not related
to reproductive functions, such as the cerebral cortex - areas in which sex
differences are not well understood. Finally, steroid hormones are manipulated
in a variety of therapeutic contexts in both adults and children and the
consequences for brain structure may be widespread. ??