* 9723793
* Pathways of Intestinal Absorption and Their Ecological Significance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* William Karasov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 02/28/2002
* USD 254,000.00

Karasov 9723793 A widespread notion is that sugar (D-glucose) is mainly
actively absorbed by the intestine. The Pi's have evidence, however, that birds
can absorb considerable amounts of the other form of glucose, L-glucose, which
is thought to be absorbed passively, not actively. The proposed studies test the
assumption that L-glucose is absorption passively by birds, and the inference
that most D-glucose absorption is passive. The studies will also determine how
passive absorption by the avian intestine varies with size of water-soluble
molecules, and whether the movement of absorbed solutes occurs across or between
intestinal cells. The findings will be important to physiologists, evolutionary
biologists, toxicologists, and ecologists. A finding that most sugar is absorbed
passively would be important because it would challenge prevailing physiological
ideas about nutrient absorption as well as current analyses in evolutionary
digestive physiology that attempt to match the physiological capacity to absorb
nutrients with nutrient intake. A high intestinal permeability permitting
passive absorption might permit toxins to be absorbed from plant and animal
material in the intestine. This scenario would beg research on the ecological
cost associated with exposure and detoxication of natural toxins, and perhaps
the sensitivity of wild animals to the new generation of water-soluble
herbicides and pesticides produced by humans.