* 9723922
* Regulation of Myosin Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Henry Epstein, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9723922 Epstein The central focus of the proposed project is to characterize the
molecular interactions of P28, a protein associated with the cores of muscle
thick filaments in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. A key hypothesis for the
functions of P28 is that it acts as a "paramyosin coupling protein;" that is,
that P28 binds to and cross-links paramyosin stoichiometrically during thick
filament assembly and in the final structure. Paramyosin is the homologue of
myosin heavy chain rod domains and is the major protein of the thick filament
cores in C. elegans and many other invertebrates. Myosin and paramyosin are
members of the superfamily of coiled-coil proteins which includes cytoskeletal
myosin II motors, intermediate filament proteins, and nuclear lamins.
Understanding the interactions among these proteins may serve as a model for
functionally analogous interactions with structurally homologous myosin rods in
vertebrate thick filament assembly and structure. The following Specific Aims
will be pursued in order to accomplish these objectives: 1, to establish the
functional significance of P29 in vivo, deletions will be induced in the
chromosomal locus encoding this protein and will be detected in genomic DNA from
mutagenized nematode clones by PCR-based screening methods. The new alleles will
be characterized genetically, and the mutant phenotypes will be examined. In
order to establish possible broader significance, searches in vertebrates and
other invertebrates for genomic DNA and cDNA sequences homologous to P28 will be
performed in future experiments. 2, to localize P28 protein within the thick
filaments of C. elegans body-wall muscles by immunofluorescence and immuno-
electron microscopy in wild-type and specific mutant strains. 3, to analyze the
interactions of recombinant P28 protein with purified paramyosin and myosin in
vitro in terms of binding, dynamics of assembly, and structural properties of
the in vitro assemblies. The successful accomplishment of these goal s will
advance our understanding of the structure and assembly of thick filaments. The
subcellular machinery of muscle cells that allows them to carry out their
contractile function consists of two sets of complex filaments, termed thick and
thin filaments, which are arranged in parallel arrays within a larger structure
termed the myofibril. In fully "relaxed" muscles, these parallel arrays only
partially overlap each other Contraction occurs when the thick and thin
filaments slide over each other in a coordinated manner to increase the extent
of overlap, thereby shortening the myofibrils (and thus shortening the cell), a
process which requires hydrolysis of ATP. The "motor" which transduces the
energy of hydrolysis of ATP into movement is myosin, the major component of the
thick filaments. In order to fully understand how muscle cells function, it is
necessary to understand the fine molecular structure of the myofibril. Recently,
a new protein, termed P28, has been discovered as a component of thick filaments
in a model invertebrate, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This project will
explore the role that this newly-discovered thick filament protein plays in the
assembly and function of myofibrils, and will undoubtedly lead to new insights
into those processes. ***