* 9723661
* Resolution and Reconstitution of Photosystem I in           Cyanobacteria and Higher Plants:  Molecular Biological and  Physicochemical Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2002
* USD 531,435.00

9723661 Golbeck. The aim of this work is to understand the molecular mechanisms
which lead to the high quantum yield and high thermodynamic efficiency of light-
to-chemical free energy conversion in Type I (iron-sulfur) photosynthetic
reaction centers. To achieve this level of understanding about the intermediate
electron acceptor A1, the ligands which bind the phylloquinone whether one or
both of the phylloquinone pathways is utilized in electron transfer, and if it
is possible to manipulate the amino acids so that quinones with altered redox
potentials can be exchanged into the site, must be determined. The issues
regarding the mutants of FA and FB include using substituted aryl thiolates to
modify the midpoint potentials of the iron-sulfur clusters, using thiolated
viologen derivatives to function as kinetic probes of electron transfer, and
using viologen derivatives with different tether lengths to investigate the
effect of distance on electron transfer rate. The work on the low molecular mass
polypeptides PsaE through PsaM includes measurements of a possible electron
transfer pathway through PsaE, and whether the PsaF, PsaI, PsaJ, PsaK or PsaM
provide links for energy spillover from light absorbed by phycobilisomes. The
overall goal of this work is to study the structure, function and organization
of the photosystem I reaction center in cyanobacteria and plants. A combination
of organic chemical synthesis, site-directed mutagenesis and spectroscopic
characterization including time-resolved optical and EPR, will be employed to
probe these issues. ***