* 9723437
* What Drives the Group Size Effect in Ant-Predator Vigilance?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Steven Lima, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2000
* USD 52,960.00

9723437 Lima This research is directed at a new understanding of a widespread
behavioral phenomenon: the vigilance group size effect, in which socially-
feeding animals engage in less vigilance (alertness) with an increase in group
size. Despite the fact that this is one of the most well established results in
the study of animal behavior, many important issues remain unaddressed and even
unrecognized. The proposed experiments are designed to help remedy this
situation, and in doing so, will shed light on the reasons why so many types of
animals are social in the first place. The proposed research focuses first on an
assumption fundamental to all explanations of the group size effect: that an
animal cannot detect predators while it is actively feeding with its head down.
Recent work suggests that apparently non-vigilant (feeding) birds can detect
approaching predator attacks at a considerable distance. A main goal is thus to
characterize this ability in birds (as represented by the dark-eyed junco, Junco
hyemalis) under realistic situations, and then explore its consequences for the
group size effect itself. This proposed work will determine whether the group
size effect represents a previously unrecognized interaction between poor
quality vigilance (while actually feeding), and high quality vigilance (while
overtly alert). The proposed research also explores two unorthodox explanations
for the group size effect. The first is based on theoretical developments which
suggest that the group size effect occurs only because group sizes change
frequently over time (as animals come and go from the group). This idea will be
tested by allowing captive juncos to feed in constant group sizes or in groups
that vary over time. If the new theory is correct, only those birds experiencing
the variable group sizes should exhibit the basic group size effect. The second
unorthodox explanation for the group size effect concerns the effect of
competition for food on vigilance. This view does not deny that animals are
vigilant for predators, but maintains that they decrease their vigilance in
larger groups because competition for food is more intense as group size
increases. If this view is correct, then the group size effect should be much
more pronounced when animals are feeding on a limited food supply; this
prediction will be tested in flocks of house finches (Carpodacus mexicanus).
Results from this research will allow a better understanding of group behavior
and the evolution of sociality.