* 9723143
* Structural Determinants of G Protein Coupled Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* David Lambright, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9723143 Lambright Monomeric and heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G proteins)
mediate critical steps in a variety of signaling and regulatory pathways. The
function of GTP-binding proteins in such diverse biological processes as sensory
perception, hormone action, and growth control depends on their ability to cycle
between inactive (GDP-bound) and active (GTP-bound) conformations in a precisely
regulated manner. The overall objective is to understand the detailed molecular
mechanisms underlying the function of GTP-binding proteins. The experimental
approach will combine high resolution structural studies by X-ray
crystallography with biochemical and mutational experiments in order to identify
the principal stereochemical determinants that govern the nucleotide dependent
interactions between GTP-binding proteins and the structurally diverse factors
to which they are coupled. The work will focus initially on: (1) combined
mutational and structural studies on the mechanism of heterotrimeric G protein
coupled signaling. The experiments will examine the significance of conserved
interactions predicted on the basis of previous structural work to be important
for stabilizing the active or inactive conformation of the G( subunit. Alanine
and homologue substitutions will be introduced at specific amino acid residues.
The ability of the mutant G(( subunits to interact with the G( subunits and
undergo the conformational changes associated with activation will be assessed
using a variety of well established biochemical assays. To characterize the
effects on the structure, the mutant proteins will be crystallized in the GDP-
bound, GTP-bound and heterotrimeric forms and the corresponding structures
determined by the molecular replacement method. The second objective is to (2)
develop suitable systems for structural and biophysical studies of the
interaction between monomeric GTP-binding proteins and their cognate exchange
factors. These studies will focus initially on the 13 kDa exchange fac tor Mss4
and its cognate G protein Rab3a which functions in the regulation of
neurotransmission. This study concerns a large and physiologically important
family of GTP-binding proteins (known as G proteins) that play a fundamental
role in diverse biological processes including sensory perception, hormone
action, neurotransmission, and growth control. The function of these proteins in
such diverse cellular processes depends on their ability to cycle between two
distinct forms, an inactive form in which GDP is bound to the protein and an
active form in which GTP is bound. The switch from the inactive form to the
active form is controlled by a family of proteins known as GDP/GTP exchange
factors. The initial objective is to identify structural elements that are
required to stabilize the active or inactive form and distinguish these from
features that modulate the interaction with proteins which specifically
recognize one form or the other. Molecular biological methods will be used to
alter specific amino acid residues in transducin, the G protein that mediates
vision in the rod cells of the eye. The effects on the structure of both the
inactive and active forms will be determined by X-ray crystallography and
correlated with changes in functional properties assessed by a variety of well
established biochemical experiments. . ***