* 9723527
* Cellular Mechanisms of Directional Sound Localization by a  Brain Stem Network
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Janet Casagrand, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2002
* USD 301,988.00

9723527 Casagrand This research will yield new information on the ways that
nerve cells of the brain determine the location of sounds from the information
provided by sound receptor cells in the ears. This study will use an animal
model, the auditory- evoked escape response of the goldfish to study this
problem. The studies will evaluate the auditory activation of the large
reticulospinal neurons called Mauthner cells, which previously have been
important in many neurophysiological studies. Reticulospinal neurons are crucial
for producing coordinated locomotor behavior, such as walking and orientation in
all vertebrates, including humans. Yet, little is known about the nature of the
acoustic inputs which provide one of the most influential excitatory inputs to
these neurons. Recent technological advances now make feasible studies of these
inputs. The proposed work will analyze how acoustic information is transmitted
to, and processed by, the Mauthner neurons. The experiments will: 1)
Characterize the types of acoustic (pressure and acceleration) inputs to the
Mauthner neuron; 2) Localize the site(s) of connections between the afferents
and the Mauthner neuron; 3) Describe critical morphophysiological features
important in auditory processing by the Mauthner neuron; 4) Construct a
morphologically and neurophysiologically realistic computer model of sound
processing by Mauthner neuron to allow evaluation of hypotheses and improved
understanding of how the auditory inputs interact. These four experimental
approaches will permit a comprehensive analysis of directional sound processing
by the Mauthner system. The new information resulting from the proposed work
will be used to further understand how neurons in general, and the
reticulospinal system in particular, integrates its sensory inputs to produce
coordi nated outputs.