* 9723281
* Shared Instrumentation for Computational Neuroanatomy
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Arthur Toga, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 364,416.00

Recent enhancements in the resolution of primary data and the complexity of
algorithms have resulted in significant increases in the computational load for
the neuroimaging, `rain mapping and biomedical imaging communities. In response
to these increased demands, a group of neuro- and biomedical scientists with
common interests and computational needs have come together to seek funding for
a shared graphics supercomputer. This group has a critical need for potent
visualization hardware, extremely fast, parallelizable CPU architectures and
considerable amounts of data storage and transfer capabilities. This equipment
is required to satisfy the demands generated by three dimensional volume
viewing, intricate surface extraction, nonlinear warping and the volumetric
blending of complex polygonal objects with both raw data and the results of
statistical analysis. Housed at the Laboratory of Neuroimaging at UCLA, the
device will be available on a shared basis for interactive use locally and batch
processing remotely. After evaluation of several vendors of graphics platforms,
the equipment selected was an Onyx graphics supercomputer manufactured by
Silicon Graphics Inc. Simulations and benchmarking confirmed the ability of this
instrumentation to fulfill the needs of the participants. An administrative plan
was created to manage the equipment equitably and to optimize its utility for
the participating research projects. The ongoing research in nine local and four
remote projects will directly and immediately benefit by using existing software
that is capable of taking advantage of the features of the instrument.
Programmers and other experts in this architecture are already members of the
staff. Technical and management personnel are also among the funded group of
participants. The existing collaborations of the participants and the common
algorithmic requirements will enable sharing of computer code, analytic
procedures and computational strategies. The availability of suc h a machine
will enhance the productivity of ongoing funded research and foster the use of
leading edge technology for all participants.