* 9723197
* Studies of the Plant Cyanide-Resistant Alternative          Oxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Siedow, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Siedow The cyanide-resistant "alternative" oxidase of plant mitochondria
catalyzes the reduction of oxygen to water using electrons derived from the
mitochondrial ubiquinone pool. No energy is conserved in this reaction, and thus
the function of the alternative oxidase in plant metabolism has been puzzling.
Much progress has recently been made in discovering how the activity of the
enzyme is regulated in mitochondria. The alternative oxidase has been shown to
be dimeric, and its activity is decreased when the two monomers are connected by
a disulfide bridge. When this disulfide pair is reduced, the enzyme becomes more
active and is able to be stimulated by (-keto acids. The site of action of
(-keto acids is likely to be at a sulfhydryl residue, also. Study of the
mechanisms of regulation in conjunction with sequence analysis, have provided
clues to important structural features of the enzyme. The alternative oxidase is
predicted to have a diiron catalytic site, and various residues that may be
involved in binding the ubiquinone substrate have been identified. This research
project will continue investigation into the nature of the regulatory and
structural features of the oxidase. Because Escherichia coli cells grown in
cyanide will functionally express the plant alternative oxidase, this bacterial
system offers a convenient way to observe the effects of various mutations
introduced into the alternative oxidase protein. Site-directed mutations in the
cysteines believed to be involved in the redox-sensitive disulfide/sulfhydryl
system and interaction with (-keto acids, respectively, will be examined to
confirm the function of these residues. Also, a random mutagenesis approach
coupled with selection on inhibitors that are presumed to act at the quinol
oxidation site will be used to uncover residues involved in quinone binding. To
verify the presence of a diiron catalytic site in the alternative oxidase, the
protein will be purified from plant mitochondria and used in spectroscopic
studies. Final ly, the alternative oxidase from fungi will be studied to
determine the presence or absence of the regulatory features described for
plants. Although the "alternative oxidase" of plants occurs in the mitochondria
where cellular energy is normally produced, the reaction it catalyzes actually
wastes some of this energy. Consequently, the alternative oxidase would appear
to be harmful to the plant, and its activity might be expected to decrease plant
productivity. However, the fact that all plants have this enzyme implies that
the alternative oxidase is important to plant survival, and evidence has pointed
to a role for the oxidase in plant responses to a wide range of biological and
abiological stresses. Better characterization of how alternative oxidase
activity is regulated will help in understanding the role the alternative
oxidase plays in plant metabolism, and may eventually lead to greater plant
productivity for agriculturally important crops.