* 9723459
* Physiology and Biochemistry of Microaerophilic Iron-        oxidizing Bacteria Growing at Neutral pH
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Emerson, American Type Culture Collection
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2000
* USD 199,000.00

9723459 Emerson Because of past difficulties with isolating iron-oxidizing
microbes at circumneutral pH, it has been difficult to prove that prokaryotes
have the capacity to grow lithoautotrophically on iron at neutral pH. Recently,
pure cultures of bacteria that appear to grow lithotrophically by Fe-oxidation
at pH 6 have been isolated by the PI. This research will focus on using one of
these, strain ES-1, as a model organism to study the physiology and biochemistry
of iron oxidation at neutral pH. The goals are to establish that this microbe is
a chemolithoautotroph, and to begin to dissect the metabolic pathways by which
it conserves energy from Fe-oxidation, and fixes CO2 . Studies will be aimed at
developing a continuous culture system for determining molar growth yields of
cells growing on Fe2+, determining limits for Fe2+ and O2 tolerance, and for
growing enough cell biomass for in vitro biochemical and molecular studies.
Further studies will be aimed at purifying an Fe-oxidoreductase enzyme that
could be responsible for Fe-oxidation, and identifying other components of the
electron transport system. Two components of the electron transport chain of the
acidophilic chemolithoautorophic Fe-oxidizer Thiobacillus ferrooxidans will be
used to initiate a search for analogous proteins in strain ES-1. These are
rusticyanin, a putative periplasmic electron transport protein and the enzyme
that serves as the initial Fe-oxidase. We will search for the genes for these
proteins in strain ES-1 by using molecular techniques, and will attempt to
purify the proteins, if present, using conventional biochemical techniques. A
molecular approach will also be taken to establish whether or not the key CO2
fixation enzyme, ribulose 1-5, bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBPC/O), is
present in strain ES-1; both hybridization studies and PCR amplification of
genes for RuBPC/O gene subunits will be performed. Together these studies will
lay the groundwork for future investigation of the metabolic bi ochemistry of a
unique type of prokaryotic metabolism. Iron is the fourth most abundant element
in the Earth's crust; it is also perhaps the most important trace element for
all living organisms. We understand very little about the role that
microorganisms play in oxidizing iron at neutral pH. The signficance of this
research is that it will increase our fundamental knowledge about the role life
plays in controlling the iron cycle. Due to the great abundance of iron its
cycling influences other important elemental cycles including carbon oxygen and
sulfur. Iron-oxidizing bacteria are often found in industrial and municipal
water distribution systems where they can cause fouling of pipelines and
discoloration of domestic water supplies with significant economic impact. Thus
understanding the fundamental metabolic processes of these organisms will help
in our efforts to exert positive or negative control over them.