* 9723756
* Characterization of Mechanisms That Regulate Inositol       Metabolism In Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Patricia McGraw, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* William David Nes
* 01/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

9723756 McGraw The long-term goal of this research project is to uncover the
pathway that links the function of a regulator of inositol metabolism encoded by
the OPI1 gene to the metabolite inositol. The B vitamin inositol is an essential
biomolecule in metazoa. In every cell type that has been examined, starvation
for inositol causes cell death, although little is known about the mechanism of
this phenomenon. Termed inositolless death in 1959 by Lester and Gross, it was
first described by G.W. Beadle in 1944, who stated that "...death ensues when
the reaction pathways which utilize the missing or limiting component cannot
'keep up' with the other reaction pathways and this in turn may reasonably be
defined as a condition of imbalance". Some of the cellular processes that
require inositol are well-documented. In eukarytoic cells inositol is a
component of a major class of membrane phospholipids that includes
phosphatidylinositol (PI) and its polyphosphorylated derivatives (PIPs). In this
capacity, inositol provides structure to the cell membrane (PI), and also
functions in transmitting information (PIPs) from the environment to the
interior of the cell. Experiments during the previous funding period
demonstrated that inositol uptake from the environment is subject to complex
regulation. It was shown that the activity of the major inositol permease,
encoded by the ITR1 gene, is regulated at multiple levels including both
transcription of ITR1 and stability of the Itr1 permease. Ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation was found to be necessary for inactivation and endocytosis
of the Itr1 permease. Remarkably, the same ubiquitin conjugating enzymes
required for Itr1 degradation were also required for derepression of
transcription of ITR1. In this case, the ubiquitin system could be bypassed by
deletion of the OPi1 negative regulator. The research to be carried out will
include the construction of mutations in OPI1 in vitro that will then be
analyzed in vivo. Mutations will be introduced in ar eas of the gene encoding
regions of Opi1p regions such as the leucine zipper and polyglutamine tracts, in
PEST regions, and in potential ubiquitination sites. The consequences of these
mutations on Opi1p stability, on Opi1p-mediated negative regulation, and on
formation and stability of a high molecular weight Opi1p complex will be
analyzed . Additionally, the cellular location of Opi1p, and the effects of
mutations in OPI1 and other genes such as ITR1, ITR2, INO2, and INO4, on that
localization will be determined. Antibodies will be used to localize Opi1p in
the presence and absence of inositol by confocal fluorescence microscopy.
Preliminary data suggest that Opi1p is not located in the nucleus. There is
evidence that other inositol-dependent processes exist; mutations that affect a
variety of functions have been coincidentally found to perturb inositol
metabolism. The B vitamin inositol is essential for all higher organisms. The
study of a eukaryotic model system in which mutations can be easily constructed
and analyzed provides an opportunity to dissect the mechanisms that link
inositol metabolism to membrane biogenesis and cellular growth. This work will
further understanding of how the supply and demand for inositol is sensed by the
cell. The research is part of a broad investigation of the mechanisms that
maintain metabolic balance and ensure normal physiological function.