* 9723509
* Analysis of Proteins Which Interact With a Protein          Tyrosine Phosphatase
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Lizabeth Perkins, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 08/31/1999
* USD 210,000.00

Perkins 97-23509 Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is a remarkably conserved
mechanism which is implicated in the control of cell growth, differentiation and
cell survival in organisms as distantly related as yeast and humans. Although
many tyrosine kineses have been described, only recently have protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPases) been implicated in receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
mediated signal transduction pathways. The Drosophila gene corkscrew (csw)
encodes a protein which is among the first PTPases whose gene mutations are
facilitating a genetic analysis of function in vivo. Genetic, developmental and
molecular studies have demonstrated that Csw functions positively in multiple
RTK pathways, four of which are essential during embryonic development. These
analyses suggest that Csw is a member of the conserved signaling cassette that
operates downstream of all RTKs. Csw also has been functionally conserved
through evolution since a structurally similar mammalian PTPase, SHP-2, can
substitute for Csw during development; therefore, the observations made for Csw
may be generally applied to its mammalian homolog. Preliminary work reveals that
Csw physically interacts in viva with two novel proteins, D2 and 61. To
understand the function of D2 and 61 in Csw, hence RTK, signaling a number of
genetic and biochemical approaches have been designed. Specifically the
experiments will: 1. determine the functions of D2 and 61 during Drosophila
development and RTK signaling, 2. determine if their functions are dependent on
the activation state of the RTK, 3. determine whether D2 and 61 are required to
positively or negatively transduce an RTK signal, and if so 4. determine if D2
and 61 act upstream or downstream of Csw, and more precisely where in the
signaling cassette they function. Understanding the genetic and molecular
mechanisms of Csw action are critical first steps towards determining how a
PTPase functions positively in RTK pathways that are essential for cell growth
and differentiati on.