* 9723642
* Synthesis and Use of Chiral Beta-Deuterated Amino Acids for NMR Studies of Protein Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Robert Curley, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9723642 Curley The structure assignment of proteins as determined by modern NMR
methods is greatly facilitated by access to appropriate regio- and
stereoselectively labelled amino acids which can be incorporated into the
proteins. Use of these labelled amino acids greatly increases experimental
sensitivity and permits the use of isotope-edited NMR experiments which can
provide specific structural information otherwise difficult to obtain. Of
particular importance to assigning an accurate solution structure of a protein
by NMR is stereospecific assignment of the amino acid side chain resonances.
Useful for these assignments is access to amino acids with stereoselective
substitution of deuteron for proton on the (-methylene groups of these amino
acids with prochiral (-methylene protons. In addition, the effect of
(-deuteration of the 13C relaxation rate will also facilitate C(carbon
assignments, especially in large systems. A generalized, versatile, inexpensive
method will be developed for the synthesis of virtually all the amino acids with
prochiral (-methylene protons in a manner which will stereoselectively replace
one of the prochiral protons with deuteron. These methods will also permit
double labelling of the amino acid with 15N or 13C in a variety of patterns and
can also be readily adapted to provide the natural amino acid L-isomer
stereospecifically. Once obtained, these amino acids will be used to study
biosynthesis and protein structure by NMR The function of proteins is dependent
on their structure. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has become an
important tool for determining the structure of proteins in solution. Proteins
are composed of different amino acid building blocks which are bound together to
make up the entire protein. The NMR study of proteins is made easier if the
amino acids are labelled with nonradioactive, NMR-detectable isotopes. This
project will develop general methods for the synthesis of these specially
labelled amino acids. ***