* 9723715
* Biosynthesis, Structure, Function, and Regulation of NitrousOxide Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Dooley, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9723715 Dooley The biochemistry, biosynthesis, structures, reactivity, and
function of nitrous oxide reductase, the terminal enzyme in bacterial
denitrification, is being investigated. Denitrification is a key component of
the global nitrogen cycle and is the pathway that balances the cycle, returning
fixed nitrogen to the atmosphere. The ecology involving nitrogen fixation,
assimilation, and denitrification substantially impacts agricultural
productivity and water quality. Denitrification may release N20 to the
atmosphere, where it may contribute to ozone depletion and global warming. This
research addresses several outstanding issues in the biochemistry of
denitrification, in the bacterium Achromobacter cycloclastes, with the goal of a
thorough molecular understanding of this pathway. The roles of the proteins
encoded by the genes nosD, F,Y,L,X, which are (or may be) required for the
biosynthesis of nitrous oxide reductase, are being examined. The general
strategy is to clone and over-express the soluble, periplasmic nos-coded
proteins, which may be involved in the biosynthesis of the catalytic site of
nitrous oxide reductase, thereby insuring sufficient material for detailed
biophysical and functional studies. Site-directed mutagenesis, together with
variable -temperature absorption, CD, MCD, EPR and resonance Raman spectroscopy
will be used to probe the nature of the catalytic site in nitrous oxide
reductase (thought to be the Cuz site), and the mechanism of reduction of
nitrous oxide, including the interactions with physiological electron donors.
Concerted efforts are underway to develop rapid, generally applicable schemes to
purify nitrous oxide reductase, with the objective of obtaining crystals of
nitrous oxide reductase suitable for x-ray diffraction analysis. Results of
these experiments should be applicable to major themes in modern biochemistry
such as metalloenzyme structure and function; metal ion metabolism and the
biosynthesis of metalloproteins; and the recognition and acti vation of
kinetically-inert small molecules. This research project seeks to understand how
bacteria in soil and water convert nitrate, an important source of nitrogen for
plants, into nitrogen gas, which is released to the atmosphere. A substantial
fraction of the fertilizers applied to crops are wasted as a result of this
conversion. The organisms responsible contain an enzyme known as nitrous oxide
reductase, which plays a critical role in the overall process. A major goal of
the project is to understand how this enzyme is made, its structure, and exactly
how it functions. Understanding how bacteria convert nitrate to nitrogen gas
could eventually lead to effective controls of this process, thereby resulting
in substantial savings to farmers. It might also be possible to turn the tables
and exploit this process to safely remove nitrate from drinking-water supplies,
where it can be a problem.