* 9723623
* RUI:  Genetic and Molecular Polymorphism in                 Microbotryum Violaceum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Edward Garber, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 310,214.00

Henry 9723623 This project provides minority students at Chicago State
University with opportunities to participate in current research projects at the
University of Chicago. The goal is to instruct students in specific areas of
genetics to the level that they will be competent to conduct a research project,
to guide them to achieve success in their work and to experience the excitement
in current genetic biology. Students should come to feel comfortable and
confident at a major research university. The experience should stimulate
students to consider and to explore careers in the biological sciences. The
projects should help students, through their research archievements, to build
the necessary self-confidence to enter a graduate degree program. To this end,
students will participate in the research on the genetic and molecular evidence
of polymorphisms in fungi. The specific organism for this purpose is the anther-
smut fungus Microbotryum violaceum. The choice of this species is predicted by
ongoing research in the Principal and Co-principal Investigators' laboratories.
They have familiarity and long experience with the species. Background work is
expected to lead to experiments that challenge students to engage in hands-on
and minds-on experience. All projects are selected to provide students with
real, rather than contrived, problems. The six projects on transmission gentics
focus on testing the hypothesis that the highly mutable loci in M. violaceum may
be explained by assuming the activity of a transposible element (TE).
Polymorphism in colony color and auxotrophy were selected because the relative
ease in experimental manipulation and the accumulation of appropriate
collections. Polymorphisms detected by RAPDs is the basis for two projects that
may provide molecular markers for the detection of linkage with color,
morphology, nutritional requirement and mating type loci. The result of these
experiments will also provide information to construct a physical map of the M.
vio lacum and other Ustilaginales. It could yield a map of the mitochondrial
genome and provide important information on the phylogenetic relatedness between
and among the fungi that infect dicot and monocot plants.