* 9723771
* RUI: Beta-Oxidative Biosynthesis of Bile Acids
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Dean Cuebas, Missouri State University
* Continuing grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2000
* USD 207,503.00

9723771 Cuebas The biosynthesis of bile acids from cholesterol is an important
process that occurs in liver cells of all vertebrates. The objective of this
research is to characterize the enzyme system(s) responsible for the(-oxidative
modifications of the steroid side chain in the formation of bile acids in
several lower vertebrate species and in the rat. Since the end-products of
cholesterol degradation are bile acids, this project will improve our
understanding of the processes by which cholesterol is eliminated from
organisms. There is a lack of information regarding the enzymes in peroxisomes
that catalyze these conversions and the stereochemical mechanisms by which these
enzyme reactions proceed. This project will involve the chemical synthesis of
the Coenzyme A derivatives of putative sterol intermediates during bile acid
biosynthesis as well as the purification and characterization of the enzymes
found to catalyze these transformations. Spectrophotometry, HPLC, NMR, and GC/MS
will be used to determine the kinetic constants, substrate specificities, and
the stereochemistries of these reactions. Enzymes will be purified from liver
tissue using conventional chromatography and FPLC. Since peroxisomes harbor two
different multifunctional proteins that catalyze the formation of (-hydroxyacyl-
CoA intermediates with opposite stereochemistries, it will be of significance to
determine which of these multifunctional proteins is necessary and/or sufficient
for bile acid biosynthesis. This biosynthetic pathway will be studied in liver
obtained from toad, bullfrog, lizard, alligator, and the rat. Since the extent
of side chain modification in primary bile acids appears to be correlated to the
degree of evolutionary development of the particular class of vertebrate, these
studies will uncover species differences in(-oxidative enzyme systems
responsible for bile acid biosynthesis and thereby provide valuable information
in tracing evolutionary relationships between species. To aid in the detection o
f auxiliary bile acid biosynthetic pathways, site-directed irreversible
inhibitors will be synthesized that specifically inhibit enzymes catalyzing the
peroxisomal oxidase and thiolase steps. Results from this project will not only
make a significant contribution to our present knowledge of bile acid
biosynthesis in mammals, but they will also uncover the enzymology behind the
evolutionary diversity of bile acids produced by various species of vertebrates
throughout the animal kingdom. The conversion of cholesterol to bile acids is an
important process that occurs in liver cells of all vertebrates. The bile acids
are detergents that are secreted into the digestive tract and are essential for
the digestion of fatty materials that are consumed in the diet. In addition, the
fecal excretion of bile acids is the primary mechanism by which organisms can
eliminate cholesterol from their body. The objective of this project is to
investigate the enzymatic mechanisms that have evolved for the conversion of
cholesterol to bile acids in mammals, reptiles, and various amphibians and
thereby provide valuable information concerning cholesterol metabolism in
various species. Results from this project will not only make a significant
contribution to our present knowledge of bile acid biosynthesis in mammals, but
they will also uncover the details behind the evolutionary diversity of bile
acids produced by various species of vertebrates throughout the animal kingdom.