* 9723306
* Extracellular Fluid Volume Homeostasis in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2002
* Kenneth Olson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2002
* USD 258,000.00

As animals evolved, the extracellular fluids became compartmentalized into the
intravascular (blood) and interstitial (between the cells) fluids. Blood
pressure regulation and cardiovascular function is intimately dependent upon
blood volume and, because fluids can move between blood and interstitial
compartments, the interstitial fluid volume also influences blood pressure. Due
to technical problems, it is impossible to experimentally manipulate these
fluids in terrestrial vertebrates without drugs or surgery. The proposed
research will employ a different animal model, the rainbow trout, to examine the
interrelationships between fluid volumes and cardiovascular function. Trout are
ideal models for these studies because they naturally live in a variety of
environments that are either dehydrating or hydrating, and salt loading or salt
depleting. Fluid compartments will also me measured in other, more primitive
fish such as the hagfish and shark. While these fish do not tolerate
manipulation of the environment as well as trout, they provide an evolutionary
window into the phylogenetic origin of the relationships between fluid balance
and the vertebrate cardiovascular system and the factors that shaped their
development. In the proposed research, the primary fluid compartments, blood,
interstitial, and intracellular, will be examined in hagfish and sharks and in
rainbow trout living in controlled environments in which water, salt, and
osmotic load are independently controlled. These environments include
freshwater, saltwater, freshwater plus high salt diet, and high-osmolarity salt-
free water. In addition, the nature of a unique fluid compartment, the secondary
circulation, will be examined. This circulation, possibly the evolutionary
prototype of the mammalian lymphatic system, has not been accurately measured in
any fish. Fluid compartments will be measured by indicator dilution methods
using specific radiolabelled markers. Once the relationships between fluid
compartments and water and salt balance have been established, the role of
pressure-volume regulatory systems, the renin angiotensin system, sympathetic
nervous system, antidiuretic hormones (arginine vasotocin), and natriuretic
peptides will be examined in the context of altered water and salt balance.
These experiments will provide the first complete quantitative description of
fluid compartments in any fish. They are also the first experiments, in any
vertebrate, to independently examine how salt and water balance are regulated
and how these parameters are integrated into cardiovascular function. These
studies are not possible with other animal or non-animal models. The information
obtained from the project is crucial in all areas of cardiovascular, renal and
endocrine physiology and it is applicable to all vertebrates, including mammals.
The results will also be of practical benefit by providing base-line information
for development of less stressful environments for fish culture.