* 9723711
* Control of Actin Ring Formation During Cell Division in     Aspergillus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Steven Harris, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2001
* USD 297,997.00

9723711 Harris In preparation for cytokinesis, both animal and fungal cells
assemble a cortical actin ring. The formation of this ring appears to be
temporally and spatially controlled by signals from mitotic nuclei. Current
models suggest that the actin ring functions via two possible mechanisms to
effect cytokinesis. In animals and certain fungi, the actin ring contracts,
splitting cells in two. In other fungi, the ring defines a region where a cell
plate forms to divide the cell. Regardless of mechanism used, the actin ring is
essential for cytokinesis. Previous studies employing various biochemical and
genetic approaches have identified numerous proteins necessary for the formation
and/or function of the actin ring. However, it is not at all clear how these
proteins function in an integrated manner to control cytokinesis. Moreover, it
has become increasingly evident that a complete inventory of actin ring proteins
has not been attained. The overall objective of Dr. Harris' research program is
to use the power of genetics to identify and characterize additional proteins
required for the formation and function of the actin ring, and thereby elucidate
the molecular mechanisms underlying cytokinesis in the genetically tractable
filamentous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans. This fungus undergoes cytokinesis by
forming crosswalls known as septa. Septum formation in A. nidulans is temporally
and spatially coordinated with mitosis, and requires the formation of a
contractile actin ring. Genetic screens have resulted in the identification and
characterization of gene products which act at different steps to control
septation in A. nidulans. For example, the analysis of sepB mutants has revealed
the existence of a checkpoint which prevents septum formation in the presence of
DNA damage. In contrast, the characterization of sepA mutants has led to the
identification of an evolutionarily conserved protein that may control the
assembly of the actin ring. The objective of this research project is to address
the hypothesis that the sepA gene product plays an essential role in septum
formation by promoting the formation of the contractile actin ring.
Specifically, Dr. Harris will use indirect immunofluorescence to determine if
SepA localizes to the incipient division site. In addition, he will establish
the timing of SepA localization relative to mitosis and actin ring formation. He
also plans to employ a battery of genetic and biochemical approaches to identify
proteins that interact with SepA. In particular, he will test predictions that
SepA function requires interactions with the actin-associated protein profilin
and with the septins. The fascinating process of cytokinesis, in which a living
cell literally separates itself into two progeny cells, underpins the nature of
life. This research project should lead to a better understanding of the general
mechanisms underlying cytokinesis. The use of a filamentous fungus as the model
organism in this study is a particularly good choice because of the pronounced
societal impact of fungi. On the one hand, some fungi cause diseases; on the
other hand, they produce useful natural products such as antibiotics and
commercially important enzymes, and can be genetically engineered to produce
non-fungal proteins of commercial interest. Thus, an increased understanding of
how septum formation permits filamentous fungi to grow and reproduce can lead to
ways of combating fungal infections of plants, animals, and humans, as well as
allowing fungi to be used more efficiently as industrial biocatalysts for the
production of commercially important enzymes and other proteins. ***