* 9723576
* Characterization of a Limb Autotomy Factor, LAFpro, that    Suspends Molting in Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Donald Mykles, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2000
* USD 142,500.00

9723576 Mykles Crabs and lobsters grow by periodically shedding the hard
exoskeleton. This process, called molting, increases interior space for tissue
growth. Successful molting requires the precise coordination of organ systems.
In preparation for molting, the first two layers of the new exoskeleton are
formed and the innermost layers of the old exoskeleton are broken down and
resorbed, while lost walking legs are regenerated. Molting is regulated by
hormones produced by endocrine organs located in the eyestalks and body.
Previous studies, however, indicate that control of molting is more complex. If
a regenerating walking leg is removed before the animal molts, molting is
delayed 2-3 weeks, which allows time for the lost tissue to be regenerated. The
PI has recently shown that the regenerating tissue produces a factor, termed
limb autotomy factor-proecdysis (LAFpro) that suspends molting in land crabs.
The primary goal of this project is to purify and characterize LAFpro. The
proposal consists of two specific aims: (1) establish the mechanism by which
molting is suspended and (2) isolate and characterize putative LAFpro from
regenerating tissues. This research has broad application to understanding the
control of growth in arthropods as a whole. Suspension of molting by tissue
regeneration is not unique to crustaceans. Regeneration also delays molting in a
variety of insects. This suggests a common mechanism. If so, the PI hopes to
develop entirely new strategies for controlling insect pests.