* 9723725
* Regulation of Manganese Peroxidase Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,12/31/2002
* Michael Gold, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2002
* USD 315,000.00

Gold 9723725 The lignin degradative system (LDS) of the white-rot
basidiomycetous fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium degrades the plant cell wall
polymer, lignin, and a wide range of aromatic pollutants. The major
extracellular components of this nonspecific oxidative system are two heme-
containing peroxidases, manganese peroxidase (MnP) and lignin peroxidase (LiP).
The LDS is expressed during secondary metabolic growth, the onset of which is
triggered by the depletion of nutrient nitrogen. MnP expression also is
regulated at the level of gene transcription by Mn ion, by heat shock, and by
oxidative stress. The primary goal of this project is to elucidate these
specific mechanisms of mnp gene transcription at the molecular level. New mnp
promoter-gene reporter constructs will be used to examine the regulation of
individual mnp genes by nitrogen, Mn, and heat shock. The cis-acting promoter
sequences involved in mnp regulation using site-directed mutagenesis of putative
metal response elements, promoter deletion analysis, and synthetic promoter
elements will be identified. The putative Mn-responsive transcription factor
will be identified and purified, and genes encoding the Mn-responsive and heat
shock transcription factors will be cloned. Finally, the post-transcriptional
requirements for MnP synthesis will be examined further. Lignin is the second
most abundant natural polymer, constituting 15-30% of woody plant cell walls,
and forming a matrix that surrounds the cellulose in wood. Thus, the degradation
of lignin is a significant step in the global carbon cycle. Furthermore, lignin
presents a major obstacle to the industrial utilization of cellulose. White-rot
fungi are the only organisms which can completely degrade lignin to carbon
dioxide and water. The best studied of these fungi, Phanerochaete chrysosporium,
efficiently degrades lignin and a wide range of environmental pollutants. P.
chrysosporium and other lignin-degrading fungi secrete the enzyme manganese
peroxidase (Mn P). This enzyme oxidizes manganese ion (Mn) which, in turn,
depolymerizes lignin. The production of MnP is regulated at the level of the
gene by the depletion of nutrient nitrogen, by the availability of Mn, and by
temperature and chemical stresses. The goal of this research is to understand,
at the molecular level, the mechanisms by which each of these factors control
MnP production. This is the first example of Mn regulation of gene expression to
be studied at the molecular level.