* 9723569
* RUI: Understanding Repertoire Diversification in a          Nonstandard Model
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Richard Goldsby, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1999
* USD 184,500.00

9723569 Goldsby This project is studying the development of the primary antibody
repertoire in cattle. In cattle the ileal Peyer's patch (IPP), a gut associated
lymphoid tissue, is a major site of B cell diversification. A process of
targeted, developmentally regulated somatic point mutation is responsible for
the generation of diversity in the IPP. However, this is not the sole site or
mechanisms for diversification in cattle, since the spleen has been shown to be
a site of light chain diversification during fetal development. Also, this
investigator has data suggesting that heavy chain V gene rearrangement (but not
light chain) occurs in the bone marrow. Thus the following hypothesis is
proposed for the development of B cells in cattle : 1)In the fetal bone marrow
rearrangement of heavy but not light chain occurs; 2)Cells with rearranged heavy
chain genes migrate to the spleen where light chains rearrange; 3)Peyer's patch
follicles are seeded with B cells from a pool that has undergone diversification
in the fetal spleen. Experiments will be done to test this hypothesis. These
results will provide information on how antibody diversification develops in
cattle, and will indicate species differences in the generation of diversity.
This grant is from a RUI college, and undergraduate students will be involved in
this research. %%% Although all higher vertebrates have similar immune systems
consisting of antibodies produced by B cells and T cells which modulate the
immune response, the mechanism by which organisms generate antibodies with
different specificities is not the same in all species. The experiments in this
project will provide information on the development of diverse antibodies in
cattle. ***