* 9723216
* Post-Transcriptional Regulation of Cholinergic Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Toshihiro Kitamoto, Beckman Research Institute City of Hope
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 02/28/2001
* USD 405,000.00

IBN-9723216 Post-transcriptional regulation of the Drosophila cholinergic genes
PI: Toshihiro Kitamoto Neurons use a variety of molecules as neurotransmitters
to communicate with their target cells. Specification of particular
neurotransmitter phenotypes (enzymes required for transmitter synthesis and
release) is a fundamental process for orderly construction and operation of
neural circuits, and requires coordinated expression of a particular set of
neurotransmitter-specific genes. The objective of this proposed research is to
understand the regulatory mechanism for two cholinergic neuron-specific genes,
encoding choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) for biosynthesis of acetylcholine and
vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) for packaging acetylcholine into
synaptic vesicles. It has recently been demonstrated that the ChAT and VAChT
genes are organized into a "cholinergic" locus where the latter gene is nested
within the former. This unique organization of the cholinergic locus, conserved
among distantly related species, suggests that novel post-transcriptional
mechanisms are involved in coordinated regulation of these two genes. The
project will thus specifically focus on mRNA processing and translation
mechanisms of the ChAT and VAChT genes using Drosophila melanogaster as a model
organism. First, transgenic animals that carry appropriate reporter genes will
be created using P-element mediated transformation technology available for
Drosophila. The mechanisms for ChAT and VAChT production will be investigated by
qualitative and quantitative analyses of reporter gene expression in the nervous
system of the transformants. Second, Drosophila VAChT mutants will be isolated
and their phenotypes will be carefully characterized. VAChT mutants together
with already available ChAT mutants will be used to examine the effects of
altered acetylcholine metabolism on regulation of the cholinergic genes. The
proposed research using molecu lar and classical genetics will provide a clearer
picture of interesting new mechanisms regulating coordinated expression of the
two cholinergic genes.