* 9723351
* RUI:  Regulation of Myosin Heavy Chain IIB Expression:  An  Integrative Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Steven Swoap, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 237,930.00

Muscles are designed to perform many different functions within the body.
Different muscle types perform each of these different functions. There are
certain key characteristics within a muscle that makes it better suited to
perform a particular function. For example, those muscle groups involved with
sprinting, or any high power activity, have a typical "fast muscle" phenotype.
That is, these muscles can move limbs extremely fast and can generate energy for
that movement quickly. However, these fast muscles fatigue very quickly. Muscles
that are designed for posture or endurance exhibit a typical "slow muscle"
phenotype. These slow muscles produce much less power than fast muscles, but can
remain active for much longer than fast muscles. Thus, muscles show an inverse
relationship between power production and fatigue. Muscles have the remarkable
ability to change fiber type phenotype. For example, a person training to become
an endurance runner will significantly increase his/her number of slow muscle
cells within locomotor muscles. This ability to adapt allows organisms to better
handle a new environment. The studies to be performed during the present
proposal address the fundamental mechanisms that dictate muscle fiber type
diversity in animals. Specifically, the genetic component of muscle fiber type
adaptation, i.e. DNA, will be studied herein.