* 9723063
* Ecological Significance of Heat Shock Proteins as Molecular Chaperones: Temperature Dependence of HSP Biochemical       Function in MArine Fish
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 219,541.00

Hofmann 9723063 This project will examine the ecological significance of heat
shock proteins (hsps) in marine fish. The hsps are a family of highly-
evolutionarily conserved proteins that are expressed in cells in response to
stressful conditions such heat stress or exposure to chemicals. Physiologically,
the hsps are an emergency response to stress but, they are also present in cells
to perform normal cellular duties such as folding newly synthesized proteins. At
the basic biochemical level, the function of the hsps is very well described and
the PI's know how the hsps perform their protein folding tasks. However, very
little is known about how these proteins have evolved in organisms that are
adapted to different temperatures and, whether there are differences in the hsp
protein folding abilities at ecologically relevant temperatures. Since all
organisms must by necessity fold proteins, hsps in the natural world, fold
proteins over a wide range of temperatures; literally that over which life
occurs. This range is estimated to be approximately 115 C, from the -2 C
encountered by Antarctic fish to 1 1 3 C for hot springs bacteria. The research
will use biochemical techniques to address an ecological and evolutionary
question: is there diversity of function in the highly evolutionarily conserved
hsps in marine fish adapted to different temperatures?