* 9723071
* Characterization of the Yeast Cell Polarity Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Douglas Johnson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1998
* USD 60,400.00

9723071 Johnson The long-term objective of this project is to understand the
mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis during the eukaryotic cell cycle.
The goal of this proposal is to decipher the molecular mechanisms that control
the cell polarity process in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Polarized
growth in response to different signals during the yeast cell cycle can result
in the generation of several different morphological structures, such as buds,
mating projections, and pseudohyphae. We have previously characterized two
protein components of the cell polarity apparatus in yeast: the Ras-related
GTPase Cdc42p and it guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Cdc24p. These
components are integral parts of a signal-transduction pathway that leads to the
generation of cell polarity during the cell cycle. These components have
conserved counterparts in other eukaryotes, suggesting that common signal-
transduction mechanism controlling cell polarity may exist. In addition, several
other GTPase molecular switches have been implicated in the process, but it is
unclear what signals control the activation and de-activation of these switches.
The specific aims of this proposal are directed at understanding the molecular
interactions between the Cdc42p GTPase and the Cdc24p GEF. The questions that
will be asked are: 1, do Cdc24p and the Ste20p and Cla4p protein kinases,
downstream effectors of Cdc42p, interact with Cdc42p through the same Cdc42p
effector domain?; and 2, how is the cellular localization of Cdc24p and Cdc42p
regulated? To study these interactions and to further elucidate the function(s)
of these proteins in controlling cell polarity, genetic and cell biological
approaches, including the yeast two-hybrid protein assay, GST fusion protein co-
precipitation, and genetic characterization of mutant phenotypes, will be used.
The answers to these questions will not only be relevant to the basic
understanding of signal transduction mechanism in cell biology, but also t o the
understanding of the cellular morphogenesis process in yeast and other
eukaryotes. The yeast cell, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has long been used as a
model for eukaryotic cell functions because of its simplicity. Like most
eukaryotic cells, the yeast cell "knows" how to distinguish one "end" of its
(essentially spherical) self from another. This "polarity" regulation is
critical for the yeast life cycle, but is also in a more general sense critical
for the functions of most other eukaryotic cell types. This proposal addresses
the internal signaling mechanisms whereby the yeast cell controls its own
morphogenesis during processes such as mating and budding (cell division). It is
already known that a series of proteins interact with one another in a complex
cascade of catalytic events that are involved in this process. This project will
extend our knowledge of this process by filling in important details about how
this process works. ***