* 9723837
* RUI:  Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of the TraM Protein, an Inhibitory Component of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens    Quorum-Sensor
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* William Fuqua, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 158,631.00

Fuqua 9723837 Bacteria monitor and respond rapidly to changes in the physical
and chemical character of their environment. It is now clear that many bacteria
also have evolved mechanisms by which they measure their own population growth,
a phenomenon generally described as quorum sensing. A wide range of bacteria,
often pathogens or symbionts of animals or plants, monitor cell density by
production and perception of a diffusible bacterial pheromone, an acylated
homoserine lactone called an autoinducer (AI). The plant pathogen Agrobacterium
tumefaciens regulates conjugal transfer of its primary virulence factor, the Ti
(tumor-inducing) plasmid, in response to such an acylated homoserine lactone
cell density signal. This project is directed towards understanding the
mechanism of AI-mediated quorum sensing in A. tumefaciens, with the long term
aim of applying this knowledge towards disrupting or manipulating cell density-
dependent processes in the diverse and rapidly expanding collection of bacteria
that employ autoinducers and quorum sensing. At high cell densities A.
tumefaciens conjugally transfer the Ti plasmid to recipient agrobacteria. Cell
density-dependence of Ti plasmid conjugation is mediated by a LuxI-LuxR type
quorum-sensor and the Agrobacterium autoinducer (AAI),
N-3-oxo(octanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone. The A. tumefaciens quorum-sensor
consists of the AAI synthase TraI and the AAI-responsive transcriptional
activator of Ti plasmid conjugal transfer (tra) genes, TraR. However, in
contrast to the V. fischeri system, A. tumefaciens cell density responsiveness
requires an additional regulatory protein called TraM. Tram is an integral
component of the A. tumefaciens quorum sensor and strains carrying null
mutations in tram conjugate irrespective of donor density. Tram inhibits
transcriptional activation of TraR-dependent target genes. Preliminary genetic
evidence suggests that Tram may interfere with the ability of TraR to interact
with AAI, the tra gene target promoters, or both. The go al of this research is
to understand the role of TraM as a component of the A. tumefaciens quorum
sensor-specifically how TraM inhibits activation of TraR-dependent target genes.
Using complementary genetic and biochemical approaches it will be determined
whether (i) TraM occludes tra promoters from TraR, (ii) degrades and/or
sequesters AAI, or (iii) physically associates with TraR thereby limiting its
activity. A related area that is being investigated is the regulation of traM
expression, and the importance of this regulation for control of Ti plasmid
conjugal transfer. In dissecting the TraM mechanism of action, insights will be
gained into the function of TraR itself, and by extension other LuxR-type
proteins. Understanding the inhibitory function of TraM may provide models for
modulating the activity of LuxR-type proteins in general. In a broader sense,
this study will contribute to the understanding of multicellular behavior in
prokaryotic organisms as well as the areas of signal transduction and
transciptional regulation..