* 9723850
* Conference: XIV International Glycoconjugate Symposium to beheld September 7 - 12, 1997 in Zurich, Switzerland
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Pamela Stanley, Society for Complex Carbohydrates
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1998
* USD 4,000.00

9723850 Stanley The XIV International Symposium on Glycoconjugates will be held
in Zurich, Switzerland, September 7-12, 1997. The Symposium, which is sponsored
by the International Glycoconjugate Organization, is the major international
meeting of scientists in glycoconjugate research. In order for junior scientists
to attend and present their data and further exchange on the international
level, it is necessary to obtain travel funds for them. A review of submitted
requests by a panel consisting of members of the Board of Directors of the
Society of Glycobiology will be used to rank the applicants. This ranking will
be based on individual accomplishments and quality and impact of the research to
be presented at the meeting. Scientific progress proceeds as the result of
exchange of ideas among investigators at conferences. It is important that
junior scientists be exposed to national and international conferences where the
exchange of ideas will have great impact on their career development. This award
will supply funds to support the travel of junior scientists to an international
conference. The award of funds to this conference is particularly appropriate
because the Society of Glycobiology has chosen to make the awards to junior
investigators in a competition. This will not only raise the quality of the work
presented and supported by the travel award but it will assure that the awards
will go to junior investigators who are the most competitive within their field
and who will later become prominent scientists. ***