* 9723565
* Heme Regulation of the DAN1 gene in S. cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Charles Lowry, Albany Medical College of Union University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 118,000.00

9723565 Lowry The adaptation to the lack of oxygen from a regulatory point of
view is the inverse of the adaptation to the presence of oxygen. The family of
anaerobic genes is composed of at least three subsets, two of which are
negatively regulated by heme, and another which is negatively regulated by
unsaturated fatty acid (both heme and UFA can only be synthesized in the
presence of oxygen). This project will focus on the DAN1 anaerobic gene in yeast
which is regulated in parallel with the members of a fairly well studied
anaerobic regulon known as the hypoxic genes. DAN1 and the members of hypoxic
regulon are all negatively regulated by heme, which serves as a signal for the
presence of oxygen in yeast. Preliminary evidence indicates that regulation of
DAN1 is governed by a different set of proteins than those which control the
hypoxic genes. In particular the ROX1 repressor, which controls the hypoxic
genes is not involved in DAN1 regulation. In this project three factors, encoded
by genes designated ROX7, ROX8, and ROX9, which have been identified genetically
as regulators of DAN1 will be cloned and characterized. The objective will be to
discover the mechanism by which heme regulates DAN1. It is apparent that there
are at least three different pathways sensitive to heme regulation. Two are well
known, involving the regulators HAP1 and HAP2/3/4. Two more have been inferred
recently, one which is involved (along with HAP1 ) in heme induction of ROX1,
and another which regulates DAN1. A significant objective of this project will
be to place DAN1 in the context of the three pathways, with a particular
emphasis on the mechanism(s) by which heme is sensed at the molecular level. The
mechanism of regulation of DAN1 will be studied in terms of the interactions of
the identified regulatory factors with each other and with the regulatory sites
which have been identified in the regulatory region of DANI. The limited
objective of this project is to get a broad outline of the mechanism with a view
to deeper inquiry in the future. %%% This project will focus on the DAN1
anaerobic gene in yeast, which is negatively regulated by heme in parallel with
a fairly well studied family of anaeroic genes known as the hypoxic genes. Heme
functions as a ligand in many different contexts in biology, both catalytically
and also as a regulator. The mechanism of regulation of DAN1 will be studied in
terms of the interactions of the identified regulatory factors with each other
and with the regulatory region of DAN1. The limited objective of this project is
to get a broad outline of the regulatory mechanism with a view to deeper inquiry
in the future. ***