* 9723990
* Non-catalytic Neurotrophin Receptor Expression and Function During Embryonic Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Esther Wheeler, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2002
* USD 156,602.00

IBN-9723990 PI: WHEELER The developing nervous system is dependent on many
regulatory signals to insure that the different parts of the body will become
well integrated with the central nervous system. Neurons that develop in the
central nervous system, or in its associated ganglia in the peripheral nervous
system, must send out long processes, called axons, that grow into a "target
tissue" such as the face, hand or nasal passages. The growth of axons into
target tissues is dependent on certain molecular signals that serve as guidance
cues. The molecular signals that will be studied in this project, called
neurotrophins, foster the growth and survival of growing neurons. Previous
research suggests that the availability of neurotrophins, which are made by
target tissues, is a factor that determines whether subpopulations of developing
neurons survive, and also whether they establish appropriate attachments to
their target tissues. The production of neurotrophins by target tissues is
limited in both time and quantity, and their concentration is believed to
directly influence the successful innervation of designated targets. Dr. Wheeler
and her colleagues will investigate the time of expression and the levels of a
class of receptor molecules (the "non-catalytic" neurotrophin receptors) that
potentially bind and sequester the neurotrophins to prevent axons from becoming
misdirected and establishing connections with inappropriate targets. The
researchers will also test whether the ability of these receptors to sequester
neurotrophins promotes the death of certain neuron populations, using the
neurons that innervate the face and nasal passages of rodents as their test
system. The results of this research will provide important insights into the
causes and consequences of precise control of neurotrophin availability during
development, when axons are growing into their target tissues.