* 9723450
* Water Homeostasis in Dictyostelium Discoideum
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Theodore Steck, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9723450 Steck All cells carefully control their water balance to avoid undue
swelling and shrinking. While a variety of mechanisms have been implicated, we
lack an integrated view of how cytosolic volume is sensed and regulated in
eukaryotic cells. An investigation of the molecular basis for water homeostasis
in the soil amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, is therefore proposed. Of
particular interest is the contractile vacuole, a complex organelle which
gathers cytosolic water and excretes it from the cell. Although conspicuous to
cytologists for the past two centuries, this intracellular nephron is still
enigmatic. Dictyostelium discoideum is an ideal organism in which to pursue
contractile vacuole complex structure and function. While the full scope of this
undertaking is vast, the initial pathway is clear and feasible. A genetic
approach has been initiated. Random genes in Dictyostelium were disrupted and
vector tags bearing selectable markers inserted into the genome. Mutant strains
defective in cell volume homeostasis were selected by visually screening for a
swelling phenotype. The marked genes from these lines were rescued as bacterial
colonies. The genomic DNA for one such gene, dosA, has been cloned and
determination of its sequence is nearly complete. This ~3 kbp open reading frame
encodes a putative large, water-soluble protein with multiple sites for
potential phosphorylation and interprotein associations zippered by homopolymer
stretches. It is now proposed to analyze dosA in detail. The gene copy number
will be determined, and the possibility of related forms in a family will be
explored. The presence of corresponding genes in other organisms will be
examined. The upstream region will be analyzed and compared to other promoter
sequences. Putative protein structural features will be predicted by computer
analysis. Knock-out mutants (dosA-) will be created and their phenotype explored
in detail. Cells will be transformed with dosA constructs tagged at either en d
with antigens or GFP protein and the subcellular distribution of the expressed
protein will be analyzed by fluorescence microscopy. In addition, antibodies to
the epitope tags will be used to search for associated proteins by co-
immunoprecipitation. Finally, the structural basis for the function of dosA will
be dissected using in vitro mutagenesis and cellular transformation. The
relationship of dosA to other water homeostasis genes will be explored as they
become identified. Lay abstract: For simple organisms such as protozoa and slime
molds (e.g., Dictyostelium discoideum), the maintenance of the proper water
balance inside the cell is critical. In severely hypotonic environments (e.g.,
the soil after a heavy rain), these organisms must be able to pump out the
excess water that has entered via passive diffusion across the cell membrane.
The specialized organelle that performs this function is known as the
"contractile vacuole." Although the role of the cotnractile vacuole and its
morphology as determined by microscopy has been known for a long time, it is one
of the last subcellular organelles whose mechanism of function remains unknown.
This project employs a genetic approach to study the mechanism of contractile
vacuole function and water homeostasis in the model organism, Dictyostelium
discoideum. It is likely that a better understanding of how water balance is
maintained in simple organisms such as D. discoideum will help us understand how
cells of higher organisms, including man, regulate water balance and cell
volume. ***