* 9723899
* Signaling Pathways in Insect Immunity: The Role of 18-Wheeler
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Elizabeth Eldon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Randolph Addison
* 06/30/2001
* USD 340,908.00

9723899 Eldon The immune response is protection from invasion by a foreign
organism. Vertebrate and invertebrate immunity involve the rapid production of
proteins which inactivate the invader. The presence of the invader is detected
usually by a receptor, and a signaling mechanism is required to transmit that
information. Cells of the immune system release cytokines or interleukins in
response to their activation. The interleukin receptor when activated induces a
signal transduction cascade which activates a family of transcription factors
known as NF-kB, which promote the synthesis of the proteins required for the
immune response. The interleukin R-NfkB pathway has been found in mammals as
well as in Drosophila development and immunity. The research in this grant will
study the role of the IL-R-NFkB signal transduction cascade in Drosophila
immunity by looking at the interactions among 18-Wheeler and Toll receptors and
the NfkB transcriptions factors. The 18 Wheeler receptors affects the synthesis
of antimicrobial peptides and has sequence similarity with the interleukin
receptor and the Toll receptor of Drosophila. Attacin is the antimicrobial gene
the transcription of which is dramatically reduced in 18 Wheeler mutants, so the
attacin gene will be cloned and the regions essential for its regulation will be
identified. Regions in the cytoplasmic domain be identified of the 18 Wheeler
receptor that are critical for signaling will be indentified, and the relation
of 18 Wheeler activity to the nuclear import of NfkB transcription factors will
also be examined. This research will provide information about the immune system
of insects and the immune response. %%% The immune response is an essential
feature of all living organisms. Similarities exist in the response of many
organisms to infection. This research will use the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanagaster, to study how infection by bacteria results in the production of
proteins that inactivate foreign deleterious substances. ***