* 9723952
* Characterization of the Salicylic Acid Signal Transduction  Pathway in Plant Defense Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Daniel Klessig, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 04/30/2001
* USD 600,000.00

Klessig 9723952 Characterization of the Salicylic Acid Signal Transduction
Pathway in Plant Defense Responses An ever increasing body of evidence indicates
that salicylic acid (SA) is an important endogenous signal required for
activation and/or potentiation of defense responses in both local and systemic
resistance. This research will continue studies to identify, clone, and
characterize the components of the SA signal transduction pathway(s) which lead
to activation of defense responses, in particular pathogenesis-related (PR) gene
expression. Two major objectives will continue to be pursued: i)
characterization of Arabidopsis mutants with altered SA signal transduction and
ii) characterization of PR-2d promoter binding proteins potentially involved in
SA responsiveness. A combination of genetic, molecular, and biochemical
approaches are being utilized in Arabidopsis and Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco).
Genetic approaches include isolation and characterization of Arabidopsis mutants
and construction of transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco plants to identify and
characterize cis- and trans-acting components of the SA/defense signaling
pathway(s). Molecular approaches include cloning, DNA sequencing, Southern,
northern, and western blotting, yeast one- and two-hybrid screening, site-
directed mutagenesis, and production of recombinant proteins. Protein
purification, enzyme analysis, and characterization of protein-DNA or protein-
protein interactions represent some of' the biochemical tools that are being
used to further characterize potential pathway components. Both viral (tobacco
mosaic virus TMV and turnip crinkle virus TCV ) and bacterial (Pseudomonas
syringae pv tomato, maculicola, or tabaci) pathogens are being used to activate
the defense pathway(s) and study its components. A key difference between
resistant and susceptible plants is the timely recognition of the invading
pathogen and the rapid and effective activation of host defenses. Thus, one of
the major aims of stu dying plant disease resistance is to identify and
characterize plant components which are crucial for the signal transduction
processes leading to activation of these host defenses. Identification and
characterization of these components are essential to our understanding of the
mechanisms of disease resistance. Furthermore, their manipulation through
genetic and molecular approaches offers the exciting prospect of enhancing plant
disease resistance.