* 9723817
* RUI:  Social Regulation of Reproductive Behavior and        Neuroendocrine Processes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Matthew Grober, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 218,215.00

PI: Grober, M. IBN-9723817 The long term goal of this research is to understand
social regulation of reproductive function. In the bluehead wrasse, social
interactions regulate the expression of a wide range of reproductive options,
specifically the transformation of both females and males into a 'supermale'
reproductive morph; i.e., gender change. This unique fish provides a model
system for understanding social regulation of reproductive neuroendocrinology
for several reasons: 1) the precise timing of reproductive transitions can be
experimentally controlled, 2) behavioral changes occur within minutes of the
social trigger and total gender reversal can be completed in eight days, 3)
gender transitions result in permanent changes in reproductive behavior, and 4)
these differences in behavior result from and/or cause permanent changes in the
brain and endocrine system. To approach our long term goal, one central
hypothesis will be addressed: Changes in social status induce changes in
forebrain Arginine Vasotocin (AVT) centers and gonadal hormone levels, which in
turn generate changes in the social and reproductive behaviors that are a
necessary component of gender change. This project will focus on AVT because
brain centers that produce this peptide hormone exhibit several key
characteristics: 1) in many vertebrate species, males and females show dramatic
differences in these cells, 2) these cells are sensitive to social modulation
and gonadal hormone levels, 3) this peptide regulates social and mating behavior
in association with levels of specific gonadal hormones, and 4) these cells
undergo rapid and directional changes during gender reversals in the bluehead
wrasse. This proposal addresses four specific aims: 1. The precise timing of
changes in gender-specific behavior must be determined. 2. These results will be
used as a timeline for examining the timing relationship between changes in
behavior and changes in the brain cells during gender change. 3. Determination
of changes in gonadal hormones that accompany gender change before, during and
after gender change. 4. Determination of the affects of gonadal hormones on
forebrain AVT cells. Recent changes in average testosterone levels in men and
infertility in women are associated with changes in our own social associations.
A general understanding of these processes may be gained from the investigation
of the social control of reproduction in a range of vertebrates; the bluehead
wrasse is a good model system for such studies. This work will provide a
detailed picture of how social interactions regulate reproductive behavior,
neurobiology and endocrinology. As an RUI proposal, this project will foster the
participation of undergraduates in an integrative research program. Students
will learn to critically read scientific literature, generate hypotheses and
methods for testing these hypotheses, predict possible outcomes, and analyze /
discuss their results. In addition, students will get experience with state-of-
the-art technologies in biological sciences increasing the range of future
opportunities for these students, and their ability to succeed in these fields.
Our program caters to undergraduates with non-traditional backgrounds and the
goal of this project is to make these students competitive for openings in top
quality graduate and professional programs.