* 9723900
* The Developmental Biology of Fear:  Effects of Prenatal     Stress on Corticotropin-Releasing Factor (CRF)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Dale Birkle, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 122,949.00

Birkle 9723900 Developing organisms are sensitive to various influences;
exposure at critical times during development can permanently affect behavior
and metabolism. In humans, psychosocial stress in expectant mothers is
associated with developmental lag and behavioral disturbances in their children.
When pregnant rats are stressed, their offspring develop the prenatal stress
syndrome, characterized by abnormal behavioral and physiological responses to
fear-provoking stimuli. Offspring of stressed rats (i.e., prenatally stressed
rats) are less capable of coping with stress, and therefore respond to stressful
stimuli to a greater degree. The working hypothesis of this project is that
prenatal stress imprints the organizing brain during critical stages of prenatal
development, creating effects that remain with the animal and alter the input,
processing and behavioral responses to stimuli. This project will determine
mechanisms for these effects by investigating the imprint of prenatal stress on
the development of a neuropeptide system that could mediate the increased
fearfulness and increased stress response observed in the offspring of stressed
rats. This project will investigate neurochemical mechanisms for long-lasting
developmental effects of prenatal stress. The research will focus on a specific
neuropeptide in the brain, corticotropin releasing factor (CRF). CRF is a well-
established mediator of both physical and mental responses to stress. The
project will study changes in CRF in prenatally stressed offspring as compared
to offspring of unstressed dams. The proposed experiments will localize changes
in CRF content and CRF mRNA in specific regions and nuclei of the brain. These
experiments will evaluate age of offspring as major variable. A develop mental
change in CRF may be due to alterations in the regulation of CRF synthesis or
release. In other words, the effects of prenatal stress on CRF systems may be
secondary to changes in the responses to o ther hormones or neurotransmitters.
The proposed experiments will investigate the effects of stress and drugs on CRF
mRNA, CRF content and CRF release in prenatally stressed rats as compared to
normal rats. The results of the proposed experiments will contribute to our
understanding of the developmental neurobiology of the most basic emotion, fear.
These studies may also reveal linkages between maternal stress and the
production of offspring that are vulnerable to stress-related diseases and
mental illness.