* 9723482
* Molecular Genetics Analysis of Plant Circadian Rhythms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* C. Robertson McClung, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/2000
* USD 205,000.00

McClung 9723482 The molecular basis by which time information is generated in
plants will be investigated in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. The
molecular clock regulates overt rhythms in gas exchange, leaf movement and gene
expression. Arabidopsis mutants affected in clock function have been isolated
using the circadian rhythm in resistance/sensitivity to SO2 exposure that
results from the circadian rhythms in stomatal aperture and gas exchange. If 65
mutants, 3 flower significantly earlier than wild type and 30 flower
significantly later. Six of 21 tested also display a long hypocotyl phenotype.
Efforts will be concentrated on one mutant, Circadian Timing Defective 1 (ctd1),
which flowers later than wild type, but retains photoperiod sensitivity. The
mutation is inherited as recessive nuclear gene. Ctd1 shows a short period in
oscillations in mRNA abundance for four genes, the implication being that ctd1
affects a process common to expression of all four genes and thus defines a
component of a common oscillator or of a common input or output pathway. Ctd1
will be characterized both phenotypically and genetically followed by cloning
and characterization of the gene. Other ctd mutants with altered clock
properties will continue to be characterized and the search for new mutants will
also be continued. Rhythmic biological phenomena which recur at approximately 24
hour intervals in the absence of environmental time cues are termed circadian
rhythms. Their timing is regulated by an endogenous biological clock. Such
rhythms are ubiquitous and have been described in great detail at a
phenomenological level. Plants provide excellent systems for study of circadian
rhythmicity because plants are robustly rhythmic and exquisitely sensitive to
environmental input, probably reflecting both their sessile growth form and
their dependence on their immediate environment for nutrition and energy.
Increased understanding of plant responses to environmental input and to
endogenous temporal cues ha s agricultural importance, in particular, because
both environmental cues and the circadian clock contribute to the photoperiodic
decision to flower. A genetic and molecular biological analysis of mutants
identified by a novel screen will be done in Arabidopsis thaliana, the model
plant.