* 9723816
* Collaborative, Distributed Database for Brain Viewing
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Elde, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/2000
* USD 519,992.00

Distributed Collaborative Database for Brain Viewing This project will develop a
distributed database system and the collaborative viewing tools necessary to
overcome the difficulties inherent in imageintensive neurobiological research
that is accomplished by collaborations between geographically separated
researchers. Images containing morphological information either are, or have
recently become, a primary form of data in many fields of biological research.
For an individual laboratory, the iceberg metaphor is true. Published images are
the tip, whereas the ever- expanding collection of raw image files stored on
hard disks and removable media is the hidden body of the iceberg. Neuroscience
is particularly image intensive. From the perspective of a single laboratory,
managing the magnitude of the data collected in recent years is daunting.
Neuroscientists often wish to compare images of brains from experimental groups
with those from control animals. It is oftentimes a challenge to identify and
understand the spatial relations of a brain region identified by a staining or
labeling procedure. Furthermore, collaborations among researchers in the same or
different institutions are impeded by lack of image viewing tools. This goals of
this project present challenges for computer scientists, including the design
and development of: (i) additional file header information that represents
biological variables and is generated at the microscope during the capturing of
the image using speech-to-text technology; (ii) viewing tools needed for
collections of images that give perspective, while retaining the pristine data
captured from the digital camera; (iii) multipleresolution image-handling
techniques integrated with a DBMS to meet data intensive image requirements;
(iv) collaboration support for on-going research discussion centered around
images, across time and space boundaries; (v) techniques for integrating audio
and text within the same discussion. This research wi ll yield two kinds of
results: a) artifacts, software and databases, that will be demonstrated and
made available to others, and b) reports in the literature on studies of a
variety of research questions on the impact of these on neuroscientists'
activity.