* 9723685
* Purification and Cloning of Hepta-beta Glucoside Elicitor-  binding Protein(s) from Soybean
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Michael Hahn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9723685 Hahn The long-term goal of this research is to understand how plant
cells perceive and respond to extracellular signals. The model system used in
these studies is the induction of plant defense responses, specifically
phytoalexin accumulation, in soybean (Glycine max) by oligosaccharides
(elicitors) originating from the mycelial wall of a phytopathogenic oomycete,
Phytophthora sojae var. glycines. Considerable information has accrued about the
structure of an elicitor (a branched hepta-beta-glucoside) derived from mycelial
wall glucans and about the identity and regulation of elicitor-induced genes
encoding enzymes required for the biosynthesis of the phytoalexins. However,
little is known about the mechanisms by which plant cells perceive the elicitor,
or how that signal is transmitted to the cell nucleus to initiate changes in
gene expression. The research described in this proposal focuses on the first
step in the elicitor-stimulated signal transduction pathway, namely the
recognition of a hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor by a plasma membrane-localized
receptor. Recent studies strongly suggest that the 75 kDa polypeptide previously
thought to be a hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor-binding protein (EBP) is, in fact,
a non-specific glucan- binding protein. Preliminary studies using modified
extraction procedures and photo-affinity labeling have now identified a 90 kDa
polypeptide as a candidate EBP. The overall goal of the research proposed in
this application is to identify, purify, and clone EBPs from soybean root
membranes and to obtain evidence that the EBPs are physiological receptors for
the hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor. The first specific goal is to identify and
purify EBPs. The number and identity of polypeptides in solubilized membrane
protein preparations that have hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor-binding sites will
be established by photo- affinity labeling. The specificity of the photo-
affinity labeling will be rigorously established in l igand competition assays
with oligoglucosides structurally related to the hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor.
Polypeptides present in the membranes that bind to elicitor-inactive beta-
glucans will be eliminated first and then the EBPs will be purified by ligand-
affinity chromatography. Partial amino acid sequences will be determined for the
polypeptide(s) found to have a specific hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor-binding
site. The second specific goal is to obtain antibodies against the EBPs. These
antibodies will be used to localize EBPs in plant tissues and to isolate genes
encoding EBPs. The third specific goal is to clone cDNA(s) that encode EBPs.
Degenerate oligonucleotides will be synthesized and used to amplify, by PCR, a
double-stranded DNA probe from a heterogeneous population of single-stranded
cDNAs made from soybean root mRNA. This probe will be used to screen a lambda
gt10 library for cDNAs encoding EBPs. Alternatively, antibodies generated
against affinity-purified EBPs will be used to screen a cDNA expression library
for clones expressing EBP sequences. Any cDNA clones that are obtained will be
purified and sequenced. The ability of the protein(s) encoded by the cloned
cDNA(s) to bind the hepta- beta-glucoside elicitor specifically and with high
affinity will be determined. The cDNA clones and their derived sequences will be
used to identify possible structural and functional domains in the EBPs that
might relate to their role in signal transduction. The research outlined in this
renewal application will lay the groundwork for future work that will test
whether the EBPs function as physiological receptors and to identify and
characterize components that interact with EBPs and might function downstream of
the receptor in the cellular signaling pathway that results in the accumulation
of phytoalexins in elicited plant cells. The results of these studies should
provide additional insight into the mechanisms used by plant cells to perceive
and respond to extracellular signals. These studies should also increase our
understanding of the roles of carbohydrate signal molecules (oligosaccharins) in
the regulation of biological processes in diverse organisms. Plants perceive and
respond to pathogen attack. The perception of the infection of a pathogen is
mediated by the detection of specific compounds termed elicitors are associated
with the attack. Cell surface proteins detect the presence of these elicitors
which signal a variety of processes within the plant cell to marshal defense
reactions. Dr. Hahn has identified a soybean cell-surface protein that binds an
elicitor originating from the pathogen Phytophthora. The binding appears to be
highly specific to a single protein and has characteristics that make it a
candidate for the elicitor receptor. With this award Dr. Hahn will purify and
isolate the receptor protein. Data obtained from the purified protein will be
used to obtain a cDNA clone of the elicitor binding protein. The results of this
research will yield information on the mechanisms by which plants perceive
infection of pathogens. This information is extremely important in understanding
how plants maintain growth in a hostile world and it has potential practical
applications I improving and modifying a plants response to pathogen challenge.
***