* 9723676
* A Novel Mechanism of Calcium Efflux and Signal Decay in     Adrenal Chromaffin Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Allan Schneider, Albany Medical College of Union University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,676.00

9723676 Schneider Nerve cells communicate with each other by the release of
chemical messengers or neurotransmitters, which then act on neighboring cells to
complete transmission of the message. The release of the chemical neuro-
transmitter is regulated by a brief rise and decay in cell calcium in the nerve
endings or terminals. Whatever regulates the calcium levels in the nerve
terminals will in turn regulate the rate, amount and duration of release of the
chemical neurotransmitter. The objective of the present project is to clarify
the mechanisms regulating the calcium signals for neurotransmitter release using
a model nerve cell system known as adrenal chromaffin cells. Chromaffin cells
derive from the interior of the adrenal gland and like nerves, secrete their
neurohormones, adrenaline and noradrenaline, in response to a rise in cell
calcium. While the cellular mechanisms regulating the rise in cell calcium are
well understood, those regulating the buffering and decay of the calcium signal
for secretion are not well defined. Such mechanisms are important since they in
turn will regulate the strength and duration of communication between nerve
cells. The present project will test a novel mechanism for regulating calcium
signal decay which uses a sodium- dependent calcium transport protein to remove
calcium from the cell. Such transport proteins are known as sodium- calcium
exchangers and may exist in several different forms in different cellular
compartments. The role and nature of the sodium-calcium exchange proteins in
calcium signal decay will be determined. The project should result in an
improved understanding of the cellular mechanisms regulating the calcium signal
for neurotransmitter release and the identitiy of the calcium transport proteins
involved in cellular calcium clearance and signal decay.