* 9723124
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Regulation of Tropic  Growth in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Emmanuel Liscum, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9723124 Liscum Higher plant are dependent upon light not only as an energy
source to drive carbon fixation, but also as a modulator of growth and
development throughout their life cycle. Multiple wavelength regions of the
electromagnetic spectrum can be utilized as regulatory cues of various
developmental and morphological (photomorphogenic) responses through the action
of several photoreceptor systems and associated signal transduction cascades.
However, in most cases very little is known about the molecular basis for these
response pathways. Our long-term objective is to elucidate the cellular and
components of a plant light environment. Towards that end we have been using
Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh, as a model system to investigate genetic and
molecular basis of the phototropic response, or the differential growth response
of various plant organs in response to directional light cues, and have
identified mutants at several loci of that affect this response. Mutants in the
nph4 (non-phototropic hypocotyl 4) allele series affect not only phototropism
but also gravitropism and thigmotropism suggesting that NPH4 protein may be
involved in the regulation og differential growth. We propose to: (a)
Characterize a variety of physiological and developmental properties that
require changes in growth for phenotypic expression (e.g., tropisms, light-
dependent hypocotyl growth inhibition, inflorescence bolting) of the nph4
mutants in single mutant backgrounds, as well as in double and multiple mutant
combinations with other phototropic and photomorphogenic mutants. (b) Clone and
characterize the NPH4 gene. (c) Initiate studies to determine the biochemical
function(s) of the NPH4 protein. (d) Use a variety of genetic screens
(mutational, as well as biochemical) to identify additional components required
for phototropism. (e) Use the photobiological characters elucidated from mutant
analyses in our ongoing project to generate a genetic hierarchy for the
regulation of phototropism. The rese arch proposed here should provide a wealth
of information about a subset of the components of the phototropic signal-
response system that are also necessary for additional tropic responses of
higher plants. In addition, these studies may provide important insights into
the mechanisms of how plant achieve and regulate differential growth.