* 9723874
* Cell Interaction-Dependent Neural Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Paul Linser, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 08/31/1999
* USD 78,500.00

ABSTRACT 9723874 LINSER The central nervous system (CNS) is composed of two
major and distinct populations of cells: neurons and neuroglia. In many ways,
neurons and neuroglia are specialized to perform distinct although complementary
tasks. Indeed, it is currently believed that the "functional unit" of the
nervous system is a neuron and its obligatory associated neuroglia. Although the
neurons and neuroglia of the mature CNS are functionally and structurally
distinct, both cell types come from common progenitor cells during neural
development. The cellular and molecular mechanisms that control cell
differentiation during embryogenesis are the focus this research. Specifically,
Dr. Linser's laboratory has identified a unique cell-surface glycoprotein that
is involved in the final decision of progenitor cells in the retina of the eye
to differentiate as neuroglial cells. In the current project, they will
investigate how this cell-surface protein, called the 5A11 antigen, influences
glial cell phenotype maturation. The analyses will include the use of engineered
retroviral vectors to introduce genetic markers as well as to bring about
changes in expression of the 5A11 gene. As neuronal and glial cell
differentiation seems to be tied to when a cell stops dividing, the project has
an overriding focus on the events of cell differentiation relative to "terminal"
or the last cell division. In addition, this study will compare and contrast the
role of the 5A11 antigen with that of two, well characterized cell-cell
recognition molecules, integrin and N-cadherin. The technical approaches to be
used rely heavily on current state-of-the-art molecular biology, biochemistry,
tissue culture and immunohistochemistry. The proposed studies are designed to
shed light on the fundamental cell-cell recognition processes that provide the
driving force for neuroglial cell differentiation. Since neurons and neuroglia
are so different from one another and yet share a common cell of origin, underst
anding the mechanisms that give rise to these different cell types will also
provide insight into the fundamental processes of cell differentiation.