* 9724806
* U.S.-Brazil Workshop on Techno-Regions: Science, Technology & Regional Development-Past, Present and Future Challenges, May 7-10, 1998, Itaipava, Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Robert Kargon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/1999
* USD 23,672.00

9724806 Kargon This award provides support for a workshop on "Techno regions:
Science, Technology and Regional Development Past, Present and Future" which is
being organized by Dr. Robert Kargon of Johns Hopkins University and Dr. Alberto
Carvalho da Silva of the University of Sao Paulo. This workshop will gather
together U.S. and Brazilian experts from the areas of science and technology
studies, economics, political science, policy analysis and geography to discuss
the inter-sectoral relations between industry, government and universities in
North and South America. By doing this, they hope to increase our understanding
of the origins, structure and function of these relationships through the
comparison of historical and current developments in the Americas. They will
analyze in particular, the university-industry relations in "techno regions"
such as Silicon Valley, Tsukuba Science City in Japan and Sophia-Antipolis in
France and in the economy generally. With this workshop, the participants will
study policy issues surrounding the relationship of research and development to
industrial innovation and growth, knowledge transfer between government,
university and industry, and the role of regional factors in science policy. By
doing this, they hope to provide guidance on how to revitalize older techno-
regions in the U.S. and Brazil and to engage with other regions such as Japan,
India, Korea, Thailand and Singapore, starting cooperation among researchers in
the U.S. and Brazil. ***