* 9724926
* US-Japan Seminar/Workshop on Cooperative Research in        Structural Control for Civil Infrastructure Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Mahendra Singh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2001
* USD 22,000.00

9724926 Singh This award supports the participation of American scientists and
engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Structural Control for Civil Infrastructure
Systems, to be held in Kyoto, Japan from June 28-July 1, l998. The co-organizers
are Professors Mahendra Singh of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and Yutaka Inoue
of Osaka University in Japan. The seminar will focus on innovative concepts
involving new algorithms, sensors, actuators and dampers. They will also discuss
some full scale trial implementation of active control devices in Japan,
primarily for low level disturbances. Session will focus on four theme topics:
(1) active semi- active and hybrid control, (2) control of buildings, bridges
and lifelines, (3) system integration, design philosophies and code provisions,
and (4) case studies and experimental verification on international testbeds.
These will be followed by summarization of the status of the structural control
on these topics in order to identify the outstanding research issues. They will
then formulate an action plan with recommendations for development and
implementation. Participants will include younger scientists. The proceedings
will be published and also disseminated through the internet. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. ***