* 9724123
* Collaborative Research:  Biomechanics of Vertebrate Hair    Cells:  Experimental and Computation Analyses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Ellengene Peterson, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 07/31/2001
* USD 343,367.00

IBN-9724123 PI: Peterson The inner ear of vertebrates contains mechanosensory
receptors called hair cells. Each cell has extending from its surface a tuft of
hairlike microscopic processes called a ciliary bundle. This ciliary bundle is
extremely sensitive to deflection, and the amount and direction of mechanical
deflection leads to a nerve signal from the ear about head position or about
sound. There are differences in bundle morphology in different parts of the ear,
but a possible functional importance for these differences has remained largely
speculative. This project is a collaborative bioengineering effort involving
modern imaging and computational technology to clarify possible functions for
this diversity. LIght and electron microscopy are used for detailed measurements
of the bundles, which are incorporated into a computational finite-element model
to quantify the contribution of different structural elements to bundle
micromechanics. A new fiber-optic system is used for direct tests of the bundle
stiffness in isolated living hair cells, to compare with model predictions for
different morphological categories of hair cell bundles. Results will have
impact not only on auditory and vestibular sensory biology, but more broadly on
understanding echanoreception, and with a likely impact on artificial biosensors
and biotechnology at the nanoscale.