* 9724163
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Shoot Apical Meristem         Development in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* M. Kathryn Barton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Barton 9724163 The shoot apical meristem (SAM) plays a central role in
angiosperm shoot development giving rise to nearly all of the above-ground
structures of the plant. The SAM simultaneously serves two purposes: it acts
both as a site of pattern formation and as a source of pluripotent stem cells or
initial cells. Thus, the SAM produces the basic subunits of the shoot, leaves
and stem, in repeated and predictable patterns, using new cells derived from the
center of the SAM. The long term goal of this project is to understand the
molecular basis for how a SAM makes a plant. By isolating mutants that either
entirely lack a SAM or are defective in some aspect of SAM development, it is
possible to identify genes that are uniquely important in SAM function. One of
these is the SHOOTMERISTEMLESS (STM) gene, a homeodomain-containing gene that is
required for SAM formation and function in the model plant Arabidopsis. The STM
appears to act in the periphery of the SAM to form the separations between
organs, and in doing so, may play an important role in the shaping of the plant
body. We will test this notion by specifically expressing the STM gene product
in the periphery of the SAM and asking whether this can rescue the defect in
cotyledon separation in stm mutants. This experiment will also allow us to gauge
the degree to which STM acts cell autonomously within the SAM. Other mutants
defective in SAM development will be studied as well. A Peripheral Zone specific
reporter construct will be used to determine if several mutants suggested to
have defects in the Central Zone misexpress this construct. The PINHEAD gene, a
gene required for the correct functioning of positional information in the SAM,
will be cloned to find out how positional information works in the SAM - a
process about which almost nothing is known. Finally, the Adnormal mutant has
suggested the existence of a positive interaction between the adaxial side of
the leaf and SAM formation. We will test this hypothesis by i solating mutants
that do not make an adaxial leaf domain and asking whether they can form
axillary and primary SAMs. We will also investigate the ability of an "overly"
adaxialized mutant to suppress the phenotypes of mutants defective in SAM
formation.