* 9724186
* Acquisiton of Workstation Computers, Rapid Prototyper and   Digital Scanner for a Cross-Departmental Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Howard Leeper, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2002
* USD 280,000.00

Western Kentucky University (WKU) is committed to achieving and maintaining
excellence in teaching through the introduction and application of new knowledge
in education, and the integration of research and education. Research conducted
at VIKU, especially in the Ogden College of Science, Technology, and Health
(OCSTH) is aimed to involve students at graduate and undergraduate level in
projects which will not only develop human resources in science, technology and
health, but create the next generation of educators, researchers and
administrators for both industry and academia. The purpose of this proposal is
to establish a Cross-Departmental Workstation Laboratory, supported by a Rapid
Prototyping Machine and a Digital Scanner, that will create a `Virtual Factory`
environment to involve faculty and students in production-systems related
research and the integration of this research into instruction. The laboratory
will at the same time provide departments and cross-departmental units either
new opportunities or enhanced capabilities in research and research training in
a broad spectrum of disciplines. The `Virtual Factory` will create an
environment that simulates the part design, design review and analysis, process
design, analysis and optimization, and prototyping stages typical in industry.
Workstation computers and advanced computer design and analysis softwares will
be used during these stages in addition to the Digital Scanner, which will be
utilized to convert shop drawings into three dimensional solid geometry in
computers, and the Rapid Prototyper, which will provide researchers a plastic
prototype of the final design. In addition these activities will be integrated
with the existing Flexible Manufacturing Cell established through prior NSF and
state funds as well as donations from industry, so that a complete system from
part design to final product will be available to interested parties including
Federal agencies, industry, research institutions, and public and private
organizations. This setting will enable the students and faculty at NWU share,
integrate and apply new knowledge in projects on manufacturing production
systems with the interested parties. The proposed equipment will also be used in
a variety of research projects by faculty and students from a broad spectrum of
disciplines for research and research-training. Among these disciplines are
computer science, physics, astronomy, mathematics, biology, engineering
technology and industrial technology. Some of these projects will require a
multi-disciplinary effort which will be greatly enhanced by the availability of
the proposed equipment.