* 9724568
* Acquisition of a Computational Facility for Numerical       Dynamo Theory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Jeremy Bloxham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 178,885.00

9724568 Bloxham This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program, provides $178,885 as partial support of the costs of acquiring a
new computational facility at Harvard University for modeling the Earth's dynamo
using their recently developed 3-d, dynamically self-consistent geodynamo code.
Specifically, they will acquire a new Silicon Graphics Origin 2000 server with
sixteen CPU's, 45 Gb of disk storage and 2 Gb of expanded memory. The current
Kuang and Bloxham (Harvard) 3-d geodynamo model and the Glatzmaier (LANL) and
Roberts (UCLA) model, whose results have recently been featured on the covers of
the international and multi-disciplinary journals Nature and Science, are the
only two currently developed and functional models of the geodynamo in the
world. The Kuang-Bloxham model simulates a magnetic field that is generated well
above the inner core close to the core-mantle boundary, while the Glatzmaier-
Roberts model predicts a field generated just above the inner core. Both models
show dipole reversals after a few decay times and the Glatzmaier- Roberts model,
which was developed first and has been run long enough to simulate other
geomagnetic reversals at ca. 100,000 ybp and 200,000 ybp, is supported by the
Earth's paleomagnetic reversal records. The difference between these models lies
in the setup of boundary conditions and choice of initial parameters for each of
the models and the geophysical basis for each model representation can be and
is, argued. Given limited computational resources for this research, both groups
are forced to make simplifications to the models that result in codes that can
be run in a reasonable amount of time (the Kuang-Bloxham model currently
requires one month of dedicated time on their CARY computer for simulation of
the Earth's dynamo for only one decay time). Given these limitations,
unrealistic values of initial parameters are used (i.e. Ekman number, Prandtl
number, Rayleigh number; see rev iew by Merrill). However, it is clear that
increased parallel processing and memory are required to run this code within
reasonable lengths of time to model the Earth's geodynamo over geologically
significant time periods and it is important to support continued development
and subsequent simulations using both of these competing models. ***