* 9724143
* Molecular Mechanisms of Mitochondrial DNA Inheritance
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Jodi Nunnari, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 09/30/2001
* USD 451,114.00

9724143 Nunnari Accurate transmission of subcellular organelles during
eukaryotic cell division is an essential and regulated process. In the case of
the semi-autonomous respiratory organelle, the mitochondrion, this process is
more complicated because, in order for progeny cells to be respiratory
competent, both the organelle and its genome must be accurately transmitted.
Although it is widely accepted that during cell division the partitioning of
mitochondria is an active process dependent on the cytoskeleton, one fundamental
question that remains unanswered is what additional mechanisms are required for
the partitioning and distribution of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) both within the
organelle and to daughter cells. The long term goal of the proposed work is to
determine the cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for mtDNA
inheritance. These questions will be addressed using the simple eukaryote,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast). From a wealth of genetic data obtained
using this organism, it is clear that mtDNA inheritance is a non-random process.
The ability to visualize both the organelle and mtDNA in vivo, and the
opportunity to combine both genetic and biochemical approaches to understanding
function, make S. cerevisiae an excellent model system for examining the
cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in mitochondrial inheritance. It has
recently been shown that when S. cerevisiae haploid cells fuse, mitochondrial
fusion also occurs and a single, continuous dynamic mitochondrial reticulum is
created in the zygote. While mitochondrial matrix proteins are able to freely
diffuse within this reticulum, the diffusion of inner membrane-associated mtDNA
is severely restricted. Although the movement of mtDNA within the organelle is
restricted, mtDNA does enter emerging buds with the mitochondria. Elucidating
the molecular mechanisms underlying mtDNA limited diffusion is critical to
understanding the exact mechanisms for mtDNA inheri tance. The specific aims of
this proposal are directed at further characterizing this mechanism and at
identifying and determining the mechanisms of action of the proteins in S.
cerevisiae that mediate mtDNA inheritance. Specifically, mtDNA movement within
cells will be characterized by time lapsed imaging of a fluorescently tagged
mtDNA-binding protein. The molecular components responsible for the limited
diffusion and segregation of mtDNA will be identified using both genetic and
biochemical approaches. Conditional mutants that are unable to stably maintain
the mitochondrial genome during mitosis will be isolated. The mtDNA-protein
complexes will be purified and characterized biochemically. Associated proteins
will be identified using tandem mass spectrometry. The role of these proteins in
mtDNA segregation will be determined using genetic, biochemical, and microscopic
approaches. When cells divide, the various essential components (genes,
cytoplasm, organelles) of the cell must be apportioned among the two daughter
cells. In the case of the mitochondrion, the organelle possesses its own genome
(in the form of multiple copies of mitochondrial DNA), and this must also be
apportioned. Prior work has shown that the mtDNA distributes non-randomly,
suggesting that mechanisms exist to somehow tether the DNA so that the copies do
not intermix spatially within the organelle. This project will shed light on
just how this occurs. ***