* 9724012
* U.S-Slovene Research on Mercury Biogeochemistry in the      Idrija River System, Slovenia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Tamar Barkay, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 45,000.00

INT 9724012 Hines This U.S.-Slovenian research project between Mark Hines of the
University of Alaska, Anchorage, and Jadran Faganeli of the University of
Ljubljana, Marine Biological Station, will examine the concentration, transport
and dynamics of methylmercury in the aquatic ecosystems of the Idrija River
system. Findings will be compared with parallel research on the Carson River in
Nevada. Similarities and differences in these two systems will permit some
delineation controls for net methylmercury formation and transport models.
Results are expected to improve our ability to understand and predict the
potential impact on human life and aquatic food chains from mercury cycling in
rivers. The objectives of this multi-disciplinary investigation include: 1)
locating sources and sinks of methylmercury; 2) studying bacterial processes
such as mercury methylation and demethylation, genetic controls, and terminal
decomposition processes; 3) defining the relationship between the sulfur cycle
and mercury methylation and demethylation; and 4) examination of the effects of
the marine environment on the transformation of mercury transported to the sea.
As planned, the full effort involves the conduct of a survey along a gradient
from pristine sites through contaminated regions to help develop a simulation
model that can guide research and aid in determining how changes in the system
may affect methylmercury flux and bioaccumulation. This project in ecology,
earth sciences and environmental remediation fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. ??