* 9724782
* Fifth E. coli and Small Genomes Meeting, held October 12-15,1997 in Snowbird, Utah.
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* George Weinstock, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1998
* USD 7,500.00

Weinstock 9724782 The Fifth E. coli and Small Genomes Conference is to be held
October 12-15, 1997 at the conference center in Snowbird, Utah. The E. coli
genome project was one of the first initiated and at its completion this year is
the largest genome sequenced to date, nearly 2.5 times the size of typical
genomes under study such as H. influenzae, the first prokaryotic genome to be
completed. The extensive physiologic, biochemical, and genetic analysis of E.
coli over the last four decades make this the best studied of prokaryotic
organisms and one of the model systems to which all others are compared. The
larger size of the genome in itself promises that there will be a wider range of
functions to be analyzed, and this guarantees that E. coli will continue to
provide precedent and paradigm for both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems.
There is great excitement over the prospect of comparing the sequences and
contents of as many as 40 prokaryotic genomes over the next few years, and E.
coli is expected to occupy a prominent place in this analysis. Considerable
integration of different aspects of microbiology will undoubtedly take place,
including new perspectives on evolution and the requirements for life. To
achieve these goals, particularly of integration and synergy, scientists from
diverse disciplines must interact. Thus this conference will include active
genome researchers, such as sequencing experts and informatics specialists
working in database design, sequence analysis, or simulation; geneticists
developing new methods to take advantage of genomic information, e.g. for
functional analysis; and cell biologists and biochemists who have specialized in
areas now ripe for genomics such as metabolism, chromosome structure, or gene
regulation. While there have been a number of recent genome conferences,
continuing completion and release of new genome sequences and developing
momentum for analysis of this huge amount of information means the community has
continued need of such conferences. This meeting has become established as the
only regular annual bacterial genomics conference during the last 5 years and
has assured status and quality.