* 9724033
* Molecular Characterization of GRASP and its Mechanism of    Action on Oligodendrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Sara Szuchet, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2001
* USD 243,624.00

Oligodendrocytes are the central nervous system cells that make and maintain
myelin (an insulating membrane that surrounds nerves and facilitates fast nerve
impulses). Myelin is indispensable for the proper function of nerves and
muscles. It has previously been shown that oligodendrocytes, isolated from
myelinated brain tissue and kept in vitro (i.e., in the laboratory), regenerate
and have the potential to resynthesize myelin membranes. It has also been shown
that during the process of regeneration, oligodendrocytes reenact the sequence
of events that lead to myelination during development. Hence these cells
constitute a good model to investigate the mechanism of myelin formation. In
vitro, a critical requirement for this entire process is the interaction of
oligodendrocytes with an adequate substratum (a surface to which the cells can
adhere). A horse serum, heparin-binding glycoprotein (a protein with attached
sugars) termed GRASP Glycine (a type of amino acid) Rich Adhesion Serum Protein
has now been identified, purified, and partially characterized that, in vitro,
fosters the adhesion of oligodendrocytes. This adhesion acts as a driving force
that propels oligodendrocytes on their path toward differentiation (i.e., myelin
formation). The long-term research endeavors are to define the signaling events
and single out the molecular players that initiate and propagate the in vitro
regeneration/differentiation of oligodendrocytes. It is hypothesized that GRASP
binds to a glycoprotein (receptor) on the surface of oligodendrocytes; this
binding turns on the machinery that activates the cells to make myelin.
Specifically, this research is an attempt to confirm/refute this hypothesis. To
this end, it is proposed to: a) identify and isolate GRASP's putative receptor;
b) determine the structure (i.e., the sequence of amino acids) of this receptor;
obtain the structure of GRASP and define its mode of interaction with
oligodendrocytes. The proposed resear ch should advance our understanding of the
mechanisms that are operative in the in vitro model. Ultimately, it is hoped to
extend these concepts to the in situ system by identifying GRASP's counterpart
on nerve cells. This research should further our knowledge of the biology of
OLGs and the mechanism of myelin formation.