* 9724149
* Molecular Genetics of Cell Fate Specification in the        Arabidopsis Root Epidermis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* John Schiefelbein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 06/30/2001
* USD 324,607.00

Schiefelbein 9724149 Multicellular organisms possess diverse cell types that are
organized in appropriate patterns to generate functional tissues and organs. One
of the great mysteries in the field of developmental biology is the nature of
the mechanism that defines the fates and patterns of the various cell types.
Plants are useful organisms with which to study this developmental problem
because many of their tissues are composed of a simple array of cell types and
their cell lineages can be traced easily. In the present project, root epidermis
formation in the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana is used as a model for
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying cell fate and patterning
during development. The formation of cell types in the Arabidopsis root
epidermis is a remarkably simple and elegant example of cell position-dependent
fate specification, and this experimental system is amenable to molecular,
genetic, and cellular analyses. One of the major advantages is that the root
epidermis is composed of only two cell types, root-hair cells and hairless
cells, and their fates are determined by the positional relationship of the
epidermal cells to their underlying cortical cell neighbors. In recent studies,
three genes (named TTG, WER, and GL2) have been identified that are required for
proper cell type specification at an early stage in root epidermis development.
The research in the present project period is designed to: (1) define the
regulation of the GL2 gene during root epidermis development, (2) analyze the
relationship of the WER gene to the TTG and GL2 genes and determine its role in
root epidermis cell fate, and (3) study the developmental features of the root
epidermis by using a GL2 promoter fusion construct as a cell-type specific
marker gene. The results of these studies are expected to provide a greater
understanding of the specific genes controlling epidermis cell fate in
Arabidopsis as well as novel insights into the general mechanisms employed by
multicellular organisms to control cell-type diversity and patterning.