* 9724716
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Nonlinear Optical          Properties of Heavy Metal Borate and Silicate-Based Glasses
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 25,555.00

9724716 Affatigato and Feller This award supports extension of research funded
under DMR 9623681 to include cooperation with the Physics Department of Fudan
University, Shanghai, on formulation and characterization of interesting and
potentially technologically significant glasses. In the current proposal, the
two PI s, one senior and one a recent Ph.D. will be joined by several
undergraduates in a joint project that will combine the glassmaking and property
characterization capabilities of the Coe College group with the expertise in
nonlinear optics resident in Dr. Wang Wencheng's group in the Laser Physics and
Optics Lab at Fudan University, Shanghai. The main scientific goal is to
investigate the second-order nonlinear optical properties of poled bismuth and
lead borate and silicate glasses. Most of the manufacturing and measurement work
at Coe will be carried out by undergraduate students. Sharing of facilities and
expertise is at the core of the proposal. The glassmaking equipment and
knowledge necessary for the project is unavailable at Fudan University, while
the Coe College group has a long tradition of manufacturing novel glasses at
extreme compositional limits. On the other hand, the group at Fudan is
internationally recognized for their expertise in nonlinear optics, which is
lacking at Coe. Support on the Chinese side will be provided by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China.