* 9724286
* Acquisition of Computational Resources for the Development  of an Intelligent Information Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Theresa Gaasterland, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 549,452.00

9724286 Hammond, Kristian Swain, Michael University of Chicago Acquisition of
Computational Resources for the Development of an Intelligent Information
Laboratory The University of Chicago is acquiring application and file servers,
workstations and network support to provide a computer-environment for
supporting a newly-formed Intelligent Information Laboratory dedicated to the
discovery of technology that forms a bridge between people and machines.
Research thrusts making up the core technologies of the laboratory are
question/answer interfaces to information resources, example-driven preference
browsing, image search and classification on the World Wide Web, and clustering
documents to aid in information retrieval. The proposed equipment will be
available for use by graduate and undergraduate students in research projects.
One of the goals of the Intelligent Information Laboratory is to create and
support intelligent information tools for the Internet. The University already
has helped to get a selection of Chicago's inner city high-schools on-line and
to provide support in the areas of digital libraries and educational tool
development. The University plans to produce software on the new equipment and
modify it for use in the high schools as well as to offer summer programs on
Internet strategies for teachers.