* 9724040
* MRPG: In vivo Characterization of the Role of eIF 2B epsilonPhosphorylation in Control of Protein Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Agatha Asuru, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Asuru 9724040 Technical Abstract: This minority research planning grant is aimed
at laying the groundwork for a full proposal that would focus on the role of
eIF-2B in the regulation of protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells. Specifically,
a mammalian expression system will be developed to study the role of
phosphorylation of the largest subunit of eIF-2B in controlling protein
synthesis. The cDNA for this subunit will be cloned and transfected into COS-7
cells. The cDNA currently in hand is incomplete, and the full length cDNA will
be constructed using restriction enzymes. A 2-D gel electrophoresis system will
be developed that will allow the characterization of the phosphorylation states
of eIF-2B. Preliminary data will be developed for a competitive grant proposal.
Non-Technical Abstract: Protein synthesis in higher animals and plants is
regulated by a group of proteins called initiation factors. This project focuses
on characterizing one initiation factor, eIF-2 alpha. EIF-2 alpha mediates the
inhibition of protein synthesis in response to environmental stresses such as
viral infection, heavy metal exposure, nutrient deprivation and heat shock. This
research could lead to a better understanding of regulation of protein synthesis
during stress.