* 9724256
* Development of Neuroimage Analysis Laboratory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Steven Petersen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 176,157.00

This award permits the Psychology Department at Washington University to
purchase instrumentation to store and analyze functional magnetic resonance
imaging and positron emission typography data. Currently cognitive scientists in
the department conduct cognitive research using fMRI and PET machines located at
the Washington University Medical School campus and they must analyze the
resultant data there. This makes convenient and continuous access difficult both
for senior researchers and students. The instrumentation provided will allow
transmission of this information to the Psychology Department where it can be
analyzed. The system includes: a server computer which will receive the large
data structures and store the images for distribution to other work stations; an
SGI Work Station that takes advantage of programs that have been developed to
provide 2-dimensional surface reconstructrions of the human cortex; three work-
stations; an eithernet hub; a color printing device; a half-time technician who
will be responsible for the initial development and maintenance of the system.
Two projects currently under way will make immediate use of the system. Both
address the neural underpinnings of cognitive components of behavior. The first
- PET Activation Studies of Words - addresses those areas of the brain which are
actively engaged in processing distinct aspects of words and the neural
underpinnings of the attentional control systems that coordinate such processes.
The second project - Imaging Studies of Learning and Memory - addresses those
brain areas which are involved in the distinct aspects of encoding and retrieval
of information from episodic, semantic and procedural memory systems. This
equipment will also be used for training graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows in the area of cognitive neuroscience.