* 9724007
* Higher-Order Mechanisms in Olfactory Communication:         Individual Recognition and Scent-Overmarking
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Robert Johnston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2000
* USD 100,501.00

9724007 Johnston This proposal concerns mechanisms of olfactory perception and
communication, particularly with regard to competition between individuals by
scent marking. Most mammals communicate their individual identity and other
information by scent marking, and many species that scent mark also scent over-
mark (deposit their scent in the same location that other individuals have
deposited scent). It has recently been discovered that, in at least two species
of rodents, individuals can determine which of two individuals' scents is on top
in an over-mark, regardless of whether the two scents are completely or only
partially overlapping. Animals can thus determine which animal has marked most
recently. The data suggest: (1) that the animals have a perceptual/cognitive
strategy to determine which scent was deposited most recently; and (2) that they
have some previously unsuspected sensory mechanisms to accomplish this. In this
research, behavioral experiments will be carried out to investigate the
functions of these extraordinary abilities, particularly with regard to the
related hypotheses that (a) individuals engage in scent marking competitions in
order to maintain their scent as the most recent scent in an area and (b) that
other individuals evaluate scent over- marks as one means of assessing the
quality of potential mates. Specifically, females may prefer males that are
persistent at over-marking because this is a measure of male vigor and quality.
These experiments will involve both typical laboratory tests using habituation-
discrimination methods and other experiments using semi-natural laboratory
enclosures to approximate the complexity of natural situations. In the specific
context of the sense of smell and its role in animal behavior, this research
will clarify the significance of a newly discovered ability to analyze spatial
arrays of individual scents and determine which scent is on top (that is, to
perceive "depth" or recen cy in arrays of individual odors). This perceptual
ability probably occurs in many species and is potentially important in a wide
range of situations. Our research aims to determine why such abilities have
evolved, and to investigate the specific hypothesis that they are important in
evaluation of the health, vigor, and quality of other individuals and thereby
influence mate choice and competitive interactions. This project integrates
mechanistic and functional approaches to olfactory communication. In a more
general context, this research demonstrates some of the higher-order mechanisms
involved in social perception and characterizes in a unique way the kinds of
sophisticated processes animals may use to evaluate one another. Such higher-
order knowledge of other individuals are widespread throughout the animal
kingdom, which in turn suggests that this kind of evaluation of others has been
important in the evolution of complex social behavior necessary for complex
social organization. Understanding this kind of higher-order social cognition is
necessary if we are to truly understand both the evolution of social
communication and the neural mechanisms underlying social recognition, social
memory, and social behavior in animals and in humans.