* 9724114
* US-East Mediterranean Cooperative Research: GPS Data        Processing and Analysis Workshops
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 17,440.00

Description: This award is for the support of participation by five scientists
from Egypt, Turkey, Greece, Armenia and Russia in two workshops to be held at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology In Cambridge, MA in the summer of
1997. The workshops are organized by Dr. Robert Reilinger and Dr. Robert King,
of the Earth, Atmosphere, and Planetary Sciences Department at M.I.T. The
purpose of the first workshop is to carry out geological data reduction and
analysis. The data was obtained in a study by the P.I., funded by NSF/EAR, using
Global Position System (GPS) measurements. The second workshop will follow, to
conduct analysis and interpretation of the results obtained in the first
workshop. The study seeks to understand the nature of the collision of the
African and Arabian plates with the Eurasia plate, by monitoring deformation in
the eastern Mediterranean region. The workshops will involve scientists from the
countries in the region as well as others from the US, Germany, Switzerland, and
the UK. Scope: This project will support participation by key scientists from
the eastern Mediterranean region, who are actively involved in multi-national
research effort using GPS measurements of ground movement, in important
workshops intended to understand the results from field data collected in that
region. Their participation should lead to improvement in the interpretation of
the results obtained and in the conclusions to be reached. The attendance by the
scientists from Russia, Armenia, Greece, Turkey, and Egypt should help them with
their future in-country research in this field, and would enhance the potential
for further collaboration. Their participation will therefore have mutual
benefits to all involved in these studies and for future efforts. The project
fits well within the objectives of the Division of International Programs. This
award includes funding from the Division of International Programs, and from the
Division of Earth Sciences.