* 9724698
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Elucidation of the Rate     Processes involved in the Selective Dissolution of Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Howard Pickering, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 40,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Howard
Pickering, of the Department of Materials Science &amp; Engineering at
Pennsylvania State University in University Park, and Dr. Badr G. Ateya, of the
Chemistry Department at Cairo University in Egypt. The objective of this
research is to explore the prevailing mechanisms and to identify and
characterize the various rate processes involved in de-alloying, i.e. the
selective removal of one component of an alloy under external actions, usually
that of the environment. The de-alloying usually leads to deterioration in the
properties of the remaining alloy. The understanding of the mechanisms is
essential to the development of successful methods and techniques to mitigate
and control this problem. Dr. Pickering is currently conducting analytical and
experimental research in this area, with funding from DMR, to study the various
possible mechanisms and their degree of prevalence in various alloys, in the
copper, zinc, and amalgam families. The participation of the Egyptian scientist
adds a particularly proven expertise in the area of physical and mathematical
modeling of the various kinetic and transport processes involved. Scope: This
research project will be useful in improving the scientific knowledge on the
mechanisms and processes of de-alloying which are extremely important in modern
industrial designs, with heavy emphasis on light weight alloys that have
superior properties. The project involves US and Egyptian scientists with
complementary expertise in material sciences, chemistry and physics, as well as
complementary laboratory facilities at the two participating universities. The
project will also involve a US graduate student who will have access to an
international experience, by working in Dr. Ateya's laboratory, which should
help in his/her career. The project meets INT objective of increasing
U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides, and of enhancing
junior scientists' international experience. This award includes partial funding
by the Division of Materials Research.