* 9724168
* U.S.-Czech Cell Biology Research on Nuclear Myosin I
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Primal de Lanerolle, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 39,694.00

INT 9724168 de Lanerolle This U.S.-Czech research project between Primal de
Lanerolle of the University of Illinois, Chicago, and Pavel Hozak of the
Institute of Experimental Medicine, Prague, will attempt to identify a non-
filamentous motor protein, myosin I, by cloning and sequencing the cDNA for it.
Their intent is to initiate the process of defining the physiological functions
of this protein by using immunogold electron microscopy to identify the
structures it associates with in the nucleus. Results of the sequencing will be
compared to published sequences for members of the myosin superfamily to
determine whether the 120 kDa protein is myosin I, some other unconventional
myosin, or a totally new actin, ATP and calmodulin binding ATPase in the
nucleus. Central to the effort is an antibody to myosin I, which the U.S. and
Czech researchers have produced and affinity purified from bovine adrenal
glands. This antibody inhibits the actin-activated ATPase activity of purified
adrenal myosin I but not that of purified adrenal myosin II. These antibodies
recognize a 120 kDa protein that is larger than the antigen (16 kDa) in the
cytoplasm and in the nucleus. Comparative studies using different antibodies to
myosin I suggest that these antibodies recognize a unique, previously
undescribed myosin I isoform that is an intranuclear actin-based molecular
motor. If successful, this research effort to unequivocally identify the 120 kDa
protein could make fundamental contributions to our understanding of the
cellular functions of myosin and the biology of the cell nucleus. This project
in cellular organization fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Central Europe to
combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. ??