* 9724005
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  High-Performance Visualization of Urban Scenes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Julie Dorsey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 02/28/2001
* USD 28,000.00

This three-year award supports US-France cooperative research aimed at the
development of new visualization techniques for the interactive manipulation of
urban data. Efficient visualization of 3D urban scenes is important for a number
of applications, such as the evaluation of construction and renovation projects,
civil and military simulators, navigation helpers for automobiles, virtual
tourism and education, climate and environmental studies, and city development
planning. The project involves the research groups of Julie Dorsey of the
Massachusetts Institute for Technology and Francois Sillion of the French
National Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA),
Grenoble, and will support exchanges of researchers and graduate students. The
US investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in architectural
visualization, lighting simulation and design for very large datasets, image
based rendering, and urban modeling. This is complemented by the French
investigator's expertise in hierarchical modeling and rendering, efficient data
structures for geometric reasoning and visibility studies, advanced lighting
simulation and high performance visualization using mixed image-based and
3D-based rendering. /% ????Á¢¢Á¢ ¿> ¥©?¢ ?Á¢Á/??© >Á? ??_???>?¢ ?> ¥©?¢ Â/_?%`
??%% ?Á ??Á?/?Á? ?> ???Á? ¥? Á?¥Á>? ¥©Á ?¢ÁÂ?%>Á¢¢ ?Â ¥©?¢ ?>Á??Á>¢??Á ?%/¢¢ ?Â
_/¥Á??/%¢