* 9724071
* Structure-Function Studies on Deoxycytidylate Deaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gladys Maley, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9724071 Maley Technical The investigators have cloned, expressed, and purified
the deoxycytidylate (dCMP) deaminase induced by T4-phage, as well as human dCMP
deaminase, in large enough quantities for x-ray crystallography and various
other studies. Since the enzyme is a metalloprotein with 2 moles of Zn per
subunit of T4-phage enzyme and 1 mole of Zn per subunit of human enzyme, studies
are planned to define the role of Zn for each enzyme and in particular the
second Zn in the T4-phage enzyme. Mutational studies are planned to confirm the
location of the second zinc and its role will be examined by Zn replacement and
deletion. The effect of these mutations on transcription by their role in
maintaining the hexameric structure of the enzyme, and their interaction with
T4-phage TS will be examined. Most dCMP deaminase holoenzymes are hexamers, but
the yeast enzyme appears to differ. Different constructs of this enzyme, one
that is full length and others that are truncated will be studied. Questions to
be answered are the nature of the enzyme's subunit composition, its regulation
by dCTP and dTTP and whether the enzyme is located in the yeast membrane
fraction. In order to establish the role of the deaminase in eukaryotic cells,
attempts to delete the intact active dCMP deaminase gene from mice by homologous
recombination are being pursued The researchers will investigate whether dCMP
deaminase interacts with its mRNA and thereby autoregulates its own synthesis in
an in vitro translation system. Preliminary studies indicate this to be the
case. X-ray crystallography studies on both the T4-phage and human deaminases
will be pursued. As with many proteins the crystal structures could yield
answers related to substrate binding, allosteric ligand binding, and Zn binding,
in addition to the nature of subunit interaction in an attempt to explain how
this enzyme is regulated by dCTP and dTTP. Non Technical The concentrations of
DNA precursors, nucleotides, are maintained very carefully in t he cell by the
levels of the enzymes that comprise the nucleotide biosynthetic pathways and by
the presence of various factors that can affect the activities of those enzymes.
There is ample data available to demonstrate that when the cell's nucleotide
pool is perturbed, an increase in DNA mutation occurs. The investigator's
studies on the enzyme, deoxycytidylate deaminase, are key to a juncture in the
nucleotide pathway leading to DNA. Any mutations in that enzyme or restrictions
of its activity can lead to a disturbances in cell growth and function.