* 9724294
* Development of a Coherent X-Ray Diffraction Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Ian Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,300,000.00

9724294 Robinson A synchrotron beamline dedicated to the new field of coherent
x- ray diffraction (CXD) will be built at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) by
scientists at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign (UIUC). Because CXD
functions by collecting the diffraction pattern from the entire field of view at
the sample, it can be used to reconstruct an image somewhat in the same way that
a hologram does. The scientific potential of the technique is enormous, not only
because it is sensitive to the specific arrangement of the microstructure, but
also because structural fluctuations in the time domain can be observed using
photon correlation spectroscopy. The project brings together eight faculty
members from the departments of Physics, Materials Science and Engineering, and
Chemistry at UIUC. The instrumentation will support research in a variety of
material systems, including thermal fluctuations and faceting of surfaces,
electrochemical interfaces, and materials containing defect structures. %%% The
novel CXF technique depends on the use of high brightness, third generation hard
x-ray synchrotron sources to be successful. There are only three such sources in
the world: the APS at Argonne National Laboratory, the ESRF in Grenoble, and
Spring8 in Osaka. This synchrotron beamline affords the potential for many new
insights into the dynamics of structural changes of a wide class of materials
which are not possible by other techniques. This project is co-supported by the
Major Research Instrumentation program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. ***