* 9724009
* US-Turkey Workshop: Novel Trends in Environmental and       Agricultural Biotechnology, May 11-14, 1998, Izmir, Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Donald Klein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

Description: This award is for support of participation of US scientists in a
`US-Turkey Workshop on Novel Trends in Environmental and Agricultural
Biotechnology`, to be held May 11-14, 1998, at Ege University in Izmir, Turkey.
The US team leaders are Dr. Donald Klein and Dr. Robert Tengerdy of the
Department of Microbiology at Colorado State University. The Turkish co-
organizer is Dr. Fazilet Vardar-Sukan, Department of Biochemical Engineering at
Ege University. The goal of the workshop is to develop collaborative research
between the US and Turkey in the area of environmental and agricultural
biotechnology. The focus of the workshop will be on basic research needed to
develop clean technologies in integrated crop management, using new achievements
of biotechnology. Among the key topics to be dealt with are: improving soil
fertility by microbial intervention; integrated pest management; bioprocessing
of crops and crop residues for value-added products; waste free recycling of
crop and agricultural residues; and bioremediation of soils and waters. The
workshop will include specific lectures about the current research in these
areas in both the US and in Turkey, to be followed by sessions to identify
research areas of mutual interest, and where collaboration would be beneficial
to both countries. The workshop material will be disseminated via the Internet,
and the Proceedings and recommendations for joint projects are to be published
by Ege University. Scope: This award allows six experienced American scientists
from academic institutions, and one from a national laboratory, to travel to
Turkey to meet with eleven Turkish scientists, to discuss scientific and
technical developments in the important area of biotechnology applications in
agriculture and the environment. The two sides will review developments in the
scientific fields that contribute to developments in biotechnology, and also
discuss the potential for successful applications of these technologies. They
plan to focus attention on the scientific questions that can be dealt with
through US-Turkish scientific cooperation. There is potential for considerable
benefits from collaboration between the US and Turkey with its dynamic
agricultural sector, especially in the Aegean region, and its growing industrial
base, but with little domestic energy sources. The collaboration could identify
opportunities for totally or partially replacing chemical fertilizers and
chemical pesticides in agriculture, and for increased utilization of
agricultural residues for fuel and for other useful products. The potential
benefits of successful collaboration, to the US, to Turkey, and to lesser
developed countries, can be great. The proposal meets INT criteria for
supporting activities intended to enhance scientific collaboration between US
and foreign scientists in areas of mutual interest. This award is funded by INT
and the Division of Biological and Environmental Engineering.