* 9724752
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Structure and Function of   the Leishmania Paraflagellar Rod
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Jonathan LeBowitz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/2001
* USD 16,428.00

9724752 LeBowitz This three-year award supports US-UK collaborative research in
cell biology between Jonathan H. LeBowitz, Purdue University and Keith Gull,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. The objective of their research is to
understand the structure and function of the paraflagellar rod (PFR), a
cytoskeletal substructure of trypanosomatid flagella. They propose genetic,
biochemical and cytological experiments, using electron microscopy, in order to
develop a molecular description of PRF in Leishmania mexicana. The PFR is
essential for the normal motility of Leishmania, a protozoan parasite and human
pathogen. Yet the molecular structure, assembly and function of this unique
cytoskeletal structure are not well understood. Its lack of similarity to other
cytoskeletal proteins and its complex architecture suggest a novel type of
filament and organization. The US investigator brings to this collaboration
expertise in molecular biology and molecular genetics of Leishmania. This is
complemented by the UK investigator's expertise in electron microscopy and
immunofluorescence microscopy. This research effort will advance understanding
of the PFR's functional importance for parasite motility and the potential for
utilizing PFR components as an anti-Leishmania vaccine.