* 9724164
* Workshop on Cellular Computation and Decision Making,       October 5-8, 1997, Santa Fe, New Mexico
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* James Shapiro, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 7,500.00

Shapiro 9724164 The workshop will bring together the concepts and approaches of
two fields--molecular biology and theoretical computer science--for the study of
molecular computing/decision-making networks in cells. The focus will be on
molecular networks in a small number of well-analyzed microbial systems. All of
these networks are analogues of computing networks formed by multiple
interacting agents, and we now have powerful experimental tools to investigate
the properties of the molecules which constitute their nodes. What is needed now
are formal methods for describing and analyzing the behavior of the ensembles.
The idea is to use the real networks that are found in microbes to derive formal
models/representations with predictive powers. The predictions, in turn, can be
tested by returning to the microbes. Truly creative modeling will require new
concepts in theoretical computer science. The genesis and testing based on
actual microbial systems will ensure that the theoretical results are firmly
tied to real phenomena. The goal of the workshop therefore is to begin
converting our molecular knowledge into computer theoretic understanding of how
these networks function. For example, we need to determine how to represent the
analog processing capabilities of proteins that interact with multiple ligands,
and we need to find the best vocabulary for translating experimentally-
determined molecular properties, such as binding and catalytic constants, into
components of computational algorithms. To do so will require intense collective
discussions of a small number of real cases involving representatives of many
perspectives, both biological and computational. The results of the workshop
should have applications to biotechnology, for example in the area of metabolic
engineering.