* 9724514
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution Laser-Ablation ICP-MS for  Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 308,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. T. Douglas Price and James Burton
will purchase a Finnegan Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS)
to serve as principal analytic instrument at the University of Wisconsin
Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry. It will replace a current ICP-AES which
is nearly 10 years old and nearing the end of its useful lifespan. The ICP-MS
has the demonstrated capability of determining elemental abundances at, or
below, parts-per-trillion levels and the capability of measuring individual
isotopes for isotope-ratio studies. The machine has a laser ablation sample
introduction system which allows rapid analyses of either wet or dry samples in
aqueous solution or as emissions from a laser beam focused upon solid matrices.
It can thus be used to analyze a wide range of archaeological materials and the
presence of a microprobe permits micron-scale as well as bulk analysis. The
laboratory has contributed significantly to the analysis of a wide range of
archaeological materials: ceramics, metals, soil and human skeletal and dental
remains. The research group has developed rapid methods to determine trace
element signatures of pottery. It has pioneered the use of barium/calcium ratios
as indicators of past diet, examined techniques to reconstruct human activities
from anthropogenetic soils and employed strontium ratios in human bone and teeth
to determine migration history. It has also collaborated with many researchers,
both postdoctoral and student to address a wide variety of specific
archaeological issues. With this new instrument the laboratory will expand its
scope from elemental analyses to carbon and nitrogen isotope measurements which
provide insight into human diet and past environmental conditions. The
laboratory has both provided general service to the anthropological community
and worked to develop new analytic approaches. It has also served an important
training function. The ICP-MS will permit all of these aspects to be expanded
the pursued with greater efficiency.