* 9724929
* Editing of Homocysteine by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Hieronim Jakubowski, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2001
* USD 376,000.00

Hieronim Jakubowski MCB 9724929 Editing of Homocysteine by Amino-tRNA
Synthetases 1. Technical The non-protein amino acid homocysteine (Hcy), an
obligatory precursor of methionine in all cells, poses an accuracy problem for
the protein biosynthetic apparatus. Hcy is misactivated by methionyl- (MetRS),
isoleucyl- (IleRS), and leucyl-tRNA synthetases (LeuRS) at a frequency exceeding
the frequency of translational errors. Misincorporation of Hcy into tRNA and
cellular protein is prevented by an editing mechanism of these synthetases which
yields a cyclic thioester, Hcy thiolactone. In spite of considerable progress on
the elucidation of structures of AARSs, knowledge of the structural basis of
editing is limited. This study is undertaken to determine the molecular basis of
an error-correcting mechanism, using E. coli class I MetRS as a model, testing a
hypothesis that the Zn-binding domain of MetRS constitutes a thiol-binding
editing subsite involved in the editing of Hcy. Mutant selection as well as PCR
and site-directed mutagenesis methods are used to obtain editing-defective MetRS
enzymes. These approaches, combined with sensitive biochemical assays, are
designed to allow the study of structure-function relationships both in vitro
and in vivo, as well as mapping of the editing subsite and determining its
interplay with the synthetic subsite of MetRS. The data will be interpreted
within the framework of the three-dimensional structure of MetRS using molecular
modeling. This study contributes to the elucidation of the extraordinary
accuracy in the flow of genetic information. 2. Non-technical Living organisms
have evolved editing or proofreading mechanisms that assure accurate synthesis
of their nucleic acids and proteins according to the genetic information
contained in DNA. One such mechanism eliminates incorrect amino acids and
assures that correct amino acids are incorporated at specific positions of
protein chains which is important for proper functioning of these molecules. A
parad igm of error correcting mechanisms in protein synthesis is editing of the
nonprotein amino acid homocysteine which is being studied at the molecular and
cellular levels. This study addresses the molecular details of homocysteine
editing, which is fundamental to the extraordinary accuracy in the flow of
genetic information.