* 9724053
* Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Stephen Pruett-Jones, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 02/28/2001
* USD 201,781.00

9724053 Pruett-Jones This research involves ecological and behavioral studies of
a group of passerine birds in Australia, the fairy-wrens. These species are
endemic to the Australian mainland and exhibit a variety of interesting patterns
of behavior, the study of which will help us understand evolutionary processes
and social behavior in non-human species. Fairy-wrens are interesting because
individuals live in large social groups and the offspring from one generation
remain in the territory and assist the parents in raising young in successive
breeding attempts. Also, despite the close social ties between individuals in
the same group, individual males and females generally mate with birds in other
social groups. This extreme complexity and difference between social
interactions and reproductive patterns in fairy-wrens offers a unique
opportunity to study the evolution of animal societies. In our study of
reproductive patterns, and of the sex ratio of offspring, we are using the
technique of DNA profiling (i.e., fingerprinting) and microsatellite analysis.
Separate from the specific species under study, this research will also
contribute to the field of molecular biology and the refinement of techniques
that have applicability in human research. This study will be conducted in
mallee scrub habitat in South Australia, one of the most threatened habitat
types in Australia, and it will further our understanding the ecology of this
important ecosystem. This study will contribute to the conservation of mallee
habitats and provide information critical to the management of mallee bird
species.