* 9724695
* SYMPOSIUM:  Evolution of the Steroid/Thyroid/Retinoic Acid  Receptor Family; January 5, 1998, Boston, MA
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* David Durica, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

The rapidly unfolding story of the nuclear receptor superfamily has radically
changed the understanding of hormone action. One of the subgroups of that
superfamily appears to have evolved at least 500 million years ago prior to the
divergence of arthropod and chordate lineages. This subgroup of receptors plays
an important role in the control of the complicated events of development and
growth. Because of their early divergence, the mechanisms that involve these
receptors appear to be very similar in the invertebrates as well as the
vertebrates. There have been several international symposia (including both EMBO
and Keystone symposia) that address the "form and function" or "the superfamily
of nuclear receptors" in general, but until now there has been no systematic
attempt to compare the similarities or differences of the form/function of
nuclear receptors across phylogenetic lines. The symposium proposed here will
bring together researchers working on these receptors and their ligands in a
variety of vertebrates and invertebrates. Through this proposed symposium, the
PI hopes to foster a broader discussion of the comparative structures of venous
receptors, of the degree of post-transcriptional processing of gene products,
and of the wide array of developmental and growth-related events that are
controlled by this family of transcription factors.