* 9724102
* Cellular Mechanisms of Adult Plasticity in Barrel Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James McCasland, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Continuing grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 315,500.00

9724102 McCASLAND Humans and other animals can acquire new information from
their surroundings throughout life, but can also precisely recall familiar and
long-held memories. This capacity for simultaneously retaining and importing
information must be achieved by networks of neurons, especially in the cerebral
cortex. Much of cortex consists of defined areas devoted to one or more of the
senses such as touch, and each of these areas represents a topographic map of a
sensory surface such as the skin. Dr. McCasland's research uses new anatomical
and computer-imaging techniques to study a well-known model of such topographic
maps -- the portion of rodent somatosensory cortex representing the invariant
array of large whiskers on the face. Using this model, his group has shown that
a much larger area of adult cortex than normal is driven by a few spared
whiskers when all other whiskers are repeatedly trimmed. Such large-scale
changes imply robust shifts in the activation of individual neurons and
therefore of the operation of local cortical circuitry. Because the same
circuits are critical for the rodent's exquisitely precise discrimination of
tactile cues, these results provide a powerful model of how brain circuits can
both perform precisely and remain adaptive. This project studies potential
mechanisms underlying the demonstrated large-scale neuronal plasticity. Studies
will focus on the interactions between excitatory and inhibitory neurons within
local circuits, and on the role of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in such
interactions. NMDA receptors are found on both excitatory and inhibitory neurons
and have been implicated in several forms of neuronal plasticity. Subtle changes
in the strength of inhibition within local cortical circuits have dramatic
effects on the selection of sensory inputs. Thus, neural inhibition may
represent an important control point for cortical plasticity. Yet little is
known of the behavior of inhibitory neurons during adaptation, or of the relati
onship between neural inhibition and the activation of NMDA receptors. Dr.
McCasland's methods are uniquely suited to systematic, cell-by-cell measures of
activation in identified excitatory and inhibitory neurons. The project will
test whether neural inhibition declines in early stages of adult plasticity,
then increases as new activation patterns emerge. Blockade of NMDA receptors
will show whether these receptors are necessary for either the measured changes
in excitation and inhibition and/or for the neural plasticity itself. The
results will provide a unique assessment of the relative roles of excitation,
inhibition, and NMDA receptors in adult cortical plasticity.