* 9724731
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Molecular Basis and      Evolution of the Natural Homeotic Phenotype of Lancandonia  Schismatica
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/1999
* Elliot Meyerowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1999
* USD 40,290.00

9724731 Meyerowitz This U.S-Mexico award will support Dr. Elliot Meyerowitz of
the California Institute of Technology in collaboration with Dr. Elena Alvarez
Buylla of the Instituto de Ecologia of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico (UNAM). The researchers intend to study the molecular basis and evolution
of the plant, Lacandonia schismatica. Lacandonia is a unique endemic plant from
Chiapas, Mexico, whose flower is the only known example of a functional spatial
inversion of the reproductive whorls, that is, stamens in the central whorl and
carpels in the third one. Dr. Meyerowitz has been a leader in developing models
for the molecular mechanisms of flower development, models which have been
corroborated by studies in other flowering plants, including Arabidopsis. The
researchers now plan to establish the phylogenetic relationships by using rDNA
sequences as sources of characters, to clone and structurally characterize the
genes similar to the ABC genes of Arabidopsis and to test in other ways the
similarity or differences in the genetic control of flower development in the
two genera of plants. Because of its functional uniqueness, Lacandonia provides
the necessary exception to the pattern of flowers in angiosperms for a rigorous
testing of molecular models. The two laboratories have complementary skills: the
U.S. lab provides the expertise in molecular technology, while the Mexican lab
brings to the collaboration its expertise in phylogenetic and population
biology. ***