* 9724139
* Neurosteroid Potentiation of GABAa Receptor-Mediated  Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Daniel Bitran, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 178,811.00

Non-technical Summary Principal Investigator: Bitran, D. Proposal
Number:IBN9724139 Neurochemical Analysis of Motivated Behavior The long-term
goal of this project is to explore how chemical systems in the brain control
motivated behavior. Among motivated behaviors, ingestive behaviors such as
feeding and drinking have formed the focus of such studies. To develop general
principles to explain the control of motivated behaviors, the results from
studies on a variety of behaviors (e.g., reproductive behavior, aggression) are
needed. To date, little is known about the neurochemistry of the motivational
components of female reproductive behavior. The PIs have pursued studies showing
a link between the mesolimbic dopamine system and the control of the incentive
(e.g., reward) properties of female reproductive behavior, using female hamsters
as our experimental model. The studies in this proposal are designed to further
pursue this link between neural dopamine pathways and female reprodcutive
behavior in three specific ways. First, the PIs intend to continue microdialysis
studies demonstrating proximal relationships between female reproductive
function and extracellular dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens. The PIs
have demonstrated that experienced female hamsters show higher, and more
sustained extracellular dopamine levels during interactions with males compared
with inexperienced females. As sensitization of responsiveness is one property
of dopamine neurons repeatedly activated with drugs, the PIs will explicitly
test whether this augmentation of nucleus accumbens dopamine levels in
experienced female hamsters reflects a sensitized response of these neurons to
stimuli received during mating encounters. This would be the first such
demonstration of sensitization of dopamine neurons resulting from the expression
of a naturalistic behavior. Our second goal is to provide a broader neurolo
gical perspective on the relationship between dopamine and female mating
behavior. To date, the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum are the only brain
regions in which in vivo measurements of dopamine during mating encounters have
been taken. The PIs intend to extend this analysis to other behaviorally-
relevant dopaminergic terminal fields, such as the frontal cortex, medial
preoptic area, and amygdala. In the context of these experiments the PIs will
determine the degree to which dopamine in each of these areas is related to the
expression of female mating behavior or some other factor associated with social
encounters. A key issue in the interpretation of these behavioral findings
centers around the degree to which individual dopaminergic neurons project to
multiple targets. That is, do similarities or differences in dopaminergic
activity in each terminal field derive from the activity of the same or
different dopamine neurons. This is an unresolved issue for any species, and the
PIs propose to determine quantitatively the degree to which individual dopamine
neurons innervate multiple terminal fields. Together these studies will provide
a framework for defining how functional dopaminergic pathways regulate different
components of female reproductive behavior, providing a basis for developing
generalizations of the role of dopantine in motivated behavior.