* 9724055
* US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement:  From National    Identity to State-Building:  The Political Economy of       South African Taxation
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert Price, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 06/30/1998
* USD 4,050.00

9724055 Price This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
student, Mr. Evan Lieberman, working under the direction of Dr. Robert M. Price,
Professor of Political Science at the University of California, Berkeley, to do
field research in South Africa. This project will study the development of South
Africa's taxation system and how it has been influenced by the political issues
of national identity and state-building. South Africa's tax regime is unique
among developing countries with similar histories, which typically raise no more
than five percent of their Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as revenue. Developed as
a two-part taxation system when the country was racially divided, the system was
raising fifteen percent of the GDP as government revenue from taxes on income
and profits by the 1980's. It is hypothesized that the politicization of a
national identity makes a significant, measurable impact on the establishment
and performance of a state's tax institutions, while also influencing a group's
propensity to make sacrifices in the form of taxation. By considering taxation
as a historical component of state-building, Mr. Lieberman will explore the
theoretical links between critical periods in South Africa's history and the
resultant impact on its economic institutions. Additionally, Mr. Lieberman
expects that to find that the post-apartheid era is leading to a new definition
of national identity, which could dramatically alter South Africa's taxation
institutions and the ways in which revenue is collected. The research plan will
consist of in-depth interviews, a survey, and an analysis of archival records.
Staff members at the Institute for Democracy in South Africa will collaborate
with Mr. Lieberman on this project. He will also collaborate with members of the
Department of Political Science at the University of Cape Town, where he will be
a Visiting Fellow. This study will make an important contribution to the
understanding abo ut the structure of taxation in a developing country. This
grant also provides support to enable a promising student to establish a strong,
independent research career. ***