* 9724117
* A Biochemical Genetic Analysis of Inositol Metabolism in    Subcellular Organelles
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Margaret Johnson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 03/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9724117 Johnson Inositol, a six-carbon cyclitol, is essential for growth,
differentiation, and communication of eukaryotic cells. Inositol phosphates
convey signals for a wide variety of hormones, growth factors and
neurotransmitters. Insitol's metabolism, therefore, is an important concern in
many agricultural and clinical disciplines. Although extensive physiological and
biochemical data document the importance of inositol to higher plants, less is
known of the molecular genetic mechanisms regulating its metabolism. The goal of
this research is to understand the genetic mechanisms controlling inositol
metabolism during plant growth and development. The investigator's developmental
studies of inositol biosynthesis have shown, that isoforms of the pivotal
biosynthetic enzyme, myo-inositol-1- phosphate synthase (Ml-1-P synthase), exist
and that one form is localized to chloroplast thylakoids in Phaseolus vulgaris
and Arabidopsis thaliana. Given this finding, it is imperative that the current
two pathway model for phosphatidylinositol (PI) biosynthesis in plans be
examined. According to this model, PI(precursor for phosphinositdes) is
synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and then transported into other
subcellular organelles such as the chloroplasts. The investigator's recent
finding (the synthesis of inositol in chloroplasts), however, raises the
possibility that PI and the phosphinositides are also being synthesized in these
organelles. It is conceivable that inositol and/or the phosphoinositide signal
tranduction pathway operates as part of the communication system between
chloroplasts and the nucelus ( the hypothesized chloroplast-to-nucleus signal
transduction pathway in plants). The investigator will use enzyme assays,
western analyses, Immunocytochemical analyses, in situ hybridizations,
phospholipid studies, and molecular analyses to (1) correlate sites of inositol
biosynthesis with sites of PI biosynthesis and (2) isolate mutants defective in
inositol metabolism. This project is expected to yield direct evidence
concerning inositol's function in chloroplast and other subcellular organelles
shown to synthesize inositol. The findings will be directly applicable to the
overall picture (still lacking) of the important plant phosphoinositide signal
transduction pathway. This project is concerned with synthesis of inositol in
plants. While much is known about inositol phosphate signaling in animals, the
corresponding issues in plants have not been well studied. The overall long-term
goal of the work is to understand inositol's role in the biology of subcellular
organelles. The investigator has shown in previous studies that the key
biosynthetic enzyme, myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase, has temporally and
spatially controlled isoforms; this unexpected finding is novel. This project
will involve a detailed study of the sites of inositol and phosphionositol
synthesis. A combination of immunocytochemical analyses, in situ hybridization
studies, and enzyme activity measurements will be performed using Phaseolus
vulgaris and Arabidopsis thaliana. This work will help in developing an
understanding of cell signaling in plants, as well as of regulation of an
important metabolic pathway.