* 9724718
* Conference and Workshop on the Participation of Caribbean   Countries in the Inter-American Institute for Global Change
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1997,10/31/1998
* Jorge Velez-Arocho, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 10/31/1998
* USD 54,371.00

9724718 Gilbes The proposed conference and workshop will be held in Mayag=FCez,
Puerto Rico during the second week of July, 1997. The main purpose of the
conference is to bring together scientists from the Caribbean with government
officials interested in global change and to discuss the possibilities for
involving their countries in the Inter- American Institute for Global Change
Research (IAI). In addition, the meeting will provide an efficient mechanism for
the exchange of information about global change research projects currently
being supported by countries in the Caribbean. Conference proceedings, including
summaries of the papers presented, discussions, and final conclusions will be
distributed to the participants and other interested parties, and will be
available in English and Spanish. This workshop is being co- sponsored by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) on behalf of the IAI. The IAI is a U.S.
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The NSF is the U.S. Government agency
designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. %%% The proposed
conference and workshop will be held in Mayag=FCez, Puerto Rico during the
second week of July, 1997. The main purpose of the conference is to bring
together scientists from the Caribbean with government officials interested in
global change and to discuss the possibilities for involving their countries in
the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI). In addition, the
meeting will provide an efficient mechanism for the exchange of information
about global change research projects currently being supported by countries in
the Caribbean. Conference proceedings, including summaries of the papers
presented, discussions, and final conclusions will be distributed to the
participants and other interested parties, and will be available in English and
Spanish. This workshop is being co- sponsored by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) on behalf of the IAI. The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate
cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency
designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.
***