* 9724515
* High Quantum Efficiency Confocal Microscope Detector for    Viewing Live Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2002
* Seth Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/2002
* USD 284,608.00

Three-dimensional imaging with a confocal microscope is probably the most
advanced imaging method that can be applied to living cells. As equipment
becomes ever more sophisticated, the application of confocal microscopy of
living cells has become increasingly common and productive. Unfortunately, such
studies usually require the introduction of fluorescent dyes into the cell and
when these are illuminated with the laser beam of the confocal microscope, the
dye molecules are often degraded in a manner that injures the living cell.
Though much has been written about this problem when viewing living cells, the
solution comes down to making the best possible use of the fluorescent light
photons emitted by the dye. Photon efficiency has two aspects: ensuring that as
many photons as possible reach the detector in a short period of time and making
sure that those that do so are actually detected. Recently a silicon
photodetector has been designed (available in several different formulations)
which operates at high efficiency in collecting and detecting photons. Dr.
Pawley proposes to modify these detectors for use in a confocal microscope and
test their performance under realistic conditions to determine the optimum
design and method of adaptation. The final adaptation should be a signal advance
in the technique of three-dimensional visualization of cells.