* 9724049
* Interaction of Cytoplasmic Membrane Energy Transducer With Outer Membrane Receptors
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Kathleen Postle, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 08/31/2001
* USD 279,984.00

9724049 Postle Energy for the active transport of iron-bearing siderophores,
vitamin B12, and other ligands across the outer membrane of Gram-negative
bacteria is transduced from the cytoplasmic membrane to high-affinity outer
membrane transporters by a cytoplasmic membrane protein complex consisting of
TonB and a set of auxiliary proteins. Postle and colleagues have previously
demonstrated, using in vivo crosslinking, that Escherichia coli TonB directly
contacts both cytoplasmic membrane proteins and the outer membrane receptors.
Preliminary data, which are based on separation of cytoplasmic and outer
membranes by sucrose density gradient fractionation, indicate that TonB can
associate with the outer membrane in the absence of the cytoplasmic membrane.
These results suggest that TonB might shuttle from cytoplasmic to outer membrane
in the process of energy transduction, and thus serve as the springboard for
characterizing the interactions between TonB and the outer membrane. By
exploiting the ability of TonB to form stable associations with the outer
membrane, it should be possible to determine the nature of these associations.
Biochemical approaches will be used to define TonB-outer membrane interactions
and their relationship to the process of energy transduction. The cytoplasm of
Gram-negative eubacteria is surrounded by a protective envelope consisting of
three concentric layers: a cytoplasmic or inner membrane; a cell wall composed
of peptidoglycan (murein), proteins, and polysaccharides; and an outer membrane.
Between the inner membrane and the wall is the periplasmic space, which is known
to contain a number of important enzymes. This envelope poses a barrier to
harmful agents in the environment. However, it also poses a barrier to the
bacterium's access to vital nutrients such as minerals and vitamins from the
environment. The bacteria possess a complex mechanism for selectively bringing
such nutrients into the cytoplasm. This mechanism inv olves active (i.e.,
energyrequiring) transport of siderophores (carrier proteins that bind to
nutritionally vital minerals such as iron), vitamin B12 and other ligands across
the outer membrane. The source of the energy for this process comes from
cytoplasmic metabolism, and thus this mechanism requires the transduction of
energy from the cytoplasmic membrane (transduction of the membrane protonmotive
force) across the periplasmic space to the outer membrane. This energy
transduction involves a membrane protein complex consisting of a protein called
TonB plus other associated proteins. TonB was long thought to be located
exclusively in the cytoplasmic membrane. However, using in vivo crosslinking and
subcellular fractionation, Dr. Postle showed that TonB has direct contact with
both cytoplasmic membrane proteins and the outer membrane receptors, and that
TonB can exist in 3 distinct milieus: by itself in the cytoplasmic membrane, in
contact with both membranes simultaneously, and by itself in the outer membrane.
Further work will use genetic, biochemical, and other approaches to define the
interaction between TonB and the outer membrane and to relate this to the
process of energy transduction. The significance of this work extends far beyond
merely the function of TonB. In Gram-negative bacteria, there are more than 100
distinct transport systems where cytoplasmic membrane proteins are postulated to
interact with outer membrane proteins (e.g., multidrug efflux pumps, excretion
of colicins, hemolysins, and degradative enzymes). The proposed studies on TonB
may well be directly relevant to these other systems also. These studies are
therefore anticipated to greatly enhance our understanding of how bacterial
metabolism is linked to the environment. ***