* 9724317
* Acquisition of a Departmental Solid State Nuclear Magnetic  Resonance Spectrometer for Organic Geochemistry,            Experimental Petrology, and Mineral Physics
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Marilyn Fogel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2000
* USD 225,828.00

9724317 Cody This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
Program, provides $225,828 as partial support of the costs of acquiring a solid
state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer to characterize chemical
structures in studies of organic geochemistry, experimental petrology and
mineral physics. The use of this NMR spectrometer will be strongly
multidisciplinary including organic geochemical characterization of the
macromolecular products of diagenetic reactions in sediments, studies of major
element speciation in volcanic glasses and studies of the distribution of
hydrogen in hydrous magnesium silicates. Many of the proposed studies require
the use of solid state NMR as many samples require bulk spectral analysis given
that laboratory chemical separation techniques for many organic and organic-
inorganic compounds are often very difficult and time consuming or can bias the
in situ structural conditions of the compound. Additionally, the collaboration
of organic geochemists with petrologists and mineral physicists with widely
ranging backgrounds and ages using a state-of-the-art solid state NMR
spectrometer brings great potential for new insights into the complex structural
geochemistry of organic, inorganic and organic-inorganic compounds that have
direct relevance to fundamental Earth processes. ***