* 9724897
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Karen Kuhla, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Cooperating Hampton Roads Organizations for Minorities in Engineering (CHROME)
network of community organizations, founded in 1983, impacts students in
elementary, middle and high school. This proposal does a fine job of outlining
how CHROME meets each criteria while specifically highlighting CHROME activities
and successes. As a result of it clubs throughout the K-12 school system, this
program is able to "follow through" with youngsters and offer a variety of
support and activities. As a result, CHROME claims "virtually all students who
remain" in the program graduate high school. CHROME claims 95 percent of its
club members go to college and 80 percent major in SMET or related fields proven
by conducting a follow-up survey with alumni and maintaining a database.
CHROME's ability to track students demonstrates how the program has made a
difference in students graduating, going to college and choosing majors in SMET
fields. While this program mostly benefits African American students, there are
a number of other minorities who participate in the program including Hispanic,
Asian/Filipino, and Native American students. The strengths of the nominee
include: . Sixty community organizations working together providing outstanding
programs for youth and students. . Constant communication to keep individuals
informed by providing information online. . Provides training for teachers and
counselors to be effective leaders of local clubs through a variety of summer
training programs. . Excellent outreach structure. . Provides internships
through its business members, holds educational forums, funds scholarships, and
tracks participants. In summary, CHROME is a comprehensive community networking
effort that goes beyond establishing mentoring relationships between senior and
junior individuals. The program's activities sustain encouragement for SMET
disciplines from elementary schoo l through high school. It trains teachers and
counselors to encourage students to pursue careers in technical fields,
establishes and sustains partnerships among business corporations, higher
education institutions, and government agencies plus supports community
educational improvements in science, mathematics, and engineering areas. It even
brings parents into the picture by offering them workshops with themes such as
"How to Rear an Engineer" or "Preparing for College."