* 9724050
* Glucose Signaling in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Richard Gaber, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/2000
* USD 359,913.00

Abstract 9724050 Gaber The expression of many genes in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, is regulated by the availability of glucose or other hexoses. For
example, in the presence of low glucose concentrations some genes are
transcriptionally induced whereas others are only induced when the cell is
exposed to high concentrations of glucose. In addition, many genes, like those
involved in the transport and metabolism of galactose, are transcriptionally
repressed by glucose. The integration of both positive and negative
transcriptional regulation in S. cerevisiae involves a complex, sometimes
redundant network of signaling pathways. The identity of glucose signaling
molecules remains largely unknown despite intensive efforts toward their
discovery. Recently, a novel glucose signaling pathway was discovered, in which
Snf3, a membrane protein with a resemblance to glucose transporters, was found
to be required for the negative regulation of HXT6, a glucose transporter gene
that undergoes transcriptional repression in response to moderate or high levels
of glucose. This negative role of Snf3 on HXT6 expression in response to glucose
is unique. Also unusual is the expression of HXT6 in the complete absence of
glucose; all other glucose transporter genes require either low or high
concentrations of glucose to induce expression. Moreover the expression of SNF3
in cells deleted for the functional HXT genes is insufficient to confer either
growth on glucose or glucose uptake. Thus Snf3 may function more like a glucose
receptor than a transporter and its principal role appears to the elicitation or
maintenance of the appropriate signaling pathway that allows the cell to respond
to the availability of glucose by inducing or repressing downstream target
genes. One goal of the proposed research is to identify proteins that
participate in the Snf3-dependent signaling pathway. A genetic characterization
will determine the effects of known mutations on Sn f3 signaling. Genetic
screens will also be carried out to identify mutations in genes that
specifically affect this pathway. The genes identified through the mutant
screens will be cloned and the proteins they encode will be determined. These
results will enable the construction of molecular tools that are required to
assess the relative positions and roles played by specific proteins in this
pathway. This research will lead to the identification of the molecular
mechanism involved in transducing the glucose signal, and lead to an
understanding of how a membrane protein of the glucose transporter family can
maintain a glucose availability signal that is transmitted to the nucleus where
it can enhance or repress transcription of specific genes. %%% This research is
examining how a membrane protein which is similar in sequence to glucose
transporters, can negatively regulate glucose transporter genes that are
repressed in response to moderate or high levels of glucose. The results of
these studies in yeast will lead to our understanding of the mechanism by which
cells can respond to different levels of glucose in their environment. ***