* 9724829
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Effects of UV-B Radiation on Photosynthesis in Bean and Maize
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Gerald Edwards, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 02/28/2002
* USD 25,415.00

9724829 Ku This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research
project on plant responses to UV-B radiation, between Drs. Maurice Ku and Gerald
B. Edwards, Washington State University , and Drs. Manuel Pinto and Claudio
Pastenes, University of Chile. The major objectives of the proposed study are to
identify specific alterations in photochemical, biochemical and physiological
processes of photosynthesis induced by supplementary UV-B radiation in bean (C3
species) and maize (C4 species), and to evaluate the relationship between these
alterations and the loss/change in photosynthetic rate. The purpose is to
determine if modifications in photochemical efficiency and photosynthetic
enzymes correlate with changes in photosynthetic capacity by UV-B treatment. The
hypothesis is that the decrease in photosynthetic capacity in bean caused by
UV-B radiation would be related to changes in key photosynthetic enzymes and/or
changes in photochemical efficiency. For this study, representative bean
cultivars with contrasting tolerance to UV-B will be used. Over the past three
decades, there has been a significant increase in research involving the effects
of UV-B radiation on plant systems. Based on those studies, it is estimated that
about one half of all plants species, (especially herbaceous species) are
negatively affected by that increased radiation. However, because some species
are known to be well adapted to high UV-B radiation environments, a comparison
of changes in enzyme activity versus protein content during UV-B treatment will
allow the researchers to assess if the changes in protein amount or activation
state is responsible for the loss/change of photosynthetic capacity.
Interactions between plants and their environment are complex, but important to
our understanding of plant productivity. Reduction of stratospheric ozone, which
primarily absorbs UV-B radiation, has raised concerns about the potential
implications of rising UV-B radia tion at the Earth's surface. ***