* 9724894
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Norbert Hill, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) has mentored and
offered support to students since 1979 through its first student chapter. As the
proposal indicates, the number of student chapters has grown to 147. The
proposal indicates that AISES has empowered students with leadership skills, and
information to better prepare students in science and engineering fields. In
addition, AISES has provided scholarships to enable students to continue their
education and attend AISES conferences by offering opportunities for students to
connect with each other and with faculty who are role models at conferences. By
offering information through the Internet students are easily able to connect
with each other and with the organization. AISES also conducts precollege
activities such as science fairs and pre-college math and science camps. Through
these activities, AISES has created an environment that nurtures and encourages
pre-college and college students to pursue the sciences. According to the
proposal, there is a 65 percent college retention rate for AISES members.
Materials such as the unique Winds of Change and American Indian College Guide
have empowered students' education, contacts, and career. The strengths of the
nominee include: Prepares students for careers in science both intellectually
and culturally. Provides scholarships and leadership training. Participants give
back to the community. Pre-college program including science camps. Growing
network of professional scientists and engineers serve as role models for the
American Indian youth. Publication of "Winds of Change" is a major outreach
mechanism; another way to engage students and role models. Internship program
with the Department of Transportation. Web page idea is good. Replications in
Canada and New Zealand are underway. In summary, AISES has dem onstrated that it
is a unique organization with connections to open doors in many schools and
colleges. For all that is stated in the nomination, including its impressive
graduation numbers in the sciences, it can be said that AISES has an outstanding
record in mentoring Native American youth in the sciences.