* 9724193
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Ultra-Wide-Band Short-Pulse Electromagnetic Interrogation of Targets and Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Kun-Mu Chen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 09/30/1998
* USD 151,958.00

The Electromagnetics Research Group (EMRG) at Michigan State University (MSU)
performs both fundamental and applied research in the interaction of
electromagnetic fields with both electronic and biological systems. Areas of
current and past research activity include electromagnetic radiating and
receiving processes and systems, the interaction of waves with radar targets and
target identification, the guiding of EM waves and the interaction of guided
waves with integrated circuits, microwave characterization of materials, the
interaction of antennas with plasmas, the interaction of electromagnetic fields
with non-ionic species, the interaction of microwaves with biological bodies,
the interaction of power-line fields with human cell structure and the
assessment of cancer risk, and the development of microwave life detection
systems. The EMRG has existed for more than thirty years and currently includes
faculty members Dr. Kun-Mu Chen, Dr. Dennis Nyquist, and Dr. Edward Rothwell.
This group has a record of significant research contributions, and is nationally
and internationally recognized for its EM expertise. The group has graduated
some 60 doctoral students, many of whom have gone on to attain high positions in
government, industry, and international business. In addition, the group has
produced some 200 refereed journal papers, 300 conference papers, several book
chapters, and has held 53 research grants and contracts valued in excess of $5.5
million. Government sponsors have included the NSF, DARPA, DOE, Naval Medical
Research Conunand, Naval Air System Command, Naval Ocean Surveillance Center,
Office of Naval Technology, Office of Naval Research, and other agencies of the
Departments of the Navy, Army, and Air Force. Corporate support has been
obtained through Lockheed, General Electric, Boeing, Thermo Trex, Martin
Marietta, TRW, and the Electric Power Research Institute. Members of the EMRG
have demonstrated high levels of achievement in research and scholarship. This
is evidenced by the awards and positions held by the members, as well as their
successful completion of numerous research projects. Dr. Kun-Mu Chen holds the
Richard M. Hong Chair of Electrical Engineering, the first endowed chair in the
department. He is a Fellow of the IEEE, a Fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, and has been awarded the MSU Distinguished Faculty
Award, the Withrow Distinguished Scholar Award, and the Taiwanese American
Foundation's Outstanding Achievement Award. Dr. Dennis Nyquist is also a Fellow
of the IEEE, a member of Commission B of the International Radio Science Union,
Sigma Xi, Tau Beta Pi, and Phi Kappa Phi. He has acted as associate editor of
the IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation and the Journal of
Electromagnetic Waves and Applications, and has won the MSU Distinguished
Faculty Award, the MSU Teacher-Scholar award and the Withrow Distinguished
Scholar Award. Dr. Edward Rothwell is a Senior Member of the IEEE, a member of
Commission B of the International Radio Science Union, Sigma Xi, Phi Kappa Phi,
and has twice received the Withrow Teaching Excellence Award. 1.2 Major
Laboratory Facilities The Michigan State University Electromagnetics Research
Laboratory (EMRL) occupies approximately 4000 square feet of laboratory space in
two rooms of the Engineering Research Complex. Room C-24 (3000 square feet)
contains a free-field scattering range, a ground-plane scattering range, and a
low-frequency magnetic field exposure system. It also houses three smaller
laboratories, two of which are currently dedicated to the electromagnetic
characterization of materials. Room C-12 (900 square feet) contains an arch-
reflectivity scattering range. The magnetic field exposure system is currently
being employed for the assessment of the potential health hazards of power-line
frequency magnetic fields. It consists of an incubator, two exposure chambers,
and a stock chamber. Biological samples are placed into the chambers for
controlled exposure to various levels of AC magnetic field.