* 9724122
* Dissertation Enhancement Grant:  Middle Paleogene Palynology of Colombia, South America: Biostratigraphic, Sequence     Stratigraphic, and Paleogeographic Implications
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2001
* David Dilcher, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/2001
* USD 16,480.00

974122 Dilcher This Americas Program dissertation enhancement grant will fund
Mr. Carlos Jaramillo, under the direction of Dr. David Dilcher, University of
Florida, on a study of the palynostratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy of four
Andean provinces in the western, northeastern, central and eastern Colombian
Andes. The study will include a detailed taxonomic survey of pollen/spores and
comparison with living taxa. It is anticipated that the research will provide
data for recognizing flora constituents in the region during the Paleogene , as
well as refine the existent biostratigraphic resolution. The main goal is to
identify patterns of palynologic responses relative to sea-level and base-level
changes, and distinguish them from evolutionary changes. The use of palynology
(pollen/spores) palynofacies are proven and adequate techniques to make
geological and vegetational reconstructions. The research will provide an
integrated overview of the geological and vegetational development during this
period, and will provide a critical link in the knowledge of the Paleogene
history of northern South America. The Paleogene encompasses major evolutionary
progress, especially within the angiosperms, and major changes in global
circulation and climatic changes, sea-level fluctuations and tectonism. However,
its history in northwestern South America remains largely unknown due to the
scarcity of detailed geologic research. An adequate understanding of important
large-scale events, such as the Andes uplift process and its relation to the
high species diversity in the area, has been hindered by this lack of
information. Furthermore, some of the most important hydrocarbon reservoirs in
the region are located in Paleogene and Eocene continental rocks, in zones with
high structural complexities. A better understanding of the paleogene
stratigraphy and biostratigraphy will enhance the successful exploration of
these reservoirs. ***