* 9724070
* US-Egypt Workshop:  Preparation & Applications of Ultra-    Fine Particulates, Nov. 15-16, 1997, Cairo, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Hassan El-Shall, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1998
* USD 22,000.00

Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
`US-Egypt Workshop: Preparation and Applications of Ultra-Fine particulates,
Cairo, Egypt, November 15-16, 1997`. The US leader is Dr. Hassan El-Shall of the
Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Florida,
Gainesville. The Egyptian co-organizer of the workshop is Dr. Adel K. Ismail, of
the Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDA) in Helwan,
Egypt. The purpose of the workshop is to bring the US and Egyptian scientists
and engineers in a forum to explore the recent scientific developments and
technical advances in the area of fine particles, and to identify specific
research areas where their collaboration would be useful for both sides. The
workshop will be followed by an `Engineering Foundation Conference on
Development of Nonrenewable Resources` on November 17-21, in Luxor, Egypt. The
workshop topics will be: advanced techniques for fine particle preparation;
grinding of ultra-fine particles; characterization; separation of fine particle
systems; surface modifications for specific applications; and research needs.
The EFC on Development of Nonrenewable Resources will focus on industrial
minerals, non sulfide minerals, sulfide minerals, energy minerals, and
environmental aspects. The proceedings will be published prior to the meeting.
Recommendations on areas of scientific cooperation will be made available after
the meeting. Scope: This project deals with an area that is gaining in
importance as most countries are attempting to develop their mineral and energy
resources, because as the high grade resources are depleted there is increasing
emphasis on efficient utilization of low grade resources preparation and new
applications of fine particles. The planned workshop allows a forum for
scientists and engineers from both countries to discuss the challenges facing
the preparation of fine particles and its applications in different industries
as well as its environmental impact, and possible technical solutions to
overcome these challenges. Dr. El-Shall is the deputy director of the NSF-
supported Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the
U. of Florida. He will be assisted by a number of eminent scientists at that ERC
and at other well known research institutes including Columbia University and
the University of Utah. The CMRDA is the largest such center in the Arab
countries and provides a substantial capability for the workshop, the following
conference, and for the cooperative research that is expected to result. The
proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities likely to enhance
technical and scientific collaboration between US and foreign researchers in
areas of mutual interest.