* 9724567
* High Performance Processors and Networks for Video          Compression, Distributed Visualization, Database Systems    and Collaborative Telepresence
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Alexander Sawchuk, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 712,320.00

9724567 Sawchuk, Alexander McLeod, Dennis University of Southern California High
Performance of Processors and Networks for Video Compression, Distributed
Visualization, Database Systems and Collaborative Telepresence USC has received
a Major Research Instrumentation award for the acquisition of processing
hardware; a special purpose high-speed-resolution digital video storage and
display hardware; and miscellaneous data communications hardware; for an
Integrated Media Research Network (IMRN) to support research and training
programs in high-performance multimedia, graphics, visualization, and database
systems. Research projects to be supported include the generation, compression
and transmission of real-time video over shared networks; processing of remote
high resolution 3-D visualization and computation-intensive graphics; robust
distribution and networking of interactive multimedia data within a
heterogeneous distributed computing environment; distributed database management
techniques for video and audio servers; and utilization of multiprocessor
computers for collaborative telepresence over long physical distances. Besides
making the enhanced facilities available to students pursuing research in high-
performance graphics, visualization and database systems, USC plans to connect
the IMRN to the Institution's School of Engineering's Instructional Television
network which supports two-way live interactive broadcasts of regular credit
courses from engineering, computer science and mathematics. It is envisaged that
this connection will allow students to work on research projects anywhere on the
main campus, medical school campus and USC's Information Sciences Institute and
will allow classroom demonstrations over these locations as well as the local
Los Angeles area. Research results on database management for video data and
distance learning will contribute directly to these distance learning
activities.