* 9724371
* MRI:  Acquisition of Versatile Non-Contact Surface Profiling Microscopes for Characterizing Microtopographic Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Robert Cohn, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2000
* USD 165,550.00

9724371 Cohn Two surface profiling microscopes will be acquired that are capable
of measuring the three dimensional topography of a variety of samples with
extreme precision and accuracy. One instrument is referred to as a Mirau
correlation microscope or also as a white light scanning interferometer. The
other instrument is an atomic force microscope. These prowlers are complementary
in terms of scan range, accuracy and measurement speed. The Mirau microscope has
a field of view from 60 microns to 8 millimeters (depending on the objective)
and vertical range of 0.5 millimeter. The transverse resolution is set by the
diffraction limit to between 0.5 micron and 15 microns depending on the
objective. The vertical resolution is 1 angstrom. The Mirau correlation
microscope can be programmed to profile surfaces of up to 100 millimeters by 100
millimeters by stepping and repeating of the measurements. Stage movements are
accurate to 0.5 microns. A single field of view (of up to 736 x 480 sample
points) is profiled and converted to a computer file at the rate of 7 microns
per second in the vertical direction or up to 70 seconds if the entire 0.5
millimeter range is scanned. The atomic force microscope has transverse scan
ranges of up to 100 microns, vertical scan ranges of up to 9 microns and
resolution of 1.5 angstroms or less in x, y and z. A three dimensional scan can
take from 2-5 minutes and produces a 512 x 512 pixel image. The system can also
perform atomic force microscopy in contact, lateral force measurements of
surface friction, and surface tunneling microscopy. The profiling microscopes
will be used in several funded research studies. Their uses include: 1)
characterizing the accuracy of a new method of optically patterning relief
patterns into photoresist for applications to diffractive optics; 2) evaluating
thickness and roughness of chemical sensing films on suspended silicon
platforms. The noncontact measurements possible with the two profilers will be
used to avoid mechanical damage to the silicon platforms that could result from
contacting stylus prowlers, and damage to films that can result from charge
buildup when imaging with scanning electron microscopes; 3) For a study on
increasing the reliability of fuel cells through the use of conductive polymer
electrodes. The thickening of the polymerized region from nanometers to several
microns will be observed with the interferometer during the curing process; 4)
evaluating the structure of chemical vapor deposited thin films of diamond.
Measurements of individual crystal geometries will be used to understand the
nucleation and growth of diamond; 5) for developing and refining the processes
of fabricating imaging x-ray detector for space-based telescopes. The equipment
will also be available (10 hours per course) for use in two NSF supported
laboratory courses: 1) Microfabrication in which students fabricate MEMS devices
in a class 100 clean room; 2) an expanded Analytical Techniques offered jointly
by Chemistry and Chemical Engineering that will provide theory and hands on
training in Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and scanning electron,
atomic force, surface tunneling and Mirau correlation microscopy. The proposers'
research area can be classified as the development of processes for fabricating
microelectro-mechanical and micro-optic devices. The equipment would undoubtedly
be of value to numerous other researchers in areas of surface science, rapid
prototyping and microscopic imaging. ***