* 9724105
* Molecular Dissection of the Leishmania Paraflagellar Rod
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Jonathan LeBowitz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1999
* USD 129,652.00

9724105 LeBowitz The paraflagellar rod (PFR) is essential for the normal
motility of Leishmania promastigotes, yet the molecular structure, assembly and
function of this unique cytoskeletal structure are not well understood. The PFR
extends the length of the axoneme after it emerges from the flagellar pocket and
is built up from discrete filaments organized in lattice-like arrays. The major
protein components of the PFR do not reveal significant homology to other
cytoskeletal proteins. This lack of homology together with the elaborate and
unusual structure of the PFR suggests a novel type of cytoskeletal filament and
organization. Based on the characterization of L. mexicana lines lacking the
major PFR proteins, PFR-1 and PFR-2, a simple model for the organization of the
PFR is proposed that has a number of testable features. First, PFR-1 protein is
an essential constituent of the proximal domain of the PFR and PFR-2 is absent
from the proximal domain. Second, PFR-1 protein can assemble into filaments in
the absence of PFR-2 either forming a homopolymer or polymerizing with as yet
unidentified partners. Third, PFR-2 protein is a primary constituent of the
distal domain of the PFR. Fourth, assembly of the distal domain of the PFR
requires prior assembly of the proximal domain of the PFR whose assembly in turn
is coordinated with assembly of the axoneme. This ordering of PFR assembly
explains the observed inability of PFR-2 protein to assemble into a stable
structure in the absence of PFR-1, and it explains the presence of a properly
positioned structure that contains PFR-1 in the absence of PFR-2. Furthermore,
it accounts for the puzzling observation that in dividing cells examined by
immunofluorescence with anti-PFR antibodies, the daughter flagellum often stains
more weakly than the parental flagellum. This would be expected if the PFR was
assembled stepwise from the proximal to the distal zone. Genetic and cytological
experiments are proposed t o test and extend this model of the organization of
the PFR in Leishmania mexicana. These specific objectives will be accomplished:
1. Ultrastructural characterization of PFR-1 and PFR-1/PFR-2 null mutants. The
objective of this set of experiments is to determine whether or not
substructures of the PFR are retained in the mutant lines that lack PFR-1 2.
Determination of the location within the PFR of the PFR-1 and PFR-2 proteins.
The objective of this set of experiments is to separately localize PFR-1 and
PFR-2 proteins by immunogold labeling of thin sections and whole mount
cytoskeletons. 3. Test of the order of assembly of the domains of the PFR. The
objective of these experiments is to determine whether the nascent daughter
flagella of dividing L. mexicana assemble the proximal domain of the PFR prior
to the distal domain. Among unicellular organisms there is an immense diversity
of differences in physiology and structure that reflects the vast
experimentation in form and function that has occurred during evolution. The
means by which unicellular organisms move using flagella and cilia as basis has
been elaborated and altered as among diverse unicellular organisms. In this
award Dr. LeBowitz will study the function and form of the paraflagellar rod of
Leishmania. Understanding how the paraflagellar rod is assembled will yield
important information on the diversity of motility mechanisms of unicellular
organisms. Members of Leishmania species include pathogens that are causitive
agents of human disease. Potential applications of this information includes
finding compounds that impede the formation of paraflagellar rod preventing
motility and spread of the organisms. ***