* 9724751
* Dissertation Enhancement:  Particle Astrophysics at the     Super-Kamiokande Neutrino Observatory
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* R. Jeffrey Wilkes, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 14,180.00

9724751 Wilkes This award supports a 6 month National Science Foundation
Dissertation Enhancement Award for Dr. R. J. Wilkes at the Super-Kamiokande
Neutrino Observatory, Mozumi, Japan, operated by the Institute for Cosmic Ray
Research (ICRR), Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Wilkes's student, Mr. Ross Doyle, will work
with Professor Yoji Totsuka, Director of ICRR, on a research project entitled
"Atmospheric Neutrino Observations with Super-Kamiokande". Evidence from
experiments conducted over the last two decades consistently suggests there is a
discrepancy between the number of electron neutrinos observed coming from the
sun and the number that might be expected. Experiments such as Homestake, SAGE,
Kamiokande II, and GALLEX have all reported fewer electron neutrinos than
standard models predict. Because no solar models have yet been developed that
are adequately able to both predict the observed level of neutrinos and yet
account for all the other observed features of the sun, the possibility of
neutrino oscillations has been invoked as an explanation for the measured
deficit of one species. The proposed research is designed to determine whether
these neutrino oscillations actually occur and, if so, measure the solar
electron neutrino flux with greater accuracy than has been accomplished
previously. ***