* 9724409
* Acquisiton of a Multiple Collector Inductively-Coupled      Plasma Mass Spectrometer of Geochemical, Geochronological   and Cosmochemical Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Fouad Tera, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 574,172.00

9724409 Carlson This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program, provides $574,172 as partial support of the costs of acquiring a
multi-collector, high resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(MC-HR-ICP-MS) with a laser ablation microprobe for high sensitivity, high
precision and high spatial resolution studies in geochemistry, geochronology and
cosmochemistry. The multi- collector HR-ICP-MS is considered a potentially
revolutionary instrument for studies of the isotopic composition of elements
with high ionization potentials which, prior to the advent of the MC-HR-ICP-MS,
have alluded serious study. The Micromass Iso-PlasmaTrace ICP-MS that the PI's
will acquire will enhance and/or make possible fundamental studies in the Earth
sciences. Evidence for core-mantle exchange based on high precision analyses of
platinum group elements (PGE) in mafic and ultramafic samples, determination of
the degree of chemical heterogeneity in the early mantle using Lu-Hf isotope
systematics and geochronologic investigations of time scales of magma transport
through the mantle based on uranium disequilibria series isotope systematics are
just a few of the examples of the research that can be addressed given the
stated capabilities of this new generation instrument. This instrument will also
provide training on state-of-the-art geochemical instrumentation for some of the
top earth science scholars in the world through CIW-DTM's postdoctoral/guest
scientist program. ***