* 9724528
* MRI:  Development of a Paperless Machine Design Research    Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Stewart Prince, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1999
* USD 103,993.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a paperless machine design
research laboratory. The purpose of the laboratory is to introduce students to
state-of-the-art machine design and manufacturing processes, and provide a venue
for research in these areas. The laboratory shall consist of a computer
workstation with solid modeling and analysis software, a rapid prototyping
device, a computer controlled milling machine, and a computer controlled lathe.
Students will take design concepts and model them using solid modeling software.
Solid modeling allows one to sculpt a design from a solid volume rather than
draw a two-dimensional representation of a part. Designs are also created
parametrically using the parent/child relationship; these designs can be
combined together to create assemblies which include many components. Stress,
kinematic, thermal, and other types of analysis can be performed by post
processing the model information, and the resulting design can be quickly
produced using rapid prototyping processes, such as stereo-lithography. The
prototype gives the student insight into his/her design, and actual fabrication
of the machine part leads to a fundamental understanding of the overall machine
design process, yet few blueprints are ever produced. Illustrations and analysis
can be directly ported into presentation software for review. By the use of
retro-active updating, a design change can be updated backward through the
design chain. In many cases, the use of such state-of-the-art equipment can
identify design flaws early in the process thus reducing the need for refinement
and iteration. The development of this laboratory will enhance the student's
understanding of current machine design and manufacturing processes. Faculty
members and students from many departments will use the laboratory for research
and experimentation. Students will perform research on advanced transient
control strategies for tool path generation, error reduction in stereo-
lithography interpolation, and optimization of the interface between machine
design and manufacturing. Knowledge gained will lead to future research in many
other areas.