* 9724994
* Systemic Reform of Grades 6-12 Mathematics in Rural Virginia
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2003
* Harold Mick, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 09/30/2003
* USD 827,933.00

9724994 Patty Systemic Reform of Mathematics 6-12 for Rural Virginia (SRMRV), a
five-year project designed to encourage and implement systemic change in the
high schools and middle schools of five school divisions in rural Virginia, is a
partnership between Virginia Tech and the public schools of Buckingham County,
Craig County, Montgomery County, Nottoway County, and Roanoke City. Each of the
174 mathematics teachers in the participating schools engages in professional
development built around nationally developed, cutting-edge, NSF-funded
instructional material that is to replace traditional textbooks. The project's
major objective is to provide all 174 mathematics teachers with the background
and resources to achieve whole-school reform in mathematics through the
implementation of a mathematically integrated, problem-solving-based curriculum.
As a Local Systemic Change through Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, Grades
7-12, project, the professional development in SRMRV has a focus on
strengthening content and renewing pedagogy. Twelve mathematics teachers in one
high school, where the teachers have already engaged in significant professional
development, receive 131 hours of enhancement. Participants who teach both
middle and high school mathematics receive 268 hours of professional
development. All other middle and high school mathematics teachers receive 173
hours. The teacher enhancement curriculum is structured around: ten-day (two-
week) summer workshops; academic-year experiences that carry credit as graduate
courses; five-day (one-week) summer workshops that follow the two-week summer
workshops and intervening graduate courses; and two-hour, follow-up, academic-
year sessions. The project also incorporates a small research component on the
use of technology in the classroom. Quantitative and qualitative methodologies
will capture the various phases of technology use, addressing such questions as:
* What aspects of technology are important? * How does tech nology interact with
curriculum? * How do students use technology? * How do teachers use technology?
Cost-sharing, which is approximately 158% of the NSF-request, is derived from
the participating school divisions and Virginia Tech.