* 9724627
* Development of an Electromagnetics Analysis System for NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* J Vaughan, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 08/31/1999
* USD 217,484.00

An Electromagnetics Analysis System for NMR A. Project Summary Our overall goal
is to predict and minimize the radio frequency (RF) electromagnetic (EM) losses
affecting the success and safety of human NMR at very high magnetic field
strengths. To pursue this goal we require the means to numerically model the RF
coil-tissue interface, and then to analyze the realization of the coil-tissue
model on the bench, prior to actual human application. The means for the
modeling and measurement of EM losses will be provided by the proposed
"Electromagnetics Analysis System for NMR". The rationale for this study lies in
the need to know and control RF dependent transmit power, tissue heating, field
penetration, and signal-to-noise for high field (1.5-7.0T) human and animal
studies. The need: A unique "Electromagnetics (EM) Analysis System" is requested
to support on-going high field NMR research and research training activities,
directly and collaboratively at three institutions with leading programs in high
resolution metabolic, anatomic, and functional imaging. The institutions:
Massachusetts General Hospital /Harvard U., the University of Minnesota, and the
University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) are currently conducting basic life
science research on humans and animals in vivo at the highest magnetic field
strengths available. Increased signal- to-noise (SNR) and its dependent spatial
resolution, temporal resolution and contrast, are chief reasons for performing
NMR investigations at high field strengths. Also important, the spectral
resolution and susceptibility contrast also improve with field strength. The
MGH, Minnesota, and UAB sites among others have demonstrated these high field
advantages with their 3 and 4T whole body systems. The data quality achieved at
3 and 4T has compelled the MGH, Minnesota, and other groups to consider the
feasibility of human studies at 6 T, 7T, an d higher. The project: The proposed
EM Analyzer will be used to help achieve three specific aims: 1) predict of EM
losses through RF coil-anatomy modeling, 2) verify and account for EM losses by
measurement, and 3) minimize these EM losses by appropriate RF coil design and
application. In first aim, the EM losses in finite element models of the coil
adjacent to anatomy will be numerically calculated. The consequences of these EM
losses, to the coil's RF (Bl) field homogeneity, to safety, and to the SNR will
be predicted by using the computing power and software of the proposed
instrument to solve the time-dependent electromagnetic and thermodynamic
equations for these models. The second aim will be achieved by verifying the
model predictions by bench measurement methods using the high power pulsed
analyzer functions of the instrument. The modeled coils will be built and
tested, with and without phantom, animal, and human loads. For the third aim,
the theoretical predictions and empirical verifications will be tested in
targeted applications. Initially, high field RF coils will be dedicated to each
of four applications in the human head targeting deep localized structure, whole
brain, superficial local, or superficial global cortex. By minimizing RF losses
for each application we seek to show improved NMR data at safe RF power levels
in NMR applications at 1.5, 3, 4, and 7T. Although the EM Analysis System will
be applied to the development of a wide variety of high field NMR experiments,
the three groups proposing this instrument share a common interest to first
develop the high field human head application. The aims of this project will be
closely allied with, and checked against the commercial high field products
supported by Advanced NMR Systems, Inc. The instrument: The EM Analyzer will be
used to help prove the feasibility of 6 to7T experiments, and to achieve the
inherent potential of 3T and 4T studies. This will be accomplished by predicting
and developing the physical and technical components of selected high field NMR
experiments. The EM Analysis System will be a workstation driven, high power
pulsed network analyzer. The system will include a dynamic gradient signal
analyzer as well. The workstation will host EM, thermal, mechanical, and NMR
simulation software for modeling the physical components of the NMR experiment.
The EM Analyzer does not exist as a stand-alone commercial product, but will be
assembled from mostly off-the-shelf hardware and software components. Analogous
to and deriving from the Automatic Test Equipment (ATE) used in military radar
development and diagnostics, the EM Analyzer proposed will be quite unique to
the NMR application. The Analyzer will be uniquely powerful as well, combining
3D, time-dependent EM simulation software, with automated test equipment for
analyzing realizations of these EM coil designs on the bench, under realistic
high power pulsed or switched conditions. This instrument will allow 3D finite
element models of anatomic regions encompassed by EM coil structures including
RF, gradient and magnet coils, to be modeled. Time dependent numerical solutions
of EM phenomena including SNR, B1 penetration, power absorption, heating,
magnetic susceptibility, etc. will be calculated. After using these simulations
to develop optimized coil designs, the proposed instrument will be used to
dynamically analyze the physically constructed coil circuits for realistic RF
pulse excitation and gradient wave form protocols. Thusly the success and safety
of high field human experiments will be predicted by simulation, and verified on
the bench. The shared use: The proposed instrument will be a much enhanced,
second generation of the workstation and small-signal CW network analyzer
previously used by the PI while at UAB. The PI will assemble and mainta in the
EM Analyzer at the MGH-Harvard Advanced Detector Laboratory, a part of the MGH-
NMR Center. In addition to and as part of their own research, Drs. Vaughan and
Ackerman will support and supervise local Harvard and MIT graduate student
projects requiring use of the EM Analysis System. This system will be shared
through continued collaboration with Dr. Harrison and his students at the UAB,
and with Drs. Ugurbil, Garwood and their students at the University of
Minnesota. In turn, the methods and coil technology developed through shared use
of the proposed instrument will be verified by application at 4T and at 7T at
the collaborating sites.