* 9724091
* Nitric Oxide Synthase in the Magnocellular System During    Pregnancy and Lactation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Gwyneth Beagley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 60,000.00

PI: Summy-Long, J. IBN-9724091 Large cells in the brain that produce the
hormones vasopressin (VP) and oxytocin (OT) comprise the magnocellular
neuroendocrine system. These cells also make nitric oxide (NO), a gas that
regulates the function of neurons and their interconnections and cellular
structure. These structural changes (termed plasticity) are known to occur on
oxytocinergic neurons late in pregnancy and are maintained throughout lactation.
Current research indicates that NO, as well as OT, released within the brain
during nursing, may be necessary to maintain these plastic changes in the
oxytocinergic neuron. In the proposed research it is postulated that more
magnocellular cells synthesize or produce NO during lactation to meet the
increasing demand for NO to influence plasticity. Current methods in
neuroscience (immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization) will be used to
localize and count the number of cells throughout the magnocellular system that
express different forms of NO synthase, the enzyme needed to produce NO.
Specifically, we will determine if an increased expression of NO synthase occurs
in magnocellular neurons during lactation. Findings from these proposed studies
will clarify a role for NO in regulating plasticity of the magnocellular system
during lactation. Aside from the recognized contribution to our understanding of
the neuroendocrinology of lactation, these studies have the potential to
increase our knowledge regarding the action of NO on the nervous system with
implications for the neurobiology of learning and memory and the treatment of
neurodegenerative diseases.