* 9724225
* Acquisition of a Motion Analysis Facility for the Study     of Primate Locomotion at SUNY, Stony Brook
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* John Fleagle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 138,502.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Primate Locomotion Laboratory at
SUNY Stony Brook will acquire instrumentation to supplement and increase their
capacity to study primate locomotion. Purchase of a 3D motion analysis system
will permit automatic and manual tracking of limb segment coordinates and will
allow accurate quantification of 3D displacements, velocities and accelerations
of limb segments. These data will then be coordinated with EMG data on muscle
recruitment patterns, kinetic data on substrate forces and pressures, and strain
data on long bone loading. A pressure plate, also purchased through this grant
will permit determination of pressure distribution at hand and foot contacts.
The laboratory is one of a few in the US engaged in experimental analysis of
functional morphology in primates and has examined the function of muscle and
bone conformation across a wide range of anatomical parts of the body and
primate species. The group plans to pursue a number of studies including: 1. the
kinematics of primate quadrupeds involved in bone strain studies to determine if
inter-individual and interlimb variations in strain correlate with limb posture
differences: 2. the kinematics of climbing in monkeys and apes to help determine
whether climbing adaptations are responsible for any of the unique features
which distinguish are and fossil hominid postcranial morphology; 3. the
kinematics and kinetics of gibbon and spider monkey brachiation; 4. the
kinematics and kinetics of knuckle-walking to understand the distribution of
this unique locomotor adaptation in the hominoid tree; The research will serve
several functions. It will provide basic insight into the relationship between
analytical form and function. It will also provide a powerful data base and
point of departure for the analysis of fossil monkey ape and hominid remains.
Many researchers from several departments within the university as well as
graduate students will benefit from this instrumentation