* 9724491
* Development of the Hawaii-2 Observatory:  Deployment and    Installation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Rhett Butler, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,020,832.00

This collaborative effort between IRIS, University of Hawaii, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and a private corporation will result in a multi-
purpose seafloor observatory for geophysical research. The Hawaii-2 undersea
telephone cable between Hawaii and California has been retired by AT&amp;T and
transferred for scientific re-use by the geoscience community. The initiation of
a deep-ocean facility-the Hawaii-2 Observatory (H20)-will provide the capability
for long-term geoscientific research at the sea floor using the Hawaii-2 cable
for power and two-way, real-time communications. A site midway between Hawaii
and California optimizes coverage for the IRIS Global Seismographic Network, and
will potentially contribute to geomagnetism, tsunami studies, and physical
oceanography. A junction box with eight independent underwater-mateable
connectors will be connected to the Hawaii-2 cable. A broadband seismometer and
hydrophone package will be deployed (plugged in). Ample power availability to
the observatory opens up the types of instrumentation that can be added (or
changed) later using a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) or a manned submersible.
The data from H20 will be available in real time on a disk buffer via Internet
or telephone dial-up. Data will be archived and distributed by the IRIS Data
Management Center in Seattle. The seismic station at H20 will become a part of
the IRIS Global Seismographic Network.