* 9724082
* A Proposed Seminar on Guatemalan Development and            Democratization: Proactive Responses to Globalization;      Guatemala, August 21-23, 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Christopher Chase-Dunn, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 06/30/1999
* USD 14,955.00

9724082 Chase-Dunn This Americas Program award will fund a seminar on Guatemalan
development and democratization, focusing on proactive responses to
globalization. Organizers are Dr. Christopher Chase-Dunn, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Md., and Dr. Nelson Amaro, Universidad del Valle,
Guatemala City, Guatemala. The seminar will bring together social scientists and
policy experts from the United States and Guatemala, to present research and
analyses of the trajectory of Guatemalan social change in its comparative
regional and global context. The main purpose is to further policy-relevant
social scientific research on the issues of Guatemalan economic development and
democratization in the context of changing global constraints and opportunities.
Researchers will evaluate a range of proactive responses to forces that should
be considered by participants from all sectors of Guatemalan society, as well as
by those abroad who are interested in facilitating Guatemalan democracy and
development. Guatemala is the largest country in Central America, and the last
to negotiate an end to civil war. The peace process has created an important
moment in Guatemalan history. Formerly excluded groups are becoming participants
in legal and institutional processes for formulating policies of development and
democratization. While the process still has a long way to go before Guatemala
can be considered a full-fledged member of the family of democratic nations, the
direction of recent developments is clear. The prospect of a new multiethnic
nation that recognizes the cultural, political and economic rights of its
poorest and least powerful citizens is a real possibility for the first time in
decades. The focus of the seminar will be on the most salient problems and their
potential solutions during the next two decades. The dissemination of the
results will help social scientists share perspectives and formulate research
strategies that are relevant for policies that can contribute to resolving the
emergent problems in post-war Guatemala. ***