* 9724068
* RUI:  Sex, Hormonal, and Age-Related Factors in Endogenous  Pain Inhibition
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Wendy Sternberg, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 72,767.00

PI: Sternberg, W. IBN-9724068 The goal of this research is to elucidate the
mechanisms of pain inhibition in male and female mice. The experience of pain is
dependent not only on peripheral activation of pain receptors but also on
influences from higher brain centers that modulate the pain experience. Pain
usually serves as a warning signal, preventing further use of the injured area
to promote healing; however, there are situations when pain perception would be
counter-adaptive such as during conditions of "fight-or-flight" when the brain
perceives a threatening situation and temporarily blocks any incoming pain
messages to allow the organism to cope with the potentially pain producing
event, and live to fight or flee again. This phenomenon of pain inhibition
during threatening events is known as "stress-induced analgesia", or SIA. Many
animals, including humans, exhibit SIA responses under a wide variety of
"stressful" laboratory and real-life situations. That the brain has the ability
to inhibit pain perception implies that there may be ways of artificially
activating these systems to treat pain in individuals who are unable to
experience pain relief by currently available methods, such as those suffering
from chronic pain. It is believed that non-traditional methods of producing
analgesia such as hypnosis, acupuncture, or even placebo analgesia, are due to
the activation of endogenous pain inhibitory pathways. Another minimally
invasive way to activate the brain's own mechanisms of pain relief is to use
pharmaceuticals which mimic the action of the neurotransmitters which are
normally used to communicate between neurons in the pain inhibition pathway.
Morphine works in this way to produce analgesia by binding to receptors in pain
inhibitory pathways which normally accept the brain's own opiate peptides (the
endorphins, enkephalins and dynorphins). However, morphine has several
liabilities when used in a clinical setting over prolonged periods (such as is
necessary for the treat ment of chronic pain), so investigators are currently
examining other non-opioid neurotransmitters which play a role in pain
inhibition as possible candidate systems for analgesic drug development. One
system that has been implicated in non-opioid SIA is the excitatory amino acid
class of neurotransmitters (glutamate and aspartate) which bind to the NMDA
subtype of receptor. Recent research has established the existence of NMDA-
mediated SIA in mice; however, this appears to be specific to male mice only.
The non-opioid analgesia displayed by female mice following the same stressor
(3-min cold water swim), while equivalent in magnitude to that exhibited by
males, cannot be characterized as being NMDA-mediated, and therefore must
involve other neurotransmitters. Follow-up research determined that females have
a mechanism of non-opioid analgesia that is specific to their gender, and is
dependent on the presence of estrogen for it's expression. The goal of the PI is
to determine which neurotransmitters are responsible for non-opioid analgesia in
female mice of varying ages, and how varying hormonal states influence the
neurochemical nature of the analgesia exhibited following swim stress. This
should lead to a better understanding of the neurotransmitters that underlie
non-opioid SIA in female mice and may contribute to the development of analgesic
drugs that will be particularly effective at combating pain in the female.