* 9724290
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Commercial OMCVD System for Compound Semiconductor Material and Device Research
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Kei Lau, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Zavada
* 09/30/2000
* USD 400,000.00

9724290 Lau The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the
University of Massachusetts/Amherst will purchase a commercial organometallic
chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD) system which will be dedicated to support
research in compound semiconductor materials and devices. The OMCVD system will
be used for many research projects, including in particular: (1) Resonant
tunneling injection lasers, (2) Selective-Area Growth of Compound Semiconductors
by OMCVD, (3) Application of the Two-Dimensional Electron Gas Medium to THz
Detectors and Heterodyne Receivers, (4) Optically-Pumped THz Sources/lasers, (5)
Quantum Well Solar Cells, (6) Alternate sources for OMVPE of Ill-V
semiconductors. Acquisition of the OMCVD system will allow the PI to continue
his pursuit of advanced device concepts such as resonant tunneling injection
lasers, 2-DEG detector and mixer arrays, THz sources, etc. In addition, it will
also allow us to work more closely with industrial companies who are interested
in further development of more mature devices such as PHEMTs (pseudomorphic
high-electron mobility transistors) and HBTs (Heterojuction Bipolar
Transistors). In the development of new device structures, testing of material
concepts, and compatibility of different technologies, device wafers (full 3" or
4") with various structural designs grown in this system can be placed in the
process lines by the companies for comparison. This system will also greatly
increase his capacity of training students in semiconductors in general and with
familiarity of OMCVD specifically. In summary, this piece of equipment is
essential to some of our major projects and will provide new opportunities for
us to collaborate with industrial researchers, as well as training students who
are in high demand by the semiconductor, microwave, and photonic industries
nafionwide. ***