* 9724808
* U.S.-Mexico Workshops on Low Dimensional Systems and        Heterostructures; January 1998, Oaxaca, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1998,09/30/1999
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 18,981.00

9724808 Schuller This Americas Program award will support travel and related
expenses for six senior researchers and six young investigators, to participate
in two workshops on research of current interest in the fields of solid state
physics and materials science. These workshops will be held concurrently with a
Latin American Symposium of Solid State Physics (SLAFES), in Oaxaca, Mexico,
January 11-16, 1998. The topics to be discussed in the two workshops will be the
physical properties of heterostructures and the magnetic properties of low
dimensional systems. Organizers are Dr. Ivan Schuller, University of California,
San Diego, and Dr. Jose Luis Moran Lopez, Universidad Autonoma de San Luis
Potosi. The physics and materials science of low dimensional systems is an
important current subject of research worldwide, but much of the research is
performed by small groups in many institutions. Therefore, there is a strong
need to bring together this small group of researchers for open discussions of
past research and future directions. The two workshops will meet this need,
especially with the opportunity of holding them concurrently with the Latin
American Symposium, which has had US participation since its inception and has
played an important role for the development of American collaboration for many
years. ***