* 9724895
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Emily Wadsworth, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 12/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

Purdue's Women in Engineering Mentoring Program (WIEMP) was created in 1992 to
expand the number of women engineering students. A networking model was chosen
as a way for students to provide support to each other in personal and
professional advancement. Mentors are experienced students and alumni who are
working in engineering fields. The components of the mentoring model focus on:
undergraduates in the first and third year; undergraduates in the second and
fourth year; and graduates pursuing masters and doctorates. As a consequence,
the mentoring programs provide constant support to women in the program. There
is ongoing assessment of the women in the program as well as a summative
evaluation. Results indicate that retention is 19 percent higher for women in
the program. Purdue has already institutionalized Undergraduate Mentoring
Programs of WIEMP in their Women in Engineering Programs. The success of the
program has been cited in professional publications, and presentations. In
addition, information has been distributed internally as well to 35 higher
education institutions throughout the country. A thorough proposal demonstrates
changes the university has made to affect the enrollment of women in their
engineering program. The strengths of the nominee include: . Excellent
continuity in its mentoring program whereby former mentees become mentors. .
Number of institutions acknowledging the success of the program indicates
possible replication. . Undergraduate programs introduced are being
institutionalized. . Active involvement is clearly seen as a bonus. . High rate
of success. . Linking graduate students with Ph.D. alumni is great for
continuity. . Mentoring is mostly independent of faculty. . Recruitment of women
in engineering is excellent. In summary, WIEMP offers outstanding mentoring
continuity for female engineering students that stems from their first year as
freshmen to afte r graduation when they can serve as alumni mentors for graduate
students. Throughout the program process, evaluation is undertaken to ensure
student satisfaction with the mentoring support and strategies. The retention
and graduation data indicate a very high success rate. Linking graduate student
participants with Ph.D. alumni changes the traditional educational system in a
positive way by bringing the world of work closer to the students' university
experience.