* 9724179
* International Consultative and Planning Meeting of Physical Societies
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Irving Lerch, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 06/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

This grant will provide partial support of a planning meeting of international
physical societies to be held in Washington, DC, on October 8-10, 1997,
organized by the American Physical Society. The planning meeting will include
representatives from the largest national membership societies (Deutsche
Physikallische Gessellschaft, the UK's Institute of Physics, the Japanese
Physical Society and the Japanese Society of Applied Physics, the Chinese
Physical Society) and the five international regional societies (the European
Physical Society, the Federation of Latin-American Physical Societies, the
association of Asia-Pacific Physical Societies, the Euro-Asian Physical Society,
the Society of African Physicists and Mathematicians). Observers to the meeting
will include the President of the International Union of Pure and Applied
Physics and the President of the Canadian Association of Physicists. The purpose
of this meeting is to explore important common issues affecting the
international physics enterprise and to engage in joint planning to address
these issues. The topics which have been identified as most important by all
participants are: 1) the formulation and implementation of national and
international science policy, 2) the impact of electronic publishing on the
dissemination of research results, 3) status and needs for physics education and
public education, 4) physics and capacity building in developing nations and 5)
the possible organization of an international council or congress of physical
societies as a means to sustain international collaboration. The meeting will be
organized around plenary presentations designed to outline the problems and
alternative solutions, followed by break-out groups assigned specific tasks. A
concluding plenary will bring together the elements of the various discussions
to include a compilation of outcomes and assignments. The meeting is expected to
produce a consensus paper on each of the principal topics of discussion and a
general plan for further concerted action.