* 9724501
* Acquisition of a CCD-Based X-ray Diffraction Facility for   Earth Science and Chemistry Research at Stony Brook and the NSLS
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* John Parise, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 295,518.00

9724501 Parise This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
Program, provides $295,518 as one-half support of the costs of acquiring
equipment for development of a modular, CCD detector-based x-ray diffraction
facility that will be used in conjunction with both synchrotron x-ray sources at
the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven National Lab (BNL), the
Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Lab (ANL) and laboratory x-ray
sources. Specifically, the equipment will include two CCD detector systems
allowing real time x-ray diffraction studies of very small single crystals and
powdered samples, a significant advantage over more conventional image plate-
based XRD systems. One of the CCD detector systems will be used in conjunction
with a refurbished Rigaku 18 kW rotating anode that will incorporate focusing
mirrors to provide an extra beam and a high brightness focused beam for further
in-house development of the T-cup high pressure device originally designed by
researchers at the Mineral Physics Institute at SUNY-SB (a node of the CHiPR
STC). This modular system will also be transferable to brighter x-ray sources at
NSLS and APS for studies of the smallest crystals (0.5 - 20 microns). A second
system will alleviate demand for beam time at NSLS by the many postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students affiliated with the CHiPR STC who require
XRD analyses on crystals ranging in sizes from 20-100 microns for which current
laboratory x-ray sources and XRD detector systems are not adequate. Additional
funds will be used to purchase a workstation and mass storage for analysis of
the high resolution diffraction data and ancillary equipment needed to
manufacture this integrated modular system. Specific examples of the cutting
edge and funded research that will be enhanced or enabled by this equipment
include, development of the next-generation, portable, large volume high
pressure cell, determination of the strength and rheological properties of
ceramics, textural analysis during ultrasonic experiments for determination of
seismic velocities through high pressure phases, structural analyses of organic-
inorganic open framework compounds, powder diffraction studies of doped-
fullerenes, solid-state organic geochemistry, characterization of low
temperature compounds formed during early diagenesis in marine sediments and
bio- medical studies of photochemically formed natural compounds. ***