* 9724701
* FSML Planning Activities: Research, Education and           Facilities Planning for the Prescott College Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/1999
* Edward Boyer, Prescott College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,818.00

Prescott College has been conducting field courses for undergraduates in the
Gulf of California, and particularly in the area around Bahia Kino, Sonora,
Mexico, and the Midriff Island region of the Gulf of California, for nearly
thirty years. Although it is a small liberal arts school, its mission emphasizes
field studies and experiential approaches to science and environmental studies.
The college recently purchased a small field station on the coast of the Gulf of
California near the town of Bahia Kino, Sonara, Mexico and has been offering
field courses and facilitating research at the station since the fall of 1992.
With the growth of the college, the creation of a Master of Arts program and
increases in enrollment and use of the field station, the college has expanded
its commitment to the Prescott College Kino Bay Center for Cultural and
ecological Studies by appointing a director,hiring a manage, increasing
operating budgets and committing to a broader mission for the
station,particularly in the area of support for scientific research, independent
studies and graduate students. Although the station is a small offers
unparalleled access to a unique and fragile bioregion, which is coming under
increasing human pressures. It is only field station on a 400-mile stretch of
Sonoran Desert coast from Puerto Penasco in the north to Guaymas in the south.
This project will develop an intelligent, coherent, long-range plan that will
improve the undergraduate curriculum, create opportunities for graduate research
at the station, define research priorities and identify the facilities and
equipment needs to properly support research in marine and desert ecology,
island biogeography,cultural anthropology and human impact on fisheries. The
intent is to create a field station that supports and blends qualify field
research with undergraduate field courses and graduate studies.