* 9724719
* Dissertation Enhancement Grant:  Impact of Local and        Regional Processes on Foraging Patterns and Community       Organization
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1998,08/31/1999
* Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 16,137.00

9724719 Loiselle This Americas Program dissertation enhancement grant will fund
Grace Servat, under the direction of Dr. Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri,
St. Louis, on a study to elucidate the patterns and underlying mechanisms that
shape the foraging ecology of birds associated with a unique woodland habitat of
the High Andes in South America. This community is well suited for the present
study because it is a distinctive biological system characterized by high levels
of endemism, its scattered distribution in the Andes provides discrete
replicates for study, and the plant and bird species composition are relatively
simple, when compared to more species-rich forests at lower elevation, thus
facilitating detailed ecological studies at a community level. The major
objectives of the study are to document and compare, across replicate sites, the
foraging ecology of individual bird species feeding on arboreal arthropods; to
determine the extent to which patterns observed in the foraging ecology of bird
species and the assemblage as a whole are repeated across regions; and to
determine which scale and factors best explain variation in the foraging ecology
of individual species. The research will integrate natural history observations
with detailed ecological studies on availability of arthropod resources,
vegetation structures and the abundance of potential competitors and predators.
The proposed study will contribute new information about a distinctive and
highly threatened Andean system, as well as provide a model to examine the
importance of local and regional processes in shaping individual foraging
ecology and community patterns. ***