* 9724904
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Regulation of the      Ryanodine-Receptor
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1998,03/31/1999
* Esther Gallant, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1999
* USD 38,678.00

9724904 Gallant Under this U.S.-Australia cooperative research award, Dr. Esther
Gallant, Department of Veterinary Biology, University of Minnesota, and Dr.
Angela F. Dulhunty, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National
University, Canberra, will join forces to study the regulation of the ryanodine
receptor in skeletal muscle excitation- contraction. Skeletal muscle excitation-
contraction coupling involves the interaction of two calcium channel proteins,
the dihydropyridine receptor and the ryanodine-receptor. A short dihydropyradine
peptide sequence is required for in vivo excitation-contraction coupling and can
substitute for the dihydropyridine in ryanodine-receptor activation. The
investigators will record currents through ryanodine- receptor channels inserted
in artificial lipid bilayer membranes to determine 1) concentrations of
coproteins and ligands necessary for optimal ryanodine-receptor function, and 2)
ryanodine-receptor activation by dihydropyridine receptor peptides under these
optimal conditions. The U.S. and Australian investigators are experts in the
area of excitation-contraction coupling in muscle. Both will approach the study
from different perspectives: Prof. Gallant has focused at the cellular and
tissue level; while Prof. Dulhunty has experience with the single-channel,
artificial bilayer technique. Prof. Gallant will employ the new knowledge gained
in Australia to develop a similar apparatus in Minnesota. In addition, this
project will provide an opportunity for Dr. Gallant's graduate student to
participate in research in Australia.