* 9724763
* Dissertation Enhancement:  Dextrous Manipulation and        Haptic Exploration of Unknown Objects
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Mark Cutkosky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/1998
* USD 10,400.00

9724763 Cutkosky This award supports a 3 month NSF Dissertation Enhancement
Fellowship for Dr. Mark Cutkosky at the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory in
Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Cutkosky's student, Allison Okamura, will work with Dr.
Kazuo Tanie, Director of the Bio-Robotics Division, on a research project
entitled, "Dextrous Manipulation and Haptic Exploration of Unknown Objects."
Advances in controls, tactile sensing and motion planning are beginning to make
it possible for robot hands to accomplish autonomous exploration and
manipulation of unknown objects. Drawing upon human-inspired exploratory
procedures, a robot can build and refine object models using the data obtained
from position, force and tactile sensors. During the proposed research, dextrous
hands and fingers will be equipped with tactile sensors and programmed to
evaluate different exploratory procedures and object models developed during
thesis research. Experiments will also be conducted to test the ability to
display derived object properties to a human observer through haptic interface.
The proposed experiments in exploratory procedures, object modeling, and display
will contribute directly to the development of systems for autonomous or
supervised haptic exploration of objects in remote or hazardous environments.
***