* 9724706
* Developmental Control of Size
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Patrick O'Farrell, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 299,742.00

O'Farrell 9724706 To produce a body having coherent shape and structure,
development must control the size of each body part. Detailed knowledge of
development and cell cycle control in Drosophila provides unique advantages for
an exploration of the mechanisms that coordinate development, cell proliferation
and size. Dr. O'Farrell will examine this coordination in imaginal discs, the
larval precursors to the adult cuticular structures. Imaginal cells grow
exponentially during larval life but arrest when this disc reaches a mature
size. Wingless (Wg) and Decapentaplegic (Dpp) are pattern regulators that are
also synergistic activators of growth and proliferation in discs. Nitric oxide
synthase (NOS) inhibits proliferation and its activity rises at about the time
proliferation arrests in discs. He will explore the hierarchy of the inputs
controlling proliferation by examining the effect of a perturbation (e.g.
induction of Wg and Dpp) on the other processes (e.g., activation of NOS), and
the ability of other treatments (e.g., induction of various cell cycle
regulators) to override the perturbation. These epistasis like experiments
should begin to outline the pathway of regulation used in size control and give
us entries to begin a more detailed dissection of the controls. To provide
probes for this pathway dissection Dr. O'Farrell will define the basis of cell
cycle arrest upon termination of growth. Measurement of the levels of various
cell cycle regulators and analysis of the ability of ectopic expression to
bypass the arrest will define the limiting cell cycle regulators. Because
control of growth (increase in mass regulates cell cycle, he will develop probes
for growth. The rate of protein synthesis governs when cell achieve the size
threshold required for division, and the translational initiation factor eIF4E
has important inputs into cell cycle regulation. Using transgenes and a drug
(rapamycin) that impairs eIF4E activity, he will explore its involvement in
growth an d cell cycle quiescence. He will use similar techniques to alter
cyclin D levels and activity, because it is implicated in the coupling of
translation and cell cycle. As a measure of growth quiescence, he will use a
newly developed in situ procedure to assess the level of nascent rRNA
transcripts. Together these experiments should provide the ground work for
detailed dissection of the controls of tissue and organ size.