* 9724831
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  String Theory and Field    Theory Dualities and Integrable Models
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Nicholas Warner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 04/30/2002
* USD 39,264.00

9724831 Bars This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Itzhak Bars of the University of Southern California, and
Professor Tohru Eguchi of the University of Tokyo in Japan. The researchers will
be undertaking studies relating to string theory and field theory dualities and
integrable models. The objectives of the research are to study: (1) dualities of
superstrings and super-p-branes and their role in non-perturbative computations
in string theory, supersymmetric gauge theories and superconformal field
theories in four dimensions, (2) theories with extended supersymmetries and
hidden dimensions beyond ten which are crucial in the construction of the
fundamental theory that lies behind string theory, (3) integrable models and
their role in duality symmetries of field and string theories, representation
theory of W- algebras and quantum gravity and (4) problems in condensed matter
physics, such as the Kondo problem. This project brings together the efforts of
two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.
The collaboration will unite the theoretical high energy physics group at the
University of California with the theoretical group from the University of
Tokyo. In addition, younger scientists will be included in the project. It is
anticipated that the research could contribute further to an all-embracing
theory of physical phenomena. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***