* 9724100
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Sub-band Decomposition     Based Lossless Image Compression Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,01/05/1999
* Nasir Memon, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/05/1999
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Nasir
Memon of the Department of Computer Science at Northern Illinois University in
Dekalb, Dr. Khalid Sayood, Department of Electrical Engineering at the
University of Nebraska in Lincoln, Dr. Bulent Sankur, Department of Electrical
and Electronics Engineering at Bogazici (Bosporus) University in Istanbul,
Turkey and Dr. Emin Anarim of HAVELSAN ELECTRONICS Corp. in Ankara, Turkey. The
objective of this research is to develop lossless image compression techniques
that are based on subband decompositions. Such techniques offer features that
cannot be matched by currently popular predictive techniques for lossless image
compression. However, the best known lossless image compression techniques based
on subband decomposition do not match the compression performance provided by
state-of-the-art predictive techniques. The proposed research aims at removing
this performance difference and possibly achieving performance that surpasses
the best known predictive techniques. Scope: This research project will be
useful in promoting the scientific and technological knowledge of computer
graphics in general, and especially of image compression. The techniques
developed may have applications in teleradiology and in the world-wide-web. The
collaboration involves four scientists who have had some academic interaction in
the past. Each of the four has outstanding academic credentials and a solid
research record and publications. Their expertise complement each other in the
tasks of this project. The US team has primary expertise in lossless image
compression, while the Turkish team has expertise in subband coding. The
participation of high-technology private research organization such as HAVELSAN
is especially useful because of its practical experience. This proposal meets
INT objective of increasing U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit
both sides, and, since Dr. Memon received his Ph.D. in 1992, in enhancing junior
scientists' international experience. This award includes partial funding by the
Division of Networking and Communications Research.