* 9724058
* US-Pakistan Workshop:  Motion-Based Recognition,            Karachi, Pakistan, Jan. 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 9,500.00

Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
`US-Pakistan Workshop on Motion-Based recognition`, to be held in January 1998,
in Karachi, Pakistan. The US team leader is Dr. Mubarak Shah, Department of
Computer Science at the University of Central Florida in Orlando. The Pakistani
co-organizer is Dr. Javaid Laghari, of the Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute
of Science and Technology in Karachi, Pakistan. The areas to be emphasized in
the workshop include: cyclic motion detection, activity recognition, event
recognition, lip-reading, gesture recognition, and facial expression
recognition. The proceedings, including the technical presentations and the
recommendations, will be published. The workshop is to be held just before the
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) planned in January 1998, in
Bombay, India. The proximity of the two sites should help increase the
participation in the Karachi workshop by US scientists. Scope: This project is
to bring US and Pakistani scientists to discuss recent developments in a
relatively new and important area of computer graphics, namely the area of
motion-based recognition. The applications of this technology are wide, such as
in manufacturing (industrial automation and robotics), in surveillance and
monitoring, in traffic control, in object tracking, in measurement of cloud and
wind motions, and in biomedical imaging. It is planned to focus attention during
the workshop on the scientific questions that can be addressed through US-
Pakistan collaboration. There is a relatively inexpensive, skilled, scientific
manpower in Pakistan, which can effectively carry part of the research work in
the field of computer imaging and software development. This project should help
establish the infrastructure necessary for developments in industry in Pakistan,
and for Western companies wishing to invest in manufacturing in this growing
market. The invited US participants are eminent researchers from universities,
industry and government laboratories, and they include one woman who is an
expert on artificial intelligence and signal processing, and at least two junior
scientists. The proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities likely to
enhance collaboration between US and foreign scientists in areas of mutual
interest, and for encouraging the participation of women scientists and junior
scientists in international activities .