* 9724038
* Cell Division in a Filamentous, Sporulating Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Charles Daniels, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

Kendrick 9724038 To deposit a septum at the correct time in the cell cycle and
at the correct location, a unicellular bacterium must be able to monitor the
completion of DNA replication and the segregation of the newly replicated DNA,
locate the center of the cell, and initiate the centripetal growth of new cell
wall and cytoplasmic membrane. Because binary fission is the only means by which
most commonly studied bacteria reproduce, many of the genes required for cell
division are essential and thus cannot be readily dissected by mutation
analysis. Unlike other bacteria, Streptomyces grows as branched, filamentous,
multinucleoidal cells that undergo multiple septation events to form chains of
spores. Key events in Streptomyces differentiation include the massive and
relatively synchronous septation necessary to form the compartments destined to
become the spores, and the extensive growth of the differentiated structures
prior to septation. To identify structural, enzymatic, and regulatory proteins
responsible for this dramatic change in cell structure, this project focuses on
two proteins required for sporulation septum formation: FtsZ and the septum-
specific penicillin-binding protein. These experiments will identify the factors
involved in the developmental regulation of ftsZ in Streptomyces griseus by
using an integrative reporter system, mutant analysis, and the analysis of
proteins required for transcription of ftsZ. The gene encoding the septum-
specific penicillin-binding protein of S.griseus will be isolated and its
nucleotide sequence determined; in another experiment this gene will be
disrupted to confirm its role in septum formation. Cell division is an essential
property of all organisms. To reproduce, each cell must divide to generate
viable daughter cells. The analysis of cell division in filamentous bacteria is
a logical system to use to study molecular events central to the correct timing
and location of cell division. By characterizing the cell division machine ry in
these bacteria, this research will help to build the cornerstones of cell
growth.