* 9724535
* Development of a Scanning Plasmon Resonant Probe Microscope for Ultra Resolution of Fluorescent, Raman, and Immuno-     Labeled Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Sheldon Schultz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 09/30/2001
* USD 364,480.00

9724535 Schultz A scanning plasmon resonant probe microscope will be developed
at the University of California-San Diego. The microscope utilizes individual,
sub-micron metal particles that exhibit well-defined plasmon resonance (PR)
scattering of light as probes or scanning tip element. The PR particles act as
"point source" (about 50 nanometers in size) optical transducers that feature
enhanced local electric fields. In the near-field configuration, instrument
design goals include down to 10 nanometer resolution for the scanning microscope
working in either of three spectroscopic modes: surface enhanced Raman, surface
enhanced fluorescence and two-photon excitations (fluorescence or Raman). State-
of-the-art experimental techniques involved include nanolithographic preparation
of metal particles, nanofabrication of ultrathin SiN window substrates, and
design and construction of a 1 nanometer-precision, 100 micron-scanning range,
ultra- stable scanning stage. %%% The development program involves the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students, and post-doctoral
associates in the design, construction and testing of advanced instrumentation.
Applications of the microscope in the material and biological sciences include
sub-wavelength resolution of Raman signals from wear-track residues in magnetic
disk drives and motor protein motion. ***