* 9724948
* Magneto-Elastic Sensors for Postearthquake Damage Detection in Steel Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2001
* Chien Wu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 03/31/2001
* USD 258,883.00

9724948 Wang In this project, research is conducted toward development of a
method of direct stress measurement based on the measurement of magnetization
characteristics of ferro-magnetic structural materials. It has been shown that
the magnetization characteristics of ferro-magnetic materials are related to the
stress level, and a number of successful magneto-elastic sensors have been
designed by researchers around the world. Most of these sensors are cylindrical
in design and are primarily designed for measuring force and stress in
cylindrical specimens. This is sometimes seen as a severe deficiency, since the
bast majority of structural elements in a typical structure are planar (girders
and beams, plates and decks) and the specimen under investigation cannot be
enclosed within the sensor. A novel planar sensor design will be achieved using
the concept of magnetic reluctance measurement for stress analysis. The sensor
design philosophy emphasizes the ability to make stress measurements in the post
yield region of the structure. The research consists of the following tasks: 1)
design of sensors that can operate in the postyeild zone, 2) development of a
residual stress sensor capable of detecting yielding, 3) development of a
surface mountable planar sensor design in contrast to a cylindrical design, and
4) development of a suitable constitutive model for determination of
permeability-stress relationships for sensor design and calibration. The
proposed sensor is flexible and can be utilized for a variety of structural
monitoring schemes, force measurement of inplanar and circular cross-sections,
monitoring of prestress loss in bridge girders, and postearthquake evaluation of
structural members. ***