* 9724167
* US-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genetic               Engineering and Biotechnology, Karachi, Pakistan,           Feb. 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Michael Gealt, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
`US-Pakistan Workshop and Symposium on Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology`,
to be held in February 1998, in Karachi, Pakistan. The US team leader is Dr.
Michael Gealt, Department of Biosciences and Biotechnology at Drexel University
in Philadelphia, and the Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Nuzhat Ahmed, of the
Center of Molecular Genetics at the University of Karachi, Pakistan. The
research areas to be emphasized in the workshop include: on-site biodegradation;
in situ (intrinsic) biodegradation; genetic manipulation for development of new
microorganisms; risk assessment; and environmental analysis. The meeting
includes a symposium attended by scientists from the US and Pakistan, and from
Europe and Japan. It will be followed by a bilateral US-Pakistan session to
identify areas of potential joint research based on the information gathered in
the symposium. The proceedings, including the presentations and also the US-
Pakistan recommendations, will be published by the University of Karachi. Scope:
This project is intended to first bring American and Pakistani scientists in a
meeting with others working in the important areas of genetic engineering and
biotechnology from Europe and Japan to exchange information and results of
recent research work. It is also intended to focus attention to the scientific
questions that can be better addressed through US-Pakistan scientific
cooperation. There is potential for considerable benefits from collaboration
between an advanced country such as the US with a developing country such as
Pakistan in this field. There is a unique flora of plants, animals, and
microorganisms in Pakistan that enriches the biological resources to be used.
There is also relatively inexpensive, skilled, scientific manpower in Pakistan,
which can carry part of the lengthy and laborious research work that is common
in the field of biotechnology and genetic engineering. The benefits of
successful collaboration, to many developing countries, can be great. The
proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities likely to enhance
collaboration between US and foreign scientists in areas of mutual interest.