* 9724088
* Regulation of the Neuronal Promoter of Calcium-Activated    Potassium Channel Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Nigel Atkinson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 345,517.00

ABSTRACT 9724088 ATKINSON Different types of neurons must have different
patterns of electical activity for the nervous system to function properly. For
example, neurons that initiate movement often "fire" with high-frequency burst
of action potentials, whereas neurons that control slow, rythmic behaviors may
fire only slowly, but with very precise timing. A neuron's ability to generate
specific activity patterns is determined by the types and numbers of ion
channels it expresses. Dr. Atkinson and his students will investigate the
transcriptional regulation of an ion channel gene in the fruitfly Drosophila
melanogaster. The gene, called "slowpoke," produces a calcium-activated
potassium channel, which is crucially involved in setting activity patterns in a
variety of neurons types. The expression of any gene is controlled by specific
areas of the gene called the transciptional control region. In the case of
slowpoke, there are four different promoter sequences within the transciptional
control region that are responsible for differential expression in different
tissues. Some of the promoters alter the amount of the gene product, whereas
others alter the amino acid sequence, and thus the structure, of the encoded
channel. Such changes can dramatically alter a neuron's range of firing
patterns. Dr. Atkinson's laboratory has cloned the entire transcriptional
control region of slowpoke. They now plan to systematically introduce deletions
into the region to precisely locate the transcriptional control elements
responsible for expression in different neuronal subtypes. The function of these
control elements will then be verified by re-introducing them as single
oligonucleotide sequences, which should restore the expression pattern, if the
elements have been properly identified. In the final part of the project, they
will use several techniques to identify genes that produce the transcription
factors that bind each of the transcription control element. The results of this
work will help us understand how neurons acquire the sometimes subtle
differences in ion channel number and type they need to play different
functional roles.