* 9724960
* Synthetic Coordination Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,10/05/1998
* Christopher Reed, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 10/05/1998
* USD 132,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides continued support for research on weakly coordinating anions by Dr.
Christopher A. Reed, Chemistry Department, University of Southern California.
The goal of the project is to develop the chemistry of carborane anions based on
the icosahedral CB(11)H(12) anion. The anion will be functionalized, typically
with halogens, to make it as inert as possible to coordination with a cation.
Some synthetic work with fullerenes is also proposed. The basicity and redox
properties of the resulting species will be determined and compared with those
of known weakly coordinating anions. New spectroscopic and electrochemical
methodswill be used to rank anion basicity. The anions developed will be used to
carry out a magnetochemical investigation of an iron compound to determine the
extreme magnetic parameters for the S = 3/2 spin state. New extremes of
electrophilicity, coordinative unsaturation, oxidation potential and electrolyte
behavior are expected to be observed. Negatively charged species (anions)
usually associate tightly with species bearing a positive charge (cations). By
preparing anions whose shape and charge distribution prevents them from closely
associating with cations, highly reactive cations result. Development of this
chemistry has implications for numerous chemical processes, including cationic
polymerization and battery technology. It could lead to new chemical reagents
for use in synthesis and excellent catalysts.