* 9724347
* Major Research Instrumentation:  Acquisition of a CAVE and  Shared-Memory Supercomputer
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Jimmie Doll, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,000,000.00

Brown University has received a Major Research Instrumentation Award for the
acquisition of a virtual reality display system (a CAVE), a graphics computer to
provide synchronized output to the CAVE, and a large shared-memory computer
interconnected to the graphics computer via a high speed link. This equipment
will form the core of a shared research computing environment at Brown
University. Connectivity to resources available at federally funded computing
laboratories will be provided through vBNS connection at Brown. A large array of
computer and computational science research projects drawn from computer
science, chemistry, cognitive and linguistic sciences, geological sciences,
mathematics, and physics will be utilizing the proposed equipment. The research
projects range over scientific visualization conducted by the Brown Graphics
Group in collaboration with the NSF Science and Technology Center for Graphics
and Visualization, interactive graphics in computational fluid mechanics at the
Center for Fluid Mechanics, geophysical research on earthquake mechanics using
numerical modeling, and condensed matter physics. The equipment will be used by
graduate students for research and by undergraduate students in over a dozen
courses in at least six different science departments, as well for honors thesis
projects. In addition, new course units and new interdisciplinary courses in
topics such as computational science, neural networks, and medical imaging will
be developed to take advantage of this powerful new facility. Ongoing work by
undergraduates that could take advantage of this equipment include projects that
span departments such as computational steering, scientific visualization,
interaction techniques for immersive virtual reality, and the creation of
immersive interactive teaching tools.