* 9724032
* RUI:  Negative Transcriptional Regulation of the Inducible  Interleukin-4 Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Deborah Weiss, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2001
* USD 285,736.00

9724032 Weiss For genes which exhibit strict tissue specific expression or are
expressed only upon induction, the contribution by negative regulatory elements
is particularly important. The objective of this research is to define the
nuclear factors which interact with the negative regulatory element NEG-1 of the
Interleukin-4 (IL-4) gene. IL-4 is produced only by mast cells and certain T
cell subsets, and then only upon induction. Messenger RNA levels for IL-4
increase rapidly after induction and then decrease once the inducing stimulus is
removed. This observation coupled with other data indicates that IL-4 production
is under transcriptional control. Previous studies have demonstrated that there
are several DNA regulatory elements within the 5' flanking region of this gene
and that specific nuclear factors interact with these sequences to regulate the
inducible transcription of IL-4. The recently defined DNA element NEG-1, (-326
to -302 relative to the transcription initiation start site) contributes to the
down regulation of this gene. Preliminary results indicate that two sub-
sequences (A and B) within NEG-1 interact co-operatively and that NEG-1 A forms
a specific complex with mast cell nuclear factor(s) found in both unstimulated
and stimulated cells. This research identify the nuclear factor(s) in direct
contact with the A region of NEG-1, and will use heparin-sepharose and DNA
affinity chromatography to purify enough factor to obtain sequence information.
A cDNA library will be constructed and screened with degenerate oligonucleotides
corresponding to the sequence information obtained. Positive clones will be
subcloned, sequenced, and expressed; their NEG-1 A binding ability will be
confirmed by EMSA. %%% For genes which exhibit strict tissue specific expression
or are expressed only upon induction, the contribution by negative regulatory
elements is particularly important. Interleukin-4 (IL-4) is produced only by
mast cells and certain T cell subsets, and then only upon induction. The
objective of this research is to define the nuclear factors which interact with
the negative regulatory element NEG-1 of the IL-4 gene. ***