* 9724035
* Ultrastructural Organization of Developing Acetylcholine    Receptor Aggregates
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jes Stollberg, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 293,038.00

IBN-9724035 PI: STOLLBERG This research is directed at a better understanding of
the molecular events underlying "synaptogenesis" (the formation of synapses
during fetal development), which is of fundamental importance because synapses
are the conduits through which nerve cells communicate with each other and with
other cell types such as muscle fibers. At nerve-muscle synapses the
communication depends on the release of acetylcholine from the nerve terminal.
This molecule diffuses across a small space between the cells and binds to
specialized muscle-cell molecules called "acetylcholine receptors." The binding
of acetylcholine to its receptors triggers muscle contraction. Because nerve-
muscle synapses must be fast and reliable, the receptors are concentrated in
that part of the muscle cell membrane that is adjacent to the nerve terminal.
This concentration takes place during fetal development, and many research
efforts have been directed at discovering the molecular mechanisms that cause
receptors to aggregate at this precise location. This project will examine
aggregates of acetylcholine receptors and two related synaptic components at the
ultrastructural level. The experiments involve labeling the molecules under
study with small gold particles which can be detected using scanning electron
microscopy. A sophisticated numerical analysis of label locations is then used
to deduce the structure of labeled aggregates to within &lt;1 nanometer. This
represents a greater than hundred-fold improvement in resolution over previous
experiments with developing receptor aggregates. The successful completion of
this work will greatly enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying receptor aggregation, and will thus contribute to our understanding
of the basic mechanisms by which synapses are formed.