* 9724783
* U.S.-Czech Mathematics Research on Reliability Problems in  Computational Mechanics
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Ivo Babuska, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 09/30/2002
* USD 49,999.00

INT 9724783 Babuska This U.S.-Czech mathematics project between Ivo Babuska of
the University of Texas, Austin, and Michal Krizek of the Czech Mathematics
Institute, Prague, will examine the problem of reliability in computational
mathematics as it relates to mathematical models, available information used in
such models (data), and the numerical procedures employed. Overall, this
collaboration should yield work that will improve our ability to make
engineering decisions based on the outcome of numerical computations. Using a
stochastic approach and a worst case approach, the researchers intend to analyze
the reliability of the numerical solution(s) by an a-posteriori estimation on
the basis of the superconvergence theory. (The worst case approach involves
working with a given set of admissible input data to find bounds for the
information of interest.) Specifically, this project will test: 1) reliability
of mathematical formulations with respect to engineering decisions; and 2)
reliability of computed data of engineering importance that is derived by a
numerical solution of the mathematical problem. Results are expected to be
directly applicable to practical engineering calculations such as those
associated with plasticity; elastoplastic torsion; and the Signorini contact
problem with approximate friction. This applied mathematics project fulfills the
program objective of advancing basic scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of mutual interest and competence. ??