* 9724118
* US-Madagascar Dissertation Enhancement: Cultivating         Democracy on Fragile Lands:  Environmental Institutions and Non-Elite Perceptions of Democracy
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Goran Hyden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 12/31/1998
* USD 22,500.00

9724118 Hyden This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US graduate
student, Richard R. Marcus, working under the guidance of Dr. Goran Hyden,
Professor of Political Science at the University of Florida, to do field
research in Madagascar. During the democratic transition in Madagascar, the
government instituted a country-wide conservation program. Many international
and local nongovernmental organizations, including USAID and the World Bank,
worked with the Malagasy government in the formulation of the program. It is
hypothesized that support for democracy in Madagascar is contingent upon
positive economic outcomes at the local level. Since donor-supported
conservation programs have such a far-reaching influence on local economies,
local people will only support democracy in Madagascar if conservation programs
lead to an amelioration in the quality of life. Further, it is assumed that the
most successful environmental institutions are those that incorporated the
concerns and attitudes of the local people, as expressed through their
fokonolona (local administrative units) and community organizations, into the
project. Mr. Marcus will visit villages in surrounds of Masoala National Park
and the Ankarana Protected Area. In each of these areas, villages influenced by
Integrated Conservation and Development Project (ICDP) policies and villages
beyond the influence of ICDP policies will be selected in an effort to study the
activities of donor-funded environmental institutions and local organizations.
The strength of the relationship between environmental activity and democracy
will be determined by studying the differences between the activities and
policies of the fokonolona involved in the ICDP and a
social/economic/demographic index, as well as the democratic perceptions of the
local Magalasy people. A four- step methodology, consisting of participatory
appraisals, interviews with local leaders, a survey, and a series of follow-up
interviews, will be used during this study. Staff members at the Universite
D'Antananarivo will collaborate with Mr. Marcus on this project. This study will
make an important contribution to the understanding of the relationship between
international environmental activity and local democratic attitudes in
Madagascar specifically, and political transition in Africa generally. The grant
will also provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong,
independent research career. Funding jointly provided by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Social, Behavioral and Economic
Research. ***