* 9724557
* Acquisition of Major Multiuser Research Instrumentation for the Study of Plant, Fungal and Insect Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Rod Wing, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,265,027.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to acquire major instrumentation for
research and training in the analyses of complex plant, fungal and insect
genomes. The instrumentation includes: 5 automated DNA sequencers, a robot for
preparing DNA sequencing templates, 9 computer workstations for processing
sequence and physical mapping data, a robotics system for the development of
semi-automated procedures for high through-put screening of thousands of DNA
samples for library screening and plant breeding applications, 12 ultra-low
freezers for maintenance of large insert B AC libraries, a bank of 6
hybridization incubators and a versatile imaging system for rapid screening and
analysis of BAC libraries. The requested instrumentation will be integrated with
existing robotics equipment, and ongoing research, service and teaching programs
to establish a state-of-the-art Genome Center at Clemson University (CU). The
functions of this new CU Genome Center are: 1 ) construction and maintenance of
high quality BAC libraries; 2) production and distribution of high-density
hybridization filters and DNA pools for library screening and distribution of
BAC libraries and clones; 3) positional cloning of agriculturally important
genes; 4) physical mapping of whole chromosomes and targeted genomic regions
with BAC clones; 5) genome sequencing of important BAC contigs and genomes; 6)
application development; and 7) undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
training. There are three primary activities that would be greatly enhanced by
funding this proposal. First, MRI funding would ensure that the CU Genome Center
will be capable of serving as a public resource for the construction,
maintenance and distribution of large insert BAC libraries of important plant,
fungal and insect genomes. Such a centralized resource would provide the
research community convenient access to a major tool that is used for positional
cloning, physical mapping and genome sequencing. Secondly, MRI funding would
allow us to perf orm pilot projects aimed at physical mapping and sequencing of
specific genomic regions of genomes that are being targeted for intensive
investigation. Successful completion of these projects will put the CU Genome
Center in a position to compete effectively for substantial federal support to
sequence major portions of genomes such as Arabidopsis, Rice and Neurospora
crassa. Lastly, MRI funding will substantially support and enhance
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral training in genomics. With access to
state-of-the-art instrumentation, the CU-Genome Center will attract students and
scholars of high caliber propelling several life sciences programs to national
ranking, such as the interdisciplinary program in Genetics. The CU Genome
Center, as envisioned above, will be an internationally recognized facility that
in turn will produce world class science serving the agricultural genome
community at large.