* 9724037
* Evolution and Genetics of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 08/31/2001
* USD 268,500.00

9724037 Stevens Behaviors affect life, death and reproductive characters of
individuals and populations and it is important to understand their expression
and evolution. Understanding the expression of a behavior requires understanding
the genetic basis of the behavior, the physiological basis of the behavior, the
relationship between the behavior and fitness as well as effect of natural
selection on the behavior. This research will use an insect model system to
understand the role of genetics, physiology and selection in the expression of a
behavior - cannibalism behavior in the confused flour beetle Tribolium confusum.
Because behaviors are likely to be determined by or highly correlated with other
traits - including basic physiological processes such as metabolic rate or
respiration rate - the genetic basis of and selection on respiration rate and
surface behavior (i.e., the tendency of beetles to be on the flour surface
rather than tunneling in the flour media) will also be examined. Using high and
low cannibalism strains, experiments will determine if there is single optimum
expression of a behavior in a given environment, by creating populations with
differing allele frequencies of cannibalism genes and tracking the change in
allele frequencies over time. Statistical analysis will be used to determine the
relative importance of selection vs random processes in behavior evolution. The
proposed research will also examine the controversial, virtually untested
portion of Wright's shifting balance theory, namely the plausibility of a
population moving from one adaptive behavior stratagy to another by migration
among populations. The genetic analysis will be done using recent developments
in molecular genetics including quantitative trait loci (QTL) analysis. A
molecular genetic map of the genome of T. confusum will be constructed and used
to identify regions of the genome associated with the behavioral and
physiological traits. This rese arch is an important contribution to both
behavior genetics and evolutionary biology because it tests common assumptions
made about the adaptive significance of behaviors, as well as their genetic
basis and evolution.