* 9724092
* Possible Role of Subthreshold Input in Cortical             Reorganization
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,01/31/2004
* Robert Waters, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 01/31/2004
* USD 315,000.00

The somatosensory cortex of the mammalian brain is a major area concerned with
touch on the body, and shows a 'map' of activity. Neurons, or nerve cells,
become active in a location that correlates with the relative location of the
part of the body that is stimulated. It has been know for a long time that this
map is plastic, and so it can change with experience; responding areas of the
map may increase in size if there is a lot of stimulation over time, or decrease
when the stimulation is blocked or removed. Sometimes these changes are rather
rapid, over hours, yet the mechanisms for that rapid change still are not
understood. This project uses electrophyisological, local pharmacological, and
neuroanatomical techniques to explore how the inputs to particular neurons can
reorganize quickly. A novel approach includes using a reversible sensory
blockage by a small cold probe. The hypotheses to test are whether some of this
rapid change results from 'unmasking' of inputs that have before been inhibited,
whether the subthreshold inputs are regulated by control of the inhibitory
neurotransmitter molecule called GABA, and whether most of the regulatory
connections lie within the cortex itself. Results from these studies will be
important to understanding plasticity in the brain, and so will be important
beyond simply sensory physiology, extending their impact to developmental
neuroscience, and to relevance to mechanisms underlying learning.