* 9724028
* Natural Scenes and the Design of the Color Visual Systems   of Marine Animals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Thomas Cronin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 02/28/2002
* USD 236,865.00

Cronin 9724028 Color is intimately linked to vision throughout the animal
kingdom. Color vision can play key roles in recognition of mates or competitors,
and in determining effectiveness of camouflage for predators and prey. Visual
systems using color have all evolved in the context of the properties of the
light in natural scenes; these spectral properties define the potential limits
of biologically useful arrays of color receptors in the eyes of animals. Marine
animals sometimes lack color vision, but in the most complex forms, some
crustaceans have as many as a dozen spectral receptor classes, far more than in
any known terrestrial animals. This project analyzes the spectral and spatial
properties of natural underwater scenes where these complex crustaceans live,
and the signaling systems that these animals use in color-based communication
within and between species. The results will help answer how the integrated
information from their many spectral types of receptors enables them to exploit
color vision in the sea. This study will provide a valuable case of an aquatic
invertebrate to compare to terrestrial color vision and its evolution in
insects, birds and primates. It is likely to have an impact beyond sensory
science, on the fields of marine biology, evolution and ecology, and on the
design of remote sensing devices.