* 9724454
* Acquisition of a New Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive Spectrometry System at the American Museum of   Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* William Barnett, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 374,430.00

We request funds to replace our aging scanning electron microscope (SEM)
facility with new instrumentation that has the capabilities to meet the evolving
research and educational requirements at the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH). The high magnification, great detail, depth of field, and analytical
capabilities inherent to scanning electron microscopy are crucial to the
investigation of systematics, mineralogy, and other research foci at the AMNH.
The current SEM/EDS system, a Zeiss DSM 950 and Link AN10000, is in continuous
use by a varied population of researchers. It was an innovative digital design
at the time, but is now worn, outdated, and not upgradeable. This system does
not meet research and educational requirements including: 1) imaging uncoated
biological specimens, 2) high magnification imaging in both secondary and
backscattered electron modes, 3) production and storage of high resolution
digital image files, 4) separation of light elements, 5) ease of operation for a
diverse user population, 6) industry-standard computing platforms that can be
upgraded and have third party application support, 7) network and Internet
operation for collaboration and education, and 8) publication quality printing.
A new isolation system will suppress of vibrations at magnifications above
20,000x. Secondary electron imaging of uncoated biological specimens,
particularly taxonomic types, is important in a museum setting because these
specimens are unique and cannot be coated. Backscattered imaging at high
magnification and high accelerating voltage operation are critical for
mineralogical research. These diverse requirements can now be met by field
emission FE) instruments. The ability to greatly increase magnification (FE
scopes are rated to 600,00'0~ will extend the frontiers of scientific research
at the AMNH. FE instruments have chamber sizes adequate for large specimens and
are easy to operate. Current SEM and EDS systems are now migrating to standa rd
computing platforms that are easy to use, produce high-resolution digital
images, and operate with other instruments over networks and the Internet. The
new facility will provide state-of-the-art instrumentation that will meet both
new and longstanding research and educational requirements for a very large user
population associated with some of the most important natural history
collections in the world (in excess of 37 million specimens). The AMNH has
committed, and will continue to commit, staff and resources to the operation of
the SEM facility. The SEM will be available to all affiliated personnel who
undertake research, research training, or education. 3