* 9724006
* Genetic Investigation of Lammer Protein Kinase Structure and Function in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Bruce Chase, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 293,511.00

ABSTRACT 9724006 RABINOW Dr. Rabinow's laboratory is characterizing a Drosophila
gene known as Doa, which encodes a member of the LAMMER kinases, a recently
discovered eukaryotic family of protein kinases. Protein kinases transfer
phosphate groups to other proteins as a means of regulating their activity, and
regulate many essential cellular processes. Homologues to Doa throughout the
animal kingdom have very similar amino-acid sequences in the part of the protein
that has enzymatic activity, suggesting that they have equally similar function
in cellular processes. Recessive Doa mutations in flies are almost lethal;
however, rare adults do survive, but show defects in eye development. Other
defects in Doa mutants include failure of a normal embryonic central nervous
system (CNS) to develop and segmentation defects. The DOA kinase is widely
expressed and is found at particularly high levels in the embryonic CNS, where
rapid cell division and differentiation occurs. The DOA kinase comes in two
major forms that differ in size. The larger of these (105 kD) is found only in
the cell cytoplasm, whereas the smaller version (55 kD) is also found in the
cell nucleus. The structure of the 105 kD cytoplasmic form is completely
unknown. In the current research project, Dr. Rabinow's laboratory will carry
out further structural and functional characterization of DOA kinase to define
the role of this kinase family in the initiation and maintenance of cellular
differentiation. The first task will be to determine the structure of the 105 kD
protein. In addition, antibodies against the two protein isoforms will be
generated to examine their expression. Drosophila expressing specifically
altered forms of the kinase will be constructed to determine whether the two
protein isoforms perform different functions, as well as to provide more
complete genetic characterization of Doa mutant defects. These data will be used
to identify one or more of the cellular processes that are altered in mutants. R
esults from this project will substantially advance the long-term goal of
elucidating the specific cellular functions of the LAMMER protein kinase family
and the developmental signaling pathway(s) in which they function.