* 9724559
* Acquisition of a Simulation and Visualization Facility for  Fluid Dynamics Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 800,000.00

This MRI award will support the purchase of equipment for research, research
training, and education in computational fluid dynamics and visualization, at
the Courant Institute. The aim is to create a state-of-the-art simulation and
visualization center within our new Applied Mathematics Laboratory (AML), which
is dedicated to education and research training in fluid dynamical simulation
and visualization. The equipment will be shared by research groups engaged in
various areas of fluid dynamics research at the Institute, and integrated with
the present and future computational and visualization facilities owned by these
research groups. The planned instrumentation includes computers, a mass storage
system, projection facilities, network enhancements, third-party software
licenses, and miscellaneous smaller items. . The research and research training
to be conducted in the facility is dedicated to understanding complicated fluid
flows - 2- and 3-dimensional - arising in biophysics, geophysics, and energy
research as well as basic fluid dynamics, and to education in fluid dynamical
computation and visualization. A major beneficiary of the requested
instrumentation is the new Applied Mathematics Laboratory now under construction
on the ground floor of Warren Weaver Hall. The AML is comprised of two
components, the Wetlab and the ViSLab. The Wetlab is a demonstration and
research laboratory of fluid mechanics. The ViSLab (Visualization and Simulation
Laboratory) is the associated computational facility. The AML facility is
designed to integrate research with research training and education, and to
synthesize computation, visualization, and experimental research with research
training and instruction. Research activities that will use the proposed
instrumentation include the simulation of insect flight, computational studies
of the dynamics of complex fluids, the fluid dynamics of the heart, three-
dimensional niagnetohydrodynamic modelling for fusion science and solar physics,
geophysical flows, and study of aerodynamic flow in complicated geometry.
Through the present proposal it will provide our students with access to large-
scale simulation platforms and to modern visualization and animation hardware
and software. This research effort will be funded jointly by the Division of
Mathematical Science, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the
MRI Program.