* 9724757
* Japan JSPS Program:  NMR Studies of Low-Dimensional         Correlated Electron Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Charles Recchia, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 02/29/2000
* USD 7,500.00

Recchia 9724757 This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Charles Recchia at the
University of Tokyo, Tokyo,Japan. Dr. Recchia will work with Dr. Masashi
Takigawa, Professor of Physics at the Institute of Solid State Physics, on a
research project entitled, "NMR Studies of LowDimensional Correlated Electron
Systems." The proposed research will focus on the use of nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) to probe a new class of materials related to hightemperature
superconductors. These new materials, known as "ladder compounds," may provide
researchers with important clues as to the mechanisms that are responsible for
exotic superconductivity. It is determined that the crucial structural elements
in high temperature superconductors are two dimensional planes of copper and
oxygen. Electronic spins placed on copper atoms causes a short-range magnetic
order coupling, a basic fluctuation that is thought to be the key to
superconductivity. Controversy remains regarding the detailed nature of this
electronic coupling and how it gives rise to superconductivity. In an effort to
resolve these issues, researchers are now investigating samples that contain
finite width "ladders" of copper and oxygen, but the finite width appropriate to
ideal superconductive activity remains unclear. The primary goal of the research
is to use recent advances in NMR techniques to identify the idealwidth of these
"ladders" and, thus, provide a far deeper understanding of the electronic
coupling process in novel lowdimensional materials. ***