* 9724003
* Developmental Mechanisms of Body Plan Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Rudolf Raff, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/29/2000
* USD 170,000.00

Raff 9724003 Although there are several million species of animals, they fall
into groups representing 35 basic body plans (phyla). The phyla appeared in the
Cambrian radiation, and have existed for over a half billion years. The study of
the evolution of development has revealed two important and unexpected
observations. The first is that radically different developmental modes can
evolve rapidly among closely related taxa. The second is that master regulatory
genes are highly conserved, even among morphologically widely disparate phyla.
These results suggest that developmental reorganization has occurred largely by
co-option of existing genes and pathways, and that we can exploit the expression
of conserved regulatory genes to determine how body plan transformations took
place. This study investigates the evolution of the pentameral body plan of
echinoderms with the bilaterally symmetric body plan of their sister group, the
chordates. This proposal focuses on the transformations that have converted a
bilaterally symmetric body plan into a pentameral one, and on finding shared
processes that govern axial determination in disparate phyla. The proposed work
will seek to establish a potential echinoderm homolog to the notochord in the
induction of axial structures. The hypothesis that such a homolog exists can be
confirmed by defining patterns of expression of echinoderm homologs of
vertebrate axial determination genes. The project will exploit a sea urchin
species that develops directly into a juvenile adult in only four days. Genes
involved in specification of vertebrate anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral
axis induction pathways will be isolated from that sea urchin. The project will
characterize spatial expression patterns of the genes to infer echinoderm
homologs to vertebrate axial features. The function of axial determination genes
will be tested by over/ectopic expression experiments. Finally, the project will
determine the role of induction processes in axial determination in echin oderms
by experimental embryology and use of gene markers. This testing of inductive
processes will further test the potential homologies of developmental processes
in two morphologically distinct but related phyla. The results of this project
will provide an insight into the evolutionary modifications of developmental
processes, and into the role of developmental processes in constraining the
course of morphological evolution.