* 9724190
* Acquisition of Equipment for Integrated Environmental       Research and Education in Recent Sediments and Surface      Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Robert Young, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 106,166.00

9724190 Bierman This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) Program, provides $106,166 as partial support of the costs of acquiring
equipment to be used in integrated studies of surficial and environmental
geology at the University of Vermont. Specifically, the equipment to be
purchased will include a real-time kinematic global positioning system receiver
and hand-held GPS field unit, a carbon/nitrogen analyzer and a whole core
magnetic susceptibility system. This equipment will benefit the analytical needs
of these young researchers and their students for a variety of interesting and
environmentally significant studies including, landscape evolution research that
relies on AMS dating of exposed surfaces using cosmogenic nuclides, studies of
tectonic and post-glacial isostatic tilting in New England fluvial terraces,
documenting historical lake level changes and coastal wetland transgression in
response to rising sea level, investigating the carbon dynamics of coastal
wetlands, and assessing nitrogen transformations in forested ecosystems and
through aquatic food webs. The GPS equipment will help to carefully document the
geographic location of samples for subsequent exposure age dating and will
provide accurate delineation of changes in lake and wetland shorelines through
time. The C/N analyzer is necessary for characterization of lake and marsh
sediments and will complement the stable isotopic investigations of co-PI Andrea
Lini in studies of nutrient dynamics in coastal, lacustrine and forest
ecosystems. Finally, the magnetic susceptibility system will be invaluable for
stratigraphic control in the tectonic, isostatic and geomorphologic studies of
Bierman as it will aid in the correlation of individual strata. ***