* 9724132
* US-Kenya Dissertation Enhancement:  Knowledge and Authority of Western and Indigenous Knowledge in Maternal and Child   Health in Rural Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Trevor Purcell, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 08/31/1998
* USD 20,962.00

9724132 Purcell &amp; Kearly This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
graduate student, Ms. Elizabeth Kearly, working under the guidance of Dr. Trevor
Purcell, Professor of Anthropology at the University of South Florida, to do
field research in Kenya. During the past two decades many of Kenya's traditional
birth attendants (TBAs) have periodically attended biomedical workshops where
they have been trained in western biomedical practices concerning maternal and
child health care. As a result many TBAs have incorporated this knowledge into
their own indigenous health care methods, resulting in an integrated approach
which lets them select the most appropriate biomedical or indigenous treatment
for each patient's situation. Due to Kenya's long history of colonization, even
the untrained TBAs have some exposure to western biomedical knowledge, but many
of them still continue to only use the traditional practices. Ms. Kearly
hypothesizes that the untrained TBAs do not integrate the two knowledge systems
because they lack adequate access to western medical facilities and supplies,
and they view their indigenous methods as having more authority, or relative
influence, as a result of the various cultural, socioeconomic, and political
factors embedded in their traditional health care beliefs. Based on information
she will collect on how trained and untrained TBAs in the rural Migori District
acquire and use both forms of knowledge, Ms. Kearly expects to identify the
various levels of authority they ascribe to each form of health care knowledge
and how that authority then influences their selection of the best method to be
used in various health situations. The discovery of such selection patterns will
prove useful in predicting how people integrate and use knowledge systems under
different conditions. In-depth interviews, participant observations, and
archival research at the Indigenous Knowledge Center and the Kenya National
Archives, will be used durin g this study. Staff members at the Maseno
University will collaborate with Ms. Kearly on this project. This study will
make an important contribution to existing knowledge on the societal dynamics
involved in the integration of western and traditional forms of knowledge
concerning obstetrical practices in a rural area in a developing country. The
grant will also provide support to enable a promising study to establish a
strong, independent research career. ***