* 9724178
* U.S.-Pakistan Workshop on Silicon Technology,               February 1998, Islamabad, Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2000
* USD 17,105.00

Description: This award is for support of US scientists' participation in a
`US-Pakistan Symposium and Workshop on Silicon Technology`, to be held in
February 1998, in Islamabad, Pakistan. The US team leader is Dr. T. Nejat
Veziroglu, Professor and Director, Clean Energy Research Institute (CERI) at the
University of Miami, in Florida. The Pakistani co-organizer is Dr. Parvez
Akhter, Director of the National Institute of Silicon Technology (NIST) in
Islamabad. The objectives of the workshop include: exchange of the latest
knowledge on the technology and utilization of silicon in photovoltaics, as well
as transistor applications; to highlight the known applications and benefits of
the rapid growth in silicon technology, both for solar energy conversation and
for computer applications; to discuss the utilization in solar cell technology
in conjunction with the recently generated data on solar energy mapping in
Pakistan; and to make recommendations for cooperative research and development
between the US and Pakistan to accelerate the technology transfer in the field
of silicon technology. Specific topics to be discussed include: production
procedures of silicon from quartz, rice husk, and silica sand; growth of single
crystal and float zone technology; amorphous silicon technology as a viable
material for solar cells; polycrystalline casting and ribbon technology; new
materials and techniques to make thin film solar cells, heterojunctions,
concentration and hybrids; comparison of these techniques for each specific
applications; status of storage devices including hydrogen energy; and design of
solar systems. The last day will be devoted to specific workshops on specific
topics with the purpose of identifying the most effective means for transfer of
technology between industrialized countries and the developing countries. Scope:
This project deals with an area that is of particular importance to many
developing countries that are in the so-called Sun-Belt. Several of these
countries lack adequate, or any, fossil fuel for the current demands or for any
planned industrialization. They would consider the development of a viable solar
energy industry, either indigenous or as joint effort with industrialized
countries, as a breakthrough in the equation that links economic development,
environmental concerns, and needed financial resources. Pakistan has been one of
the countries that started on this effort early in the 1970's with some
technical support from NSF grantees. The US participants in this meeting are to
be selected by a committee of two US and two Pakistani experts in the field.
Both the CERI and NIST have extensive experience in organizing similar meetings
in this area, some of which included other countries in South Asia. The expected
results of the workshop, including potential research collaboration, exchange of
information, and opening avenues for US solar energy material companies to the
Pakistani market, are helpful for both countries. The proposal meets INT
criteria for supporting activities likely to enhance collaboration between US
and foreign researchers in areas of mutual interest.