* 9724998
* Dissertation Research:  Intensive Agriculture and Political Economy in the Yaguache Chiefdom of the Ecuadorian Lower    Guayas Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2000
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Florencio Delgado will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork in
the Lower Guayas Basin region of Equador and combine analysis of aerial
photography with surface survey, augur testing and small scale archaeological
research. This lowland region is seasonally flooded and this fact makes
subsistence agriculture difficult. The Spanish chronicles indicate that the
inhabitants at the time of contact were organized into chiefdoms and
archaeological reconnaissance has revealed the presence of a large scale system
of `raised fields.` These prehistoric constructions consist of elongated raised
earthen platforms and research in other regions of Middle and South America
indicate that they were planted and served as fields which projected above the
water level. Based on co-occurrance in many parts of the world, archaeologists
know that the rise of stratified chiefly societies and the appearance of
irrigation systems and other `large scale` agricultural projects are linked.
However they do now understand the cause and effect mechanisms involved. In
attempting to understand the appearance of such features, some believe that a
`top down` model applies: that it was the emergence of chiefs and the authority
they wielded which allowed the organization of the numbers of people supposedly
necessary for such construction projects. Other researchers support a `bottom
up` interpretation and believe that many features such as raised fields are
relatively easy to construct, that this can be done at a family level of
organization and that the surplus produced by such fields allowed chiefs in fact
to emerge. Mr. Belgado's research will examine this question. Through an
examination of raised field size, spatial organization and association with
`elite` mound vs. commoner residences it should be possible to set this
agricultural system into a political and social context and examine the
relationships among them. This research is important because it addresses a
central anthropological question. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.