* 9724106
* US-Turkey Workshop:  Industrial &amp; Environmental Applicationsof Direct and Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flows      Istanbul, Turkey, July 6-9, 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Sedat Biringen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2000
* USD 15,000.00

9724106 Biringen Description: This award is for support of participation of US
scientists in a "US-Turkey Workshop on Industrial and Environmental Applications
of Direct and Large Eddy Simulation ", to be held in Istanbul, Turkey, July 6-9,
1998, at Bogazici University. The US organizer is Dr. Sedat Biringen, Department
of Aerospace Engineering Sciences at the University of Colorado at Boulder. The
Turkish co- organizer is Dr. Haluk Ors, Department of Mechanical Engineering at
Bogazici University, in Istanbul. The workshop is to consist of invited and
contributed papers covering: mathematical modeling of turbulent flows; turbulent
closures and modeling; solution algorithms; error analysis; high performance
computing and parallel processing relevant to turbulence simulation; industrial
applications; and environmental and geophysical applications. The workshop will
also include discussions of areas where joint research projects can be initiated
between US and Turkish scientists. Scope: This award allows six American
scientists from highly regarded academic institutions (one is from the National
Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder) to travel to Istanbul, Turkey to
meet with Turkish scientists, to discuss scientific and technical developments
in this area of fundamental research which has many wide applications in
industry and in the environment. They plan to focus attention on the scientific
questions that can be dealt with through US-Turkish scientific cooperation.
There is potential for considerable benefits from collaboration between the US
and Turkey with its strong base of researchers and graduate students in the
areas of applied mathematics and engineering. Areas of applications in the US
are many. In Turkey there are several questions related to the environmental
impact of the South Anatolia Irrigation Project (GAP) which includes building
very large dams on two major rivers, with resulting changes in water flows. This
is an area of importance to the Turks but also of scientific benefit to the US
scientific community. The proposal meets INT criteria for supporting activities
intended to enhance scientific collaboration between US and foreign scientists
in areas of mutual interest, and by supporting two junior US scientist
(including one woman) to gain international experience that could be helpful to
their career. ***