* 9724047
* Molecular Mechanism of Polarized Growth in Pollen Tubes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1997,10/19/1999
* Zhenbiao Yang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/19/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9724047 Yang Tip-growing pollen tubes grow directionally toward the ovules to
delivery sperms to the embryo sac and thus are critical for sexual reproduction
in higher plants. Pollen tubes also present an attractive model system for the
study of polarized growth, partly because they are haploid and can be easily
cultured. The long-term goal of this project is to elucidate molecular pathways
that govern polarized cell growth in pollen tubes. We have identified a rho-type
small GTP-binding protein, Rop1, that preferentially expressed in pollen and
pollen tubes and is localized to the apex of pea and Arabidopsis pollen tubes.
Antibody microinjection experiments indicate that Rop1 plays a pivotal role in
pollen tube growth likely by modulating Ca2+-dependent exocytosis. The goal of
this proposed work is to confirm the role of Rop1 in polarized tube growth using
a reverse genetics approach and to investigate underlying molecular and cellular
mechanisms for the function of Rop1 in pollen tubes. The role of Rop1 will be
genetically tested using transgenic Arabidopsis plants that express dominant
positive and negative mutant Rop1 alleles under the control of a pollen tube-
specific promoter. The transgenic pollen tubes will be analyzed for changes in
tip growth and in vivo guidance. The transgenic pollen tubes expressing Rop1
dominant mutant alleles will also be analyzed for changes in the behavior of
secretory vesicles using TEM and the rapid freeze and freeze substitution
technique and for changes in the influx of extracellular Ca2+ and the tip-
focused intracellular Ca2+-gradients using a Ca2+-selective vibrating probe and
ratiometric ion imaging. These careful analyses will test the notion that Rop1
controls polarized cell growth by modulating Ca2+ signaling-dependent polarized
exocytosis. To further understand the underlying mechanism for Rop1-mediated
polarized growth, Rop1 effectors will be identified by cloning genes encoding
Rop1 partners using interactive cloning techniques such as the yeast two-hybrid
method. Rop1 effectors are expected to interact specifically with GTP-bound Rop1
(dominant positive mutant) but not with GDP-bound Rop1 (dominant negative
mutant). These studies will establish a solid foundation for our long-term goal
of elucidating molecular pathways that lead to directional pollen tube growth.
This work may also generate a broad impact on understanding the molecular basis
of polarized growth in higher organisms as well as produce useful information
for manipulating sexual reproduction in higher plants, such as engineering male
sterility for hybrid production. The polar growth of pollen tubes is an
interesting and significant process in which a germinating pollen tube extends
in a single direction to mediate fertilization and reproduction in plants. The
PI has identified a protein (ROP1, GTP-binding protein) involved in the signal
transduction system that appears to control the polar growth of pollen tubes
through calcium fluxes. With this preliminary data as a base the PI will use
mutants of ROP1 to examine the function of the protein. Using light microscopy
assays the role of ROP1 in inducing a calcium fluxes will be visualized and
correlated with electron microscopy of the intracellular events that are
required to extend the pollen tube. ROP1 must interact with other proteins in
cascade that transmits signals through the cell. Proteins that interact with
ROP1 will be identified and characterized. This research is of fundamental
importance in describing a critical process in the reproduction of plants.
Practical applications of the research include modifying plant reproductive
growth to create superior plants. ***