* 9724282
* Acquisition and Upgrade of an Inductively Coupled Plasma    Emission (ICP-ES) Laboratory of Geological, Oceanographic,  and Environmental Chemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Robert Gensemer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9724282 Murray This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
Program, provides $100,000 as partial support of the costs of acquiring an
inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometer (ICP-ES) for rapid analyses of
major and trace element concentrations in a variety of sample matrices including
natural waters, sediments, rocks and biological tissues. Specific studies that
will take advantage of the analytic capabilities of this new instrument include
utilize major element and trace element analyses of seawater and sediment
samples to make inferences about past conditions in the oceans (i.e. primary
productivity, preservation of biogenic minerals, eolian particle flux to the
seafloor etc.), studies of the geochemistry of volcanic ashes recovered in
Antarctica for use in provenance, chronologic correlation and tectonic history
studies of the Transantarctic Mountains, petrologic studies of batholith
granites in the Sierra Nevada extensional region to elucidate possible mantle
involvement in their formation, studies of the major and trace element
compositions of high strain schists and gneisses to understand diffusional mass
transfer during metamorphism and ecotoxologic studies of heavy metals in
freshwater alga tissues and their possible effects on photosynthesis. This
instrument will complement the analytical capabilities of several ICP-MS
instruments recently acquired at several institutions within this region (i.e.
Harvard, MIT, WHOI, URI and Brown), thus making the BU ICP-ES a truly regional
facility for major and trace element geochemistry. ***