* 9724780
* Physics Survey Overview
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/1997,05/31/2002
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Brown
* 05/31/2002
* USD 103,600.00

*** 9724780 Shapero The National Research Council (NRC) will carry out a new
survey of physics entitled "Physics in a New Era". The survey is being carried
out in phases. The first phase (now complete) has produced assessments of (1)
atomic, molecular, and optical physics and (2) plasma physics as well as a
number of short reports on selected topics, including cosmology and cosmic ray
physics. These assessments have involved the corresponding divisions of the
American Physical Society and have had a significant impact on their fields. The
second phase (now in progress) will produce assessments of (1) elementary-
particle physics, (2) condensed-matter and materials physics, and (3) nuclear
physics. In the third phase, special reports on areas such as biological
physics, computational physics, and education in physics are being developed; in
addition, and Overview is planned. The Overview will discuss the unity of
physics, its relationships with other fields, and its contributions to meeting
national needs. This volume will take a fresh look at the ways in which society
reaps benefits from its investment in physics. The Overview will also explore
such issues as demographics, career paths, and education. The contents will
include an executive summary written for the non physicist, a summary of the
studies of the various branches of physics carried out in Phases I and II, a
discussion of the overall U.S. physics program, an essay on "Physics in a New
Era", and a number of other topics. The objective of the Overview, in the
broadest terms, is to facilitate a recalibration of the goals of the field as a
whole. The motivation for this undertaking is the rapidly changing societal
context for science. Our society is in the process of reexamining its goals as
it enters a new environment of reduced expectations for growth on the one hand
and enhanced opportunities for increases in productivity and functionality on
the other. The physics survey in general and the overview in particular provide
means for the physics community to participate in this process. This Overview
volume will be supported partially by this grant. ***