* 9724387
* MRI:  Acquisition of Chemical Mechanical Polishing System   for Semiconductor Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* John Hauser, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/1998
* USD 369,950.00

9724387 Hauser The semiconductor industry's National Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (NTRS) is predicated on the continuing shrink of a planar silicon
integrated circuit manufacturing technology. Although the NTRS forecasts that an
ultimate shrink to 70 nm gate length and 4 nm oxide thickness in YEAR 2010 will
provide on-chip clock frequencies of 1 Ghz and an integration density of 0. 9 x
108 cm-2 for microprocessors and 0. 64 X 1011CM-2 for DRAM, demands of the
marketplace will require that performance continue to increase beyond these
limits in future years. Both the semiconductor industry and the Department of
Defense have recently recognized this requirement, and both are reacting to urge
continued investment in research to achieve this more aggressive objective.
NCSU's Advanced Electronic Materials Processing Center (AEMP) has been
conducting leading edge research relevant to this objective under the
sponsorship of both the National Science Foundation (NSF) through an ERC and the
Semiconductor Research Corporation through a SEMATECH Center of Excellence and
now a Materials and Bulk Processing Research program. Through collaboration with
semiconductor industry partners, NCSU has made considerable impact on industry's
technology advances. Recently, AEMP has explored the issues related to the use
of the vertical or third dimension for integrated circuit fabrication, a
departure from the NTRS roadmap. It may be possible by this approach to
dramatically improve both circuit performance and functional circuit density.
Thus, new and more aggressive research goals have been defined that are aligned
with the new national need. One key to the accomplishment of these new goals is
the ability to planarize and smooth the surface following each of the third
dimension processing steps. For this process, chemical mechanical polishing
(CMP) is the optimum solution. This proposal describes the need for this
capability and requests funds for the purchase of equipment to establish this
capability within the AEMP. Funds are requested for the purchase of three
equipment items: (1) a chemical mechanical polishing tool, (2) a double sided
wafer cleaner for use after CMP and, (3) an AFM metrology tool. All three items
are needed to provide the support for future research looking at applications of
CMP to front end of the line silicon IC manufacturing processes. ***