* 9724048
* Structure-Function Studies of the Heme Pocket of an Oxygen  Sensor
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Marie-Alda Gilles-Gonzalez, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9724048 Gilles-Gonzalez The rhizobial oxygen sensing protein FixL contains a
catalytic domain and a heme binding domain. Apo-FixL or FixL having high-spin
heme iron autophosphorylates at a conserved histidine with the (-phosphoryl
group from ATP. By contrast, FixL having low-spin heme iron, is enzymatically
inactive. The proteins to be exploited in the proposed studies include the full-
length FixL from Bradyrhizobium japonicum (BjFixL), a Rhizobium meliloti FixL
lacking an ATP binding region RmFixLT(ter439) , the isolated heme domain of the
R. meliloti FixL (RmFixLH), and the same domain coupled to kinase (RmFixLT). To
probe the nature of the FixL heme pocket and the coupling of the kinase to the
heme, a number of factors will be examined that are expected to influence
binding of heme ligands. Those factors include: the chemical nature of the heme
ligands, the presence of ATP or a phosphoryl group, and the presence of a kinase
domain. The kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for binding of F-, CN-, N3-,
imidazole, and NO to FeIIIBjFixL will provide information about the influence of
ligand shape, size, polarity and charge on binding to the heme iron.
Measurements of oxygen binding to FixL complexed with non-hydrolyzable ATP
analogs or to FixL lacking a site of ATP binding will extend knowledge of the
"back effect" of the kinase. Determination of the activation energies and the
enthalpies for binding of ligands of varying crystal-field strengths to RmFixLH
and RmFixLT will help to examine the influence of the kinase. Resonance Raman
spectroscopy experiments verifying the heme coordination and examining the
impact of the kinase on the spin equilibria will complement the measurements of
ligand binding. Structural differences in the heme pockets of the cyanomet
derivatives of the FixLs will be probed by NMR spectroscopy on isotopically
labeled proteins or proteins reconstituted with isotopically labeled heme. More
detailed structural information will be obtained from X-ray crystallogra phic
studies of high-and low-spin derivatives of FixL heme domains of varying lengths
and the full-length BjFixL. The overall goal of this work is to understand the
biophysics of signal transduction. It has particular relevance to signal
transduction by heme-based sensors such as guanylyl cyclase and by the histidine
kinases of the two-component class. An understanding of FixL's regulatory
mechanism will provide a key part of a complete biochemical description of the
regulation of nitrogen fixation. Possible applications of this research include
the design of novel sensors of heme ligands for biotechnology and the
development of improved rhizobial strains for agriculture. ***