* 9724918
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Physiology of Reproductionin Molluscs
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Jeffrey Ram, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 03/31/2002
* USD 31,772.00

9724918 Ram This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research study
on the physiology of reproduction in molluscs, between Dr. Jeffrey Ram, Wayne
State University, and Dr. Carlos S. Gallardo, Universidad Austral de Chile. The
aim of the project is to understand the functional evolution of peptide hormones
using snail egg-laying hormone(s) (EHL) as a model system, and to develop
techniques for the use of the (ELH) in prosobranch snail aquaculture. The
researchers have chosen the CH giganteus species of molluscs for conducting
experiments directed at achieving three major objectives: determining the
location of ELH-imunoreactive (ELH-IR) neurons and fibers in the nervous system,
identifying and purifying egg-laying hormone(s) in their nervous system by
bioassay, with the eventual goal of determining its sequence. The proposed
project is expected to achieve both scientific and practical results . It will
result in an increased understanding of the functional evolution of peptide
hormone, and in the development of techniques for using egg-laying hormones in
prosobranch snail aquaculture In the long term, results of this study will be
used in future studies on mechanisms underlying regulation of
electrophysiological activity in neurosecretory cells. The prosobranch gastropod
molluscs form the basis of several important fisheries in both US and Chile. An
increased knowledge of the mechanisms controlling their reproduction, to be used
at desired intervals, under controlled laboratory conditions, will help the
development of mariculture. The two researchers are among the leading experts in
their respective fields, and both will benefit by this collaboration. Dr. Ram
will identify new experimental preparations for basic science investigations of
peptide hormone and neurosecretory cell evolution and function, and Dr. Gallardo
will benefit by obtaining the expertise and experience of the US PI in hormonal
regulation of reproduction of molluscs. B oth countries will benefit by the
practical application of molluscan endocrinology to aquaculture and basic
science research. ***