* 9724086
* Role of One Double-Strand DNA Break in Yeast Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Haber, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 285,000.00

Haber 9723086 Meiotic recombination is fundamental in the generation of
diversity in people and in most other eucaryotes. Crossing-over between
homologous chromosomes also plays a key role in proper chromosome segregation.
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has provided a powerful model system to
analyze these events by a combination of genetic, molecular biological and
cytological techniques. Much progress has been made in understanding how meiotic
recombination occurs and how recombination is related to the formation and
function of the synaptonemal complex (SC). One central unanswered question is:
how does meiotic recombination differ from mitotic recombination and to what
extent this difference can be assigned to: a) the way double-strand breaks are
created, b) the influence of the synaptonemal complex on gene conversion and
crossing-over, or c) the expression of meiotic-specific recombination genes? By
the meiotic expression of the site-specific HO endonuclease, under the control
of the meiotic-specific SPOI3 promoter, it is now possible to induce a single HO
double-strand break (DSB) in meiotic cells and to compare these events with
those initiated by HO in mitotic cells. This provides, for the first time, a way
to compare directly the recombination events initiated by the same DNA cleavage
in these two cell types. Moreover, this system provides a way to examine
recombination in spo11 or rad50 or other mutant meiotic cells that are incapable
of creating normal meiotic DSBs and thus are incapable of initiating normal
meiotic recombination. Consequently the effects of these mutations on later
steps in meiotic recombination can be assessed, for the first time, by inducing
a DSB with the HO endonuclease. Southern blot analysis revealed that SPO13::HO-
induced events appear at the same time as normal events. A most striking result
was obtained from a cytological analysis of spol3 red50 cells that cannot induce
normal DSBs. Surprisingly, the creation of an HO-induced DSB at one site on one
chr omosome triggered the formation of axes containing the synaptonemal complex
protein, Zip1p, along many chromosomes. This suggests that the creation of DSBs
along a chromosome is not necessary for the formation of the synaptonemal
complex along that chromosome, and that formation of the SC is triggered in
response to the detection of a single DSB. A major focus of the work is to
understand in detail how the formation of the SC is triggered. Experiments to
determine if SC formation initiated by an HO DSB depends on subsequent
recombination events carried out by gene products such as RadS1, Rad52 and
Dmc1are being carried out. Second, the role of mutations known to cause mitotic
cell cycle delay in response to DNA damage (RAD9, RAD17, RAD53, TEL1) will be
assessed for their role in triggering SC formation after an HO DSB in meiosis.
Finally, HO induced DSBs will be used to determine if a single DSB is sufficient
to cause homologous chromosome synapsis, or whether HO-induced SC formation
occurs between nonhomologous chromosomes. Finally, an experimental system is
being carried out to determine if one HO-induced DSB per chromosome is effective
in directing proper chromosome segregation on chromosomes that lack any other
crossover events.