* 9724747
* U.S.-Bulgarian Cooperative Research:  Integrable Systems andApplications to Quantum Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Henrik Aratyn, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2000
* USD 15,678.00

INT 97-24747 Aratyn This U.S.-Bulgarian cooperative research project is on
"Integrable Systems and Applications to Quantum Physics." The principal
investigators are Dr. Henrik Aratyn of the University of Illinois at Chicago and
Drs. Svetlana Pacheva and Emil Nissimov of the Institute of Nuclear Research and
Nuclear Energy of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. The researchers propose to
focus on four main topics: 1) the relation of reduced KP integrable systems and
the theory of affine Kac-Moody symmetry; 2) discrete-difference analogues of the
classical integrable systems; 3) the relations of continuum and discrete
integrable systems and quantum integrable models; and 4) some interesting
physical application of their results. The research topics are some of the most
central in mathematical physics in the past twenty years and are still actively
developing. The work is significant for new instights into physically relevant
field-theoretic models ranging from completely integrable systems in nonlinear
soliton physics and planar statistical mechanics to string and membrane
theories. It will represent an advance in the development of consistent
systematic methods for understanding links between continuous and discrete
integrable models. This project in physics research fulfills the program
objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Bulgaria to
combine complementary efforts and capabilties in areas of strong mutual interest
and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.