* 9724078
* Analysis of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling in   Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Amanda Simcox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2001
* USD 315,000.00

Simcox 9724078 The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor is a member of the
erbB class of tyrosine kinase receptors which are highly conserved in evolution
and signal through the Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway. Both in vertebrates and in flies
the EGF receptor has multiple ligands. The goal of this project is to use the
relatively simple fly system, which is both genetically and biochemically
tractable, to investigate the biological significance of having multiple ligands
for a single receptor. Two activating ligans, Vein and Spitz, will be the focus
of the study. The hypothesis is: Vein (Vn) and Spitz (Spi) are biochemically
distinct ligands which activate the Drosophila EGF receptor (DER) with different
potency and are required for specific developmental events. Preliminary data
suggest Vn is a mitogenic signal whereas Spi is required for tissue patterning.
There are 3 specific aims: AIM 1) To analyze the relative roles of vn and spi in
the embryo. The role of spi in embryonic development has been well studied
whereas little is known about the role of vn. Genetic analysis will be used to
determine the role of vn in embryos by examining both loss of function and gain
of function phenotypes. Other genes involved in VADER signaling will be
identified and the ability of spi and vn to substitute for each other will be
tested. These results will establish whether vn and spi have distinct roles in
embryonic development. AIM 2) To define the structure-function relationships of
Vn. Biochemical and genetic analysis will be used to test the function of Vn
proteins which have domains, previously recognized by sequence homology, deleted
or altered and specific residues mutated. In particular, it will be established
whether the EGF domain is the key determinant which distinguishes the properties
of Vn and Spi. AIM 3) To test the specific hypotheses: (a) Vn/DER signaling
results in cell proliferation, and (b) Spi/DER signaling results in cell dif
ferentiation, in a tissue-culture system. DER expressing Drosophila S2 cells
will be exposed to control medium and medium conditioned by Vn or Spi. The
proliferation of the cells will be determined. The growth stimulatory, neutral
or inhibitory effect of Vn and Spi will be determined. Genetic tests will be
done to determine if spi can compensate for proliferation defects in vn mutants.
These experiments will address whether Vn and Spi mediate distinct cellular
responses. Significance: ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors and their ligands are
highly conserved and play important developmental roles in vertebrates, flies,
and worms. Because of their role in growth control and differentiation this
family of receptors and ligands is also implicated in human cancers. This study
will use the powerful molecular genetics of Drosophila to address the issue of
whether different cell responses; proliferation and differentiation, are
mediated by specific ligands. The results will contribute to the understanding
of both normal and abnormal growth control and differentiation.