* 9724414
* Acquisition of Equipment for Research in High-Speed Electronics and Power Electronics in Bulk and Finite Inertia Power  Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Thomas Van Doren, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 09/30/1999
* USD 135,447.00

High-frequency test equipment and a high-power dynamometer test stand are
proposed for multidimensional research encompassing finite inertia power systems
(FIPS), electromagnetic compatibility (EMC), and bulk power systems (BPS). The
need for this research has resulted from the incorporation of power electronic
devices into many types of systems that have been historically mechanical
including ship propulsion transmissions, actuation in aircraft (fly-by-light,
power-by-wire), and electric vehicles in order to increase efficiency,
bandwidth, and reliability, and at the same time decrease size and weight. Power
electronic devices also provide a growing basis for maintaining a high degree of
power quality and reliability in bulk power systems in the newly deregulated
electric utility environment. However, the use of power electronic devices has
also led to many technical challenges including not only traditional
coordination and control concerns in FIPS and BPS, but also high-frequency noise
and electromagnetic interference. This interference can cause malfunctioning of
the high-speed digital circuitry controlling the power electronics leading to
subsequent (and usually catastrophic) failure of these devices. In addition, the
electromagnetic interference can also result in malfunctioning of other nearby
communications or digital electronics. Multi-dimensional research at UM-Rolla
has grown out of this intersection of power engineering and electromagnetic
compatibility concerns. UM-Rolla has traditionally had strong programs in power
engineering and EMC, and are recognized as leaders in these areas. New multi-
dimensional research efforts between these groups grew out of experimental
implementation of a scaled shipboard FIPS. High-frequency noise problems
resulting from rapidly switching power electronics caused malfunctioning in the
power electronic digital control circuitry and catastrophic failure of the power
electronics. Significant collaborative research resulted between the power and
EMC groups in this relatively unexplored area in order to find solutions to
these particular challenges. In particular, the power/EMC team has attracted In
excess of $3.5 million from a wide spectrum of federal and industrial sources
for power electronics, machines and drives, power systems, and electromagnetic
compatibility research. This proposal requests equipment for the investigation
of high-frequency effects in power electronic systems as well as the development
of new design approaches for minimizing this noise. This equipment will also be
used for related research in finite inertia power systems, electromagnetic
interference and susceptibility in high-speed digital designs, and for bulk
power systems. The Emerson Electric Machines and Drives Laboratory has extensive
capabilities for experimental research, and the EMC Laboratory has state-of-the-
art high-frequency test equipment for research in the 1OOMHz-20GHz frequency
range. However, the primary frequency range for noise problems in power
electronic systems is 0.01-IOOMHz, thus additional instrumentation is required.
The specific instruments needed in this range are a network analyzer, spectrum
analyzer, impedance analyzer, time-domain reflectometer, LCR meter, and power
amplifier. Expanded research opportunities in characterizing, modeling, and
developing design aids for avoiding high-frequency noise problems in power
electronic systems are possible with the addition of the proposed test
equipment. Current facilities in the power lab are also not sufficient for
pursuing studies of systems dominated by one prime mover such as next generation
shipboard and aircraft applications. A high-power dynamometer is required as a
prime mover for this research. The experimental capabilities in both the power
and EMC areas make UM-Rol a unique both universities and industries. The
proposed equipment will build on existing strengths for expanding research and
education in the area of high-frequency problems in power electronic
applications.