* 9724080
* Molecular Basis of Thyroid in Hormone Action in Brain       Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Robert Denver, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

PI: Denver, R. IBN-9724080 Normal development of the vertebrate brain requires
thyroid hormone (TH). Insufficient amounts of hormone during fetal life results
in severe defects in neural development (e.g., cretinism in humans). On a global
scale, congenital hypothyroidism is one of the most pervasive and detrimental
human health problems, resulting in entire populations of mentally impaired ad
physically stunted individuals in certain areas of the world. In addition to
hypothyroidism caused by iodine deficiency, recent reports of disruptive effects
on the thyroid axis of various industrially-produced compounds suggest the
possibility for profound negative effects of environmental pollutants on
developmental processes of humans and wildlife. The proposed research aims to
understand the molecular basis of TH action on the development of the vertebrate
central nervous system (CNS). Tadpoles of the African clawed frog, Xenopus
laevis will be used to study TH-induced neural development and to clone TH-
target genes in the CNS. This model in invaluable for understanding post-
embryonic brain development since it affords easy access to all stages of
development, and the basic neurodevelopmental processes are similar in frogs and
other vertebrate animals including humans. The primary objectives are to: 1)
understand how TH receptors transduce the hormonal signal to the cell nucleus
resulting in changes in gene expression, and , 2) understand the structure and
function of TH target genes in the CNS.