* 9724611
* Development of Instrumentation for Digital Imaging          Fluorescence Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Walter Carrington, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 09/30/2001
* USD 500,000.00

Carrington, Walter 9724611 Project Summary: A plan is presented to develop
hardware, algorithms and software to enhance and extend the capabilities of the
digital imaging microscope (DIM), an approach to 3-D fluorescence microscopy
which combines wide field microscopy with high speed CCD cameras, fast focus
change, deconvolution algorithms and visualization and analysis software. The
plan has been developed in response to the limitations imposed on biological
experiments by even the most advanced current systems. Enhancements to an
existing ultra-fast 3-D microscope will be implemented, including increasing the
number of high speed images that may be obtained before slow readout is
necessary. New computational methods for 3-D image restoration(deconvolution)
will be developed and tested that use L^p smoothing with non-negativity to
achieve a lateral resolution of 75nm and axial resolution of 250nm. New software
will be written to automate the calculation of a sub-sampled point spread
function used in this super- resolution image restoration approach. We will
develop a new parallel implemention of these algorithms on a single 4- processor
Silicon Graphics, Inc. (SGI) Origin 200 computer using SGI's software
development tools. Visualization tools that increase 3-D rendering speeds by
100x using hardware texture mapping on low end SGI 02 workstations will be
developed. Finally, new methods for analyzing the statistical significance of
spatial and temporal patterns in images will be developed. A number of
biological projects will be carried out on this new instrument addressing key
problems which are not soluble by currently existing instruments. For example,
the pathway through the cell that glut4 glucose transporters take when they are
sent to the plasma membrane in response to insulin will be directly visualized
and the dynamics of assembly of centrosomal proteins and consequences of
assembly and disassembly during the cell cycle for centros ome function will be
determined. Biologists and engineers will be trained in optical methods and
digital imaging microscopy through involvement in biological projects and
instrument development respectively. The work we propose will enhance the
sensitivity, resolution, numerical accuracy and visualization and analysis
capabilities of the digital imaging fluorescence microscope. It will thus extend
the range of questions that biologists can answer with it.