* 9724045
* Discrete Ca2+ Release Events in Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Martin Schneider, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 07/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9724045 Schneider Large depolarizations of a skeletal muscle fiber produce high
activation of transverse tubule (TT) voltage sensors, causing massive release of
Ca2+ ions via activated sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release channels and
generating a global rise of cytosolic Ca2+ or "macroscopic" calcium transient.
Using laser scanning confocal microscopy and the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator
fluo- 3, we have recently shown that if the extent of voltage sensor activation
is drastically reduced, the large, spatially uniform macroscopic calcium
transients seen during high activation decomposes into a stochastic population
of highly localized "microscopic" calcium transients. These very small
amplitude, spatially and temporally discrete calcium "sparks" appear to underlie
the macroscopic calcium transient in skeletal muscle, occurring in large numbers
and at high frequency due to activation of large numbers of TT voltage sensors
during large depolarizations. We have also found that similar calcium sparks can
be activated at triad junctions either by the TT voltage sensors or by
myoplasmic Ca2+ . A fascinating and extremely exciting possibility is that a
calcium spark could be produced by the opening of an individual SR calcium
release channel or by a group of a few channels that function as an integrated
unit. Thus, characterization of the properties of individual calcium sparks may
now provide for the first time the possibility of determining the open time and
Ca2+ efflux rate of an SR channel or of an integrated functional unit of a few
channels under conditions that maintain the normal physiological control of the
SR channels by the TT membrane voltage sensor in skeletal muscle. The general
objective of the present proposal is to thoroughly characterize the discrete SR
calcium release events in terms of open time and calcium efflux rate and to
determine how these properties vary with the mechanism and conditions of channel
activation. The spatio-tem poral spread of fluorescence within the myofibril-
sarcomere during and after individual calcium release events will be monitored
at a higher time resolution than previously available by using an acousto- optic
laser scanning confocal system. The resulting high spatio-temporal resolution
calcium spark images will be analyzed using computer modelling of the calcium
binding, transport and diffusion within the sarcomere to determine the event
open time and calcium efflux rate underlying each spark. These release channel
properties will then be characterized as a function of fiber depolarization to
determine possible effects of the level of TT voltage sensor activation on
single SR release event duration and calcium efflux rates during physiological
activation of skeletal muscle. We will also carefully test whether fiber
repolarization, which rapidly deactivates the voltage sensors, can shorten the
event open time of channels opened by the voltage sensor. The properties of
ligand gated openings will be compared with those of voltage sensor gated
openings in the same fiber to establish whether channel open time is an
intrinsic property of the release channel or is determined by the mechanism by
which the channel was opened. The rising phase of the calcium sparks will be
carefully examined for possible evidence of secondary opening of ligand gated
channels by calcium ions released by a neighboring channel directly activated by
the voltage sensors. The proposed studies are highly significant to the basic
understanding of control of calcium release channels in skeletal muscle since
they will provide the first detailed characterization of the open times and
efflux rates of channels or integrated units of a few channels under
physiological control by the TT voltage sensor. It is extremely important to
determine the extent to which these properties of functionally coupled channels
correspond to those of channels studied previously in reconstituted systems
without volt age sensor coupling. The proposed characterization of single SR
channel properties in functioning fibers represents a major technical and
conceptual advance in the understanding of intracellular calcium channels and
the activation of skeletal muscle. Calcium ions regulate a wide variety of
physiological processes that are at the very basis of how living systems move,
respond to stimuli and regulate growth and physiology. Rapid release and
translocation of calcium within cells mediates many of the responses essential
to life. This award will support research that will allow direct visualization
of the rapid release of calcium in muscle fibers. The function of muscle is
dependent on regulation by calcium. The PI will examine the interrelationship of
the function of membrane channels that conduct ions with the release of a
calcium pulse. In other experiments the amount of calcium released during an
event will be measured and the distribution of calcium events in response to
intracellular and extracellular stimulation. The results of this research will
provide fundamental information of a critical regulatory process of all living
cells. ***