* 9724171
* CONFERENCE:  Sphingolipids as Signalling Modulators in the  Nervous System, July 13-17, 1997, New York, New York
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Robert Yu, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 06/30/1998
* USD 5,000.00

9724171 Yu This Conference entitled, "Sphingolipids as Signaling Modulators in
the Nervous System" will take place from July 13 - 17, 1997, at the New York
University Las School, New York City. Historically, sphingolipids have been of
interest to neuroscientists and neurologists because of their involvement in
lipid storage diseases and other disorders affecting the nervous system. More
recent investigations have focused on questions of basic biological functions,
such as the physiological roles of these molecules in neuronal differentiation,
regeneration, and trophic assisted cell survival. Sphingolipid involvement in
such processes has been shown to include a number of signal transduction
mechanisms as well as protein modulatory effects. Sphingomyelinase, for example,
when activated by cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor, converts
sphingomyelin to ceramide which then functions as an active second messenger
triggering such processes as proliferation and apoptotic cell death.
Sphingosine, sphingosine phosphate and ceramide phosphate are also recognized as
intracellular messengers exerting a variety of effects on cell proliferation and
differentiation. Gangliosides as a class of sphingolipids are well recognized
neurotrophic factors which function as neuroprotective agents in a variety of in
vitro and in vivo systems. Numerous studies have indicated their role as
modulatory agents to a variety of membrane enzymes, receptors, ion channels and
adhesion factors. They are now being actively studied as potential
pharmaceutical agents for treatment of specific neurological disorders including
Parkinson's disease, spinal cord injury and stroke. Presentations from basic
scientists on the biochemical/cell biological aspects of gangliosides and other
sphingolipids will focus on possible mechanisms to account for the trophic,
neuroprotective properties of these substances. The immunogenic potential of
gangliosides and sulfated glycosphingolipids in promoti ng neurological
dysfunction will be explored, a key question being whether or not this
invalidates use of these substances as therapeutic agents. As in past
sphingolipid meetings, we anticipate stimulating interchanges between research
scientists and clinicians concerning basic mechanisms and the biomedical
potentials of sphingolipids.