* 9725740
* Secular Variations in Seawater Chemistry Over the Past 600  MY: A Study of Fluid Inclusions in Marine Evaporites Using  Three Analytical Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2001
* USD 209,330.00

9725740 Lowenstein The proposed study will apply three state-of-the-art
techniques, Environmental SEM X-Ray EDS (ESEM X-Ray EDS), UV laser ablation
microprobe-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LAMP-ICP-MS), and fluid
inclusion extraction-ion chromatography (Extraction-IC) to chemically analyze
fluid inclusions in Phanerozoic evaporites in an attempt to answer the important
but unresolved question of whether global seawater has changed chemical
composition over geologic time. To date, the analysis of fluids trapped in large
inclusions (102-103 microns) in halite crystals from ancient evaporites thought
to be of marine origin has been the only direct method of obtaining clues to the
major ion chemistry of ancient seawater (see Holser, 1963; Das et al., 1990;
Horita et al., 1991, 1996; among other). However, the origin of the halite
crystals carrying these large inclusions remains uncertain but they may be the
result of recrystallization or other secondary grain growth processes (e.g. Das
et al., 1990, p.323; Land et al., 1995). The fluid extraction techniques used in
these studies could not be applied to the small inclusions in halite chevron and
cumulate crystals of undoubtedly primary origin. Two new analytical techniques
to be used in the proposed study overcome his drawback (ESEM X-Ray EDS and LAMP-
ICP-MS); they allow direct chemical analysis of fluids in primary inclusions as
small as 20 microns. For comparison, bulk extraction methods (Extraction IC)
will be used to analyze large fluid inclusions (&gt;200 microns) on splits of
the same samples analyzed with the Environmental SEM and by laser ablation-mass
spectrometry. The purposes of the bulk extraction analysis are to crosscheck
whether large fluid inclusions required for the direct extraction procedure are
representative of the primary seawater parent brines present in smaller fluid
inclusions along crystal growth bands, and to obtain high precision data on
brine chemistry, including minor elements (such as Br). The central objective of
the proposed research is the recovery of a "global" seawater signal for each
geologic period sampled. In order to do this, small fluid inclusions in primary
chevron and cumulate halite crystals from spatially separated but coeval marine
evaporites will be analyzed. We will use the water evaporation computer program
of Harvie and Weare (1980) as a forward modeling tool to backtrack from the
brine analyses to the parent "seawater" compositions. We have chosen to analyze
halites in evaporite deposits from four periods, the Devonian, the Permian, the
Cretaceous, and the Miocene. Globally, potash evaporites of Permian and Miocene
age contain abundant MgSO4 salts, a mineral assemblage not predicted to form
from the evaporation of modern seawater and one that has perplexed geologists
for over a century. Our results from these two groups of evaporites with such
different primary mineralogies deposited in sedimentary basins on different
continents during four different geologic periods should provide an important
initial test of whether the major ion chemistry of seawater has changed over
Phanerozoic time.