* 9725972
* Heat and Chemical Exchange During the Early Stages of Backarc Rifting in a Polar Region: Hydrothermal Activity in       Bransfield Strait, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Martin Fisk, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 183,399.00

NSF FORM 1358 (1/94) This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the
National Science Foundation, supports research to investigate hydrothermal
venting in Bransfield Strait, between the South Shetland Islands and the
Antarctic Peninsula. Previous exploratory work in the Strait identified several
sites where hot hydrothermal fluids emanate from the sea floor. These
discoveries were made using an instrument package specially designed to detect
and map the thermal and chemical anomalies that hydrothermal activity imparts on
the overlying water column. Hydrothermal sites in the Strait range in water
depth from <200 to 1300 meters and occur on the volcanic outcrops that
periodically protrude through the sediment cover along the strike of the rift
zone. These sites are alligned with the caldera at Deception Island which has
active hot springs. These are the first submarine hydrothermal sites discovered
in Antarctica and as such represent unique research opportunities. This project
will return to the Strait to further map and sample these areas. There are
several compelling reasons to believe that further exploration of vent systems
in the Bransfield will yield exciting new information: (1) Bransfield Strait is
a back-arc rift system and it is likely that the vent fluids and mineral
deposits associated with venting in this setting are unlike anything sampled so
far from submarine vents. (2) Preliminary evidence suggests that venting in the
Bransfield occurs in two different volcanic substrates: andesite and rhyolite.
This situation provides a natural laboratory for investigating the effects of
substrate chemistry on vent fluid composition. (3) Bransfield Strait is isolated
from the system of mid-ocean ridges and has a relatively short history of
rifting (approximately 4 my). So, while the region straddles the Atlantic and
Pacific, vent biota in the Strait may well have a distinct genealogy.
Biochemical information on vent species in the Bransfield will add to our
knowledge of the dispersal of life in the deep ocean. In the past such
discoveries have led to the identification of new species and the isolation of
previously unknown biochemical compounds. (4) The fire and ice environments of
hydrothermal sites in the Bransfield may prove to be the closest analog for
primordial environments on Earth and extraterrestrial bodies. The Bransfield
Strait is one of the most productive areas of the world's oceans and lies close
to the Antarctic continent, far removed from the mid-ocean ridge system. The
combination of organic-rich sediment and heat produced by volcanism in this
back- arc setting creates a situation conducive to unusual fluids, unique vent
biota, and exotic hydrothermal deposits. Collaborative awards: OPP 9725972 and
OPP 9813450