* 9725292
* National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research (NLANR):Distributed Applications Support Team (DAST)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Charles Catlett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gregory E Monaco
* 10/31/2001
* USD 2,798,317.00

ABSTRACT: NCR9725292 National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
(NLANR): Distributed Applications Support Team (DAST) In 1995, NSF awarded a
cooperative agreement for a National Laboratory for Applied Networking Research
(NLANR) providing for engineering, technical support and coordination of the
vBNS connections at the supercomputing centers. The purposes of this NLANR team
activity were (i) to provide sufficient testing, utilization and measurement of
the NSFvBNS to insure that its overall performance was at acceptable levels,
(ii) to facilitate the experiments to be performed on the NSFvBNS, and (iii) to
provide for the coordination of support activities among the centers. It also
provided limited engineering and technical support for general use of the
NSFvBNS and provided for the coordination of such activities and facilitated the
development at the supercomputing centers of a skilled and distributed network
engineering team with a thorough knowledge of the NSFvBNS and its performance
capabilities and use for high performance applications. The recently initiated
expansion of the NSFvBNS to encourage its use as a "leading edge but stable"
platform to enable the development and use of high performance applications by
the broader academic research community requires that the original NLANR
activities be significantly expanded to encompass support for new users, sites
and applications as well as continued measurement and testing of an expanded
network. The need for this expansion has defined the NLANR activity into
separate awards for three functional areas: the NLANR: Distributed Applications
Support Team (DAST), located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaigne,
aimed at assisting the end users of high-performance applications in maximizing
the performance of their applications; the NLANR: National Center for Network
Engineering (NCNE), located at Carnegie-Mellon University, aimed at assisting
high performance connections campuses in optimizing their network engineeri ng
and connectivity; and the NLANR: Measurement and Operational Analysis Team
(MOAT), located at the University of California, San, Diego, aimed at measuring
and optimizing performance and use of the NSFvBNS and interconnected networks.
The three efforts will continue to be be closely coodinated with each other and
with the NSFvBNS. The agreement provides for the NLANR: Distributed Applications
Support Team (DAST) which builds on the NLANR activity and brings to bear NCSA's
experience in supporting users of both high performance networks (through NLANR,
IWAY, BLANCA, etc.) and complex computing environments (through the NCSA user
support structure that serves several thousand users). DAST will place network
and software engineers in direct contact with users, develop training materials
and the host workshops to facilitate the transfer of expertise in supporting
applications to the High Performance Connections end users and user service
organizations at their institutions. DAST establishes a central help desk for
High Performance Connection award site users with high performance applications
to coordinate the routing and resolution of problems related to the vBNS and
other networks associated with the High Performance Connections program.