* 9725019
* Topics in International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Kala Krishna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2001
* USD 186,170.00

This research consists of three topics in international trade. The first
involves developing vertical models of production and trade. These models where
final products are created after going through a chain of production processes
are of considerable interest. Not only does trade in intermediate goods
constitute a substantial proportion of all trade, but such vertical production
creates complementarities across sectors which cause coordination failures and
multiple equilibria to exist in a natural way. It turns out that these models
are useful for thinking about a variety of questions in trade and development,
including the case for subsidization of what are called `leading sectors` and
the determinants of the distribution of gains from trade. This work is related
to the literature in the 1950's on unbalanced growth and to the more recent
literature on complementarities, as well as to the literature on models of
vertical production in trade. The second topic is concerned with trade
liberalization, welfare, and market access. This topic focuses on the
relationship between trade liberalization, welfare, and the volume of trade. The
approach taken is to look at the linkages between markets and their implications
for the effect of trade liberalization on welfare and trade volume. The effects
of linkages between markets in which the possibility of losses from
liberalization due to second best effects is better understood. For example,
Lopez and Panagariya suggest the Concertina Rule, where the highest tariff is
reduced first, would not apply to intermediate goods. The approach, taken here
casts light, among other things, on the issue of when trade liberalization along
the lines of the Concertina Rule, raise welfare. Second, a hitherto unsuspected
link between welfare and trade volume is discovered which seems quite general.
This suggests that under certain conditions, trade liberalization which raises
welfare must reduce trade volume. In these circumstances, pressure to liberalize
trade in order to raise imports is likely to be resisted as such a policy would
necessarily reduce welfare. The third topic involves R&amp;D and exchange rates:
This topic focuses on the effect of the exchange rate on R&amp;D expenditures
chosen in an open economy. In his provocative book, Michael Porter speculates
that economies with overvalued exchange rates are forced to compete by
innovating rather than by using lower prices to compete in the market. Despite
the intriguing case studies offered in the book, the forces at work behind the
scene are not well understood in the literature.