* 9725256
* Application of Single Crystal Membrane (SCM) Technique for  Investigation of Binary Diffusivities in Zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Dhananjai Shah, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2002
* USD 248,504.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9725256 O. Talu Shah/Cleveland State U. The single crystal membrane
(SCM) method, developed by the principal investigator, will be applied to
investigate transport properties of binary systems. In parallel, substantial
effort will be devoted to molecular simulations to enhance the understanding of
molecular scale phenomena. All industrial applications ultimately require
multicomponent equilibrium and diffusivity data. It is therefore necessary to
develop methods of predicting multicomponent equilibria and diffusivities from
pure component data. Experimental measurements and computer simulations are
essential to develop reliable prediction models. The binary systems chosen will
be several mixtures of n-alkanes whose pure component adsorption equilibria and
diffusion in silicalite have been well-characterized. Binary diffusivities will
be measured for three different modes: 1) co-diffusion, 2) counter-diffusion,
and 3) a novel chromatographic mode which is only possible with a membrane
configuration. In a separate set of experiments, binary equilibria of chosen
systems will be measured to enable accurate interpretation of diffusion data.
Molecular simulations will be performed to extend the available simulation
techniques to a novel steady-state non-equilibrium method. This approach will
complement the experimental measurements more closely than has been previously
possible and simultaneously lead to a more efficient method of deriving accurate
statistics. The findings will fill substantial voids in the present
understanding of thermodynamics and transport in micropores by combining
molecular simulations and novel experiments to resolve a number of fundamental
controversies that have plagued progress in the study of zeolites. ***