* 9725071
* The Trophic Ecology of Marine Birds and their Influence on  Carbon Flow in the North Water Polynya
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* George Hunt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2003
* USD 265,333.00

This project is a component of the international team of scientists that have
been assembled to investigate the North Water polynya (NOW) ecosystem. The
proposed study will test the hypothesis that spatial heterogeneity in the
species composition of seabirds breeding in the vicinity of the NOW ecosystem is
determined by spatial heterogeneity in physical mechanisms that structure NOW.
The proposed research is designed to determine the influence of marine birds on
the fate of particulate carbon in this High Arctic polynya. Three questions will
be addressed: (1) What is the spatial heterogeneity in the distribtuion of
foraging seabird species and prey use within the polynya and is this variability
related to water masses or other hydrographic features? (2) What is the carbon
flux to birds and what are the trophic pathways (food webs) on which the birds
depend? (3) Is there seasonal variation in the trophic role of birds and are
these the result of changes in the food webs used, or the size classes and
species of prey available? To answer these questions, the species composition,
abundance, distribution, and diets of marine birds foraging in the NOW will be
quantified. These data will be used in conjunction with published models of
energy consumption as function of body mas to calculate the daily and annual
consumption of energy, prey, and carbon by marine birds in the NOW. Additional
data on hydrography and prey fields, which will aid in addressing questions
concerning the spatial organization of physical and biological processes in the
NOW, will be available from other participating scientists.