* 9725843
* Katabatic Winds in Eastern Antarctica and Their Interaction with Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Gerd Wendler, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/2003
* USD 331,054.00

This project is the continuation of an internationally collaborative
(U.S.-French-Australian) study of katabatic winds along the coast of East
Antarctica. It is based on two lines of automatic weather stations, one from
Dumont d'Urville, the French station, inland to Dome C at an altitude of greater
than 3200 meters, the other along the coast. The coastal array includes stations
at Cape Denison and Port Martin, which have recorded the highest average surface
wind speeds on the globe (a monthly average of 62 mph). One additional automatic
weather station will be installed 15 km inland where model results predict even
higher average wind speeds. These winds drive the sea ice offshore, and are
responsible for extremely high heat fluxes from the ocean to the atmosphere.
Satellite-based active microwave imagery (Synthetic Aperture Radar) will be
combined with the observed meteorological data to analyze the formation
persistence and size of offshore polynyas as a function of wind speed. The
effort to produce a numerical model of the regional atmospheric structure will
continue, with the incorporation of a more detailed terrain map, and a new
mesoscale model developed by the principal investigator's French colleagues. In
conjunction with the Australian and Japanese station networks to the west of
this study area, this work will allow an assessment of the influence of cyclonic
storm systems on the drainage flow along the antarctic coast. ***