* 9725374
* The Development of a New Generation Gravity Map of          Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/2002
* USD 195,000.00

9725374 Bell The goal of this project is to develop a Web-based Antarctic
gravity database to globally facilitate scientific use of gravity data in
Antarctic studies. This compilation will provide an important new tool to the
Antarctic Earth science community from the geologist placing field observations
in a regional context to the seismologist studying continental scale mantle
structure. The gravity database will complement the parallel projects underway
to develop new continental bedrock (BEDMAP) and magnetic (ADMAP) maps of
Antarctica. An international effort will parallel these ongoing projects in
contacting the Antarctic geophysical community, identifying existing data sets,
agreeing upon protocols for the use of data contributed to the database and
finally assembling a new continental scale gravity map. The project has three
principal stages. The first stage will be to investigate the accuracy and
resolution of currently available high resolution satellite derived gravity data
and quantify spatial variations in both accuracy and resolution. The second
stage of this project will be to develop an interactive method of accessing
existing satellite, shipboard, land based, and airborne gravity data via a Web
based interface. The Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory RIDGE Multi-beam
bathymetry database will be used as a template for this project. The existing
online RIDGE database allows users to access the raw data, the gridded data and
raster images of the seafloor topography. A similar structure will be produced
for the existing Antarctic gravity data. The third stage of this project will be
to develop an international program to compile existing gravity data south of 60
S. This project will be discussed with leaders of both the ADMAP and BEDMAP
efforts and the appropriate working groups of SCAR. A preliminary map of
existing gravity data will be presented at the Antarctic Earth Science meeting
in Wellington in 1999. A gravity working group meeting will be held in
conjunction with the Wellington meeting to reach a consensus on the protocols
for placing data into the database. By the completion of the project, existing
gravity data will be identified and international protocols for placing this
data in the on-line database will have been defined. The process of archiving
the gravity data into the database will be an ongoing project as additional data
become available.