* 9725302
* SGER:  Scale and Complexity in Computational Models of      Social Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Robert Axtell, Brookings Institution
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

The research will investigate the computing challenges posed by extending large-
scale multi-agent computational models to achieve both greater scale and more
complex and realistic behaviors by individual agents. Individual agents in these
models are represented by complex data structures that represent their internal
states and behavioral repertoires. In agent populations of even modest size, the
number of interaction histories (which determines the state of a model) is huge,
so building realistic models poses significant computational hurdles. The
primary aim of this research is to explore the quantity-complexity frontier:
point at which there are tradeoffs between models with large numbers of simple
agents and models with greater numbers of more complex agents. This project aims
to develop innovative computational techniques to extend both the scale and the
complexity of models by two to three orders of magnitude. Such advances are
crucial to understanding whether phase changes occur when scale and/or
complexity is significantly increased in multi-agent or social systems. It is
also critical to future real-world applications of multi-agent systems modeling
to problems such as understanding development and migration patterns (e.g.
China), which pose problems of scale, and understanding peer-group effects on
crime rates (which pose problems of modeling the complexity of individual agent
behaviors).