* 9725836
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dating Quaternary Deposits and      Soils with TIMS U-Series on Pedogenic Carbonate and Silica
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Oliver Chadwick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 11/30/1999
* USD 33,984.00

9725836 Chadwick Funds are requested to further develop and apply TIMS (Thermal
Ionization Mass Spectrometry) U-series dating to pedogenic carbonate and silica.
The research will seek to understand the potential and limitations of U-series
dates on chemically/mineralogically-characterized, micro-sampled clast rinds by
detailed work in two climatically and lithologically distinct areas. Two
localities will be studied, using techniques that build on the results of
recent, independent studies by the P.I.'s. Kyle Canyon (Nevada) provides a
sequence of carbonate-clast alluvial deposits and morphologic surfaces ranging
from Holocene to >780 ka, whereas the Wind River Basin (Wyoming) provides a
sequence of granitic-clast dominated alluvial deposits from Holocene to early
Pleistocene age. In both localities, the Quaternary geology and pedology have
been well studied by one or more of the investigators of this proposal. This is
a collaborative proposal among 3 institutions: Ken Ludwig and Warren Sharp at
the Berkeley Geochronology Center will be responsible for sampling and uranium-
series analyses using the new TIMS facility and clean lab at BGC; Ron Amundson
at U.C. Berkeley and Oliver Chadwick at U.C. Santa Barbara will provide field
and laboratory expertise in Quaternary geology and pedology, as well as
familiarity with the study localities. All of the named investigators will
participate in the chemical and microscopic characterization of the pedogenic
carbonate and silica, and Amundson will be responsible for the stable-isotopic
work and interpretation. The single-sample/single-date approach developed by
Ludwig and J.B. Paces for a recent study at Crater Flat, Nevada, in which sub-
millimeter laminae of individual carbonate/silica rinds are micro-sampled to
avoid detrital contamination, will be applied to carefully-characterized clast
rinds of the deposits in both localities. The limitations of the approach will
be explored including the reliability of the detrital 230Th corrections, the
textural and geochemical indicators of open systems, and the practicality of
extending the method into the Early Pleistocene using 234U/238U. Analyses of
Holocene clast-rinds will be of special interest, as these samples will provide
an understanding of the likely time-lag between clast deposition and the
accumulation of datable carbonate or carbonate/silica rinds. Knowledge of this
time lag (and its variability in different climatic and lithologic contexts)
will be essential in using U-series dates of innermost clast-rinds to date the
Quaternary deposits themselves. Some development of micro-sampling techniques
will be required to explore the limits of sample size and spatial resolution,
but this can be done with relatively modest equipment. The laboratory challenges
involve mainly those of small-sample 230Th analyses, in which one of the P.I.'s
has extensive experience. The results of the dating studies will be applied to
understanding the history and timing of erosion and sedimentation in Kyle
Canyon, and of glacial events in the Wind River Basin. A limited number of
stable-isotope analyses will be used to evaluate the usefulness of the rinds as
a paleoclimate record, as well as to check for open-system histories of the mid-
and early Pleistocene rinds.