* 9725881
* IEEE EMBS Workshop, Virtual Reality in Medicine
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1998,02/28/1999
* Metin Akay, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 02/28/1999
* USD 3,813.00

9725881 Akay Virtual reality technologies are appearing in important diagnostic
and treatment planning applications in medicine. With today's image processing
computer workstations and PCs equipped with high end graphics programs, virtual
reality technologies are capable of producing diagnostic quality images of
internal organs such as the colon, and provide a sufficiently accurate depiction
of the anatomy of the hip for the surgeon to use in planning a patient-specific
total hip replacement procedure. The two examples noted above indicate the
important potential for the use of virtual reality technologies in medicine, but
additional engineering and computer science research is needed to generate the
knowledge required to emulate human anatomical features in high resolution and
rapid 3D image reconstruction, full color, user-friendly, and cost-effective
systems. These areas of research were examined in the Virtual Reality in
Medicine Workshop held as a part of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society conference October
30-November 2, 1997. World class investigators served as faculty for the
workshop, presenting state-of-the-art information about the important
technologies involved in virtual reality and indicating areas where research is
likely to lead to new performance capabilities. Importantly, 13 engineering
students participated in the workshop and received at first hand information
that could influence them to enter this area of engineering endeavor. This award
provides support for partial reimbursement of travel expenses for the faculty.
***