* 9725308
* Sequence Stratigraphic Signature of a Long Term Greenhouse  to Ice-House Transition in Mississippian Ramp Carbonates of Appalachian and Eastern Illinois Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* James Read, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2001
* USD 141,000.00

9725308 Read This proposal requests funds to study the large exposures and
extensive cores of the Early Mississippian (Osage-Meramecian) carbonate ramp,
Appalachian/eastern Illinois Basins, and compare them to Late Mississippian
successions, to search for the long term (30 m.y.) stratigraphic response of
this tropical carbonate ramp to eustatic and climatic changes associated with
Late Paleozoic global greenhouse to icehouse transition. We presently have a
large data set on the later Mississippian (Chesterian) units from both the
Appalachian and Illinois Basins, which appear to show evidence of deposition
under relatively large sea level fluctuations during onset of Late Paleozoic
glaciation of Gondwana; these will serve as a basis of comparison with the older
units. We propose to log and photo-mosaic the Early and Middle Mississippian
ramp facies, which appear to have formed on and above a clinoformal ramp with
skeletal ramp margin and downslope banks, a gullied slope and low-stand (?) sand
bodies, that built out from an abandoned detaic-marine self. Outcrops and cores
will be logged bed-by-bed, to define vertical and lateral extent of component
carbonate and siliciclastic facies, presence or absence of regional tidal flat
facies, eolianites, types of bounding surfaces and paleosols developed, and any
evidence of erosional incision. We will construct detailed regional cross
sections to define a high-resolution sequence stratigraphy for the early
Mississippian ramp. Additionally, we will extend our later Mississippian
(Chesterian) high resolution, sequence stratigraphic outcrop study of the
Appalachian Basin, throughout the subsurface Appalachian Basin using core,
sample cuttings and wireline logs. We will then use these data sets on the Early
to Late Mississippian to evaluate the magnitude of Mississippian sea level
fluctuations by computer simulation of our stratigraphic cross-sections. Input
parameters will be constrained where possible using the field data. Finally,
this data wil l be integrated with the ice-buildup history in Gondwana, to
define the stratigraphic response of this tropical ramp to Late Paleozoic global
climate change.