* 9725348
* RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dynamic Response of Bedrock    Fluvial Systems to Tectonic Forcing
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Dorothy Merritts, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2001
* USD 77,296.00

9725348 Merritts Erosional unloading is an important force in orogenic
processes; the rates and patterns of erosion influence the heights of mountain
belts, outcrop patterns of lithologic units, and, perhaps, the rates and styles
of crustal deformation. Analysis of the interactions of tectonic and surficial
processes requires quantitative understanding of the dynamics of bedrock channel
systems. That is, in tectonically active fluvial landscapes bedrock channels
control the rates and patterns of erosional unloading because they set the lower
boundary condition for hillslope processes that accomplish land surface
denudation. Unfortunately, little is known quantitatively about many aspects of
the process of river incision into bedrock, and this limits our ability to model
the evolution of bedrock channel systems. In particular, field data are needed
to constrain: ( rates of bedrock incision, ( Patterns of transient response to
tectonic forcing, ( Channel response timescales, ( Controls on bedrock channel
width, and ( Morphological consequences of transitions in channel processes
(e.g., fluvial to debris flow). In an effort to improve our capabilities to
model interactions between tectonic and surface processes, we propose to examine
bedrock channel systems at three field sites: coastal drainage's of the King
Range of northern California, post-glacial gullies in the Finger Lakes region of
New York, and Knife Creek in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes in Alaska. We
chose these sites because climate and lithology are spatially invariant in each,
uplift and climatic histories of each are relatively well-constrained, and each
contains landforms indicative of incision (e.g., strath terraces) and tectonic
disturbance (e.g., oversteepened stream segments) that provide a means of
assessing incision rates and patterns of transient response to tectonic forcing.
We will use data obtained from this comparative analysis to place quantitative
constraints on an existing mathematical mod el of bedrock channel evolution
through a series of forward and inverse modeling exercises (both 2-D profile and
3-D landscape evolution models). The results will provide a more complete
understanding of processes in bedrock channel systems and an improved
mathematical framework for the analysis of landscape evolution and the
interaction of tectonic, climatic and surficial processes.