* 9725979
* New Transition Metal Oxides Near Localized-Itinerant, Insulator-Metal Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Robert Cava, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2003
* USD 708,473.00

9725979 Cava The discovery of high temperature superconductivity in complex
copper oxides led to the widespread realization that the relationships between
the chemistry, crystal structure, and electronic and magnetic properties of
transition metal oxides was understood at only a cursory level. Due to the
presence of strong interactions between the d electrons, and the interactions
between the electrons, magnetic spins, and the underlying atomic lattice, the
usual band structure based picture (which, for example, does not include the
effects of electronelectron correlations) often can not properly describe the
observed electronic and magnetic properties. This research program in solid
state chemistry has the goal of discovering new complex oxides with exotic
electronic and magnetic properties due to their proximity to insulator-metal
transitions. Two classes of chemical compounds are considered in detail. The
research program consists of: (1) The discovery and characterization of new
ternary and quaternary ruthenium oxides, oxyhalides, and related compounds.
Taken as a whole, previous studies strongly suggest that ruthenium and oxygen
represent one of the pairs of atoms in the periodic table for which unusual
physical properties result due to the characteristics of the metal-oxygen bond
and the types of crystal structures which occur when compounds with ternary
elements are formed. (2) The discovery of new copper oxide superconductors and
related materials with low-dimensional copper- oxygen arrays. This program
searches for new copper based oxides synthesized at high oxygen pressures, in
which the copper-oxygen plane does not have the usual Cu02 checkerboard
geometry. New materials are sought in which the CuO geometry is electronically
"simpler" than the Cu02 plane. The characterization of these materials will
allow direct comparison to the predictions of models for the behavior of quantum
mechanical spin systems, an area of intense theoretical activity, whic h many
believe may hold the key to the microscopic mechanism of high temperature
superconductivity . %%% Many of today's technological systems are based on the
use of sophisticated electronic materials. As those systems increase in
complexity, the types of materials they are based on also increase in
complexity. This project uses the methods of solid state chemistry in the search
for new materials at the borders of our understanding of the fundamental
relationships between the chemistry, crystalline structure, and electronic and
magnetic properties of solids. Two promising classes of transition metal oxides
will be studied, with the hope that the insight gained will ultimately help
define the future directions of both condensed matter science and electronics
technology. ***