* 9725927
* Phase I and II: Unsing Information Technologies to Support  Urban Middle School Students in Scientific Inquiry
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Ronald Marx, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2000
* USD 543,056.00

9725927 Krajcik We propose to study the process of adapting and sustaining an
innovation in urban middle schools in Detroit that highlights inquiry enabled by
computational technology. The innovation includes technology (a suite of tools
in the Investigator's Workshop), instruction (Project Based Science and
instructional materials) and an approach to professional development. Our model
of implementation stresses processes that include collaborating with teachers
and administrators to adapt the innovation so that it is achieveable given the
realities of the context of the school, community, and the district' s Urban
Systemic Initiative. It also emphasizes coordination among the elements of the
innovation and of policies at the school and district level so that in
combination they support the innovation. The goal of the research is to
understand how to build capacity in urban school systems necessary to cope with
the complexities involved in adopting and sustaining technological and
pedagogical change. Capacity includes a) infrastructure and policies that
support the innovation, b) culture in which professionals embrace reform and
work together to achieve it, and c) capability, teacher and administrator know
how to mobilize energy and resources to initiate and sustain the innovation. We
are already working jointly with middle schools in Detroit. The research plan
has two phases. In phase 1, using a combination of quantitative and qualitative
methods, we will study the innovation implementation process, adaptations to the
innovation as inquiry enabled by technology is introduced to seventh and eighth
grade classrooms, and how the innovation affects students, classrooms and
schools over a three year period. The focus of Phase 2 will be to explore
whether what we learned in phase 1 about problems and potential solutions
contributes to more effective and efficient innovation implementation in new,
but similar, middle school settings. Our assumption is that by drawing on our
experiences, schools and districts can be more proactive in anticipating
difficulties, responding in ways that adapt the innovation to their situations
and that increase capacity to sustain instructional and technological change.
Products will include research reports and materials for use in educational
change efforts. The knowledge gained will add to the literature on reform and
enable educators and policy makers to improve the effectiveness of change
efforts directed at engaging urban students in learning science through inquiry
enabled by technology. NSF FORoU t358 (1/94)