* 9725502
* The Challenge of Developing Systems Thinkers:  How          Misconceptions About Complex Causality Contribute to        Fundamental Problems in Scientific Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* David Perkins, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 06/30/2003
* USD 837,690.00

9725502 Grotzer Learning to understand and analyze the systems concepts present
in many different scientific phenomena entails interpreting a variety of types
of complex causal relationships. Yet students tend to hold preconceptions and
misconceptions about causality that hinder learning and systematically generate
misconceptions in science content. There are different levels of increasingly
sophisticated forms of complex causality. At each level, learners face new
cognitive challenges where mismatches between students' causal models and
scientific causal models arise and imperil scientific understandings. Despite
the fundamental importance of complex causal models, few materials exist to help
teachers support student learning about complex causal forms. A taxonomy of
increasingly complex causal models that represent different sets of science
understandings will be generated. Students' understandings of the different
models and the inherent protoconcepts will be probed using computer and paper-
based assessments, interviews, and observations. Mismatches between students'
and scientific models will be investigated to identify and examine points of
difficulty. Researchers and teachers will then work together to develop and
assess intervention materials designed to help students beyond these points of
difficulty. The resulting program, tentatively titled "The Understandings of
Consequence Program," will be constructivist in nature. It will invite explicit
student reflection upon causal models as situated in science content and how
they map onto different scientific phenomenon. Methods will be developed for
modeling and talking about specific concepts of difficulty. The program will be
designed to be infused into existing science programs as well as provide
direction for the development of future programs. In the third and final year of
the project, the program will be tested with a set of teachers who were not
involved in the research and development process. This will suggest what
addition al supports may be needed for the broader dissemination of the program
as well as provide a means of testing its effectiveness outside the development
context. The effectiveness of the program will be evaluated through use of
qualitative, conceptual methods as well as standardized assessments. The
analysis will combine quantitative and qualitative methods. The program will
then be offered for broad dissemination. By focusing on a set of
misunderstandings and preconceptions that systematically generate other
misunderstandings, the resulting materials and methods should fundamentally
impact science learning. It will contribute of halting a pattern of
systematically generated misconceptions-enabling conceptual changes that equip
learners to grasp complex causal concepts and systematically contribute to deep
understanding in science learning instead. ***