* 9725162
* Excavation of an Early Neolithic Village in the Eygptian    Sahara
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Fred Wendorf, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2000
* USD 161,559.00

While Egypt is best known for the civilization of the pharaohs, from an
anthropological perspective it is also significant because of the developmental
processes which proceeded this period. Thousands of years earlier hunting and
gathering populations living in a fluctuating Saharan environment developed a
subsistence strategy based on focused and extensive utilization of a wide range
of local plant foods. This provided the basis for early settled (or semi-
settled) village life and likely contributed to the domestication of sorghum,
one of the world's major plant crops, and cattle. Perhaps the earliest known
pottery is associated with such Saharan populations. A central goal of the
research pursued by Dr. Wendorf and his international multidisciplinary team is
to trace the early, Neolithic stages of this developmental process which
established the groundwork for Egyptian civilization. With National Science
Foundation support his team will conduct two seasons of fieldwork at an early
Neolithic site in the Saharan Desert. Prior work has revealed the presence of an
extremely early village, labeled E-91-9, which contains abundant carbonized
plant remains, numerous houses and associated pits and the largest corpus of
pottery yet found at such an early period of occupation. The work will focus on
three issues: 1. The development of increasing reliance on cereal species that
eventually became major domestic crops: 2. The changes in social organization
that accompanied the adoption of a more sedentary village way of life; and 3.
The origins of pottery production. To accomplish these goals, the team will
excavate a number of storage pits which contain floral remains. They will also
excavate house structures and the areas surrounding them. Preliminary data
indicates that the settlement may be planned and that house structures are
arranged in a row pattern. This research is important because it will shed new
light on the emergence of settled village societies and the processes involved
in the domestication of plants and animals. It will fill an important gap in the
prehistory of Egypt and provide data of interest to many archaeologists.