* 9725418
* Reconstructing Arctic-Atlantic Interactions on a            Sub-millennial Time Scale:  Holocene Sediment Records from  the Southeastern Barents Sea
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Leonid Polyak, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2002
* USD 198,585.00

Holocene paleo-environments from the southeastern Barents Sea will be studied to
track past changes in water and sea-ice characteristics on a century to
interdecadal scale. Noticeable ongoing changes in the Arctic natural system
require better understanding of mechanisms controlling this change. In
particular, it is critical to assess variations in Arctic-Atlantic climatic
interactions in a long-term perspective. The Barents Sea has been identified as
a key area for investigating these variations. A distinct atmospheric and
hydrographic boundary between Arctic and Atlantic domains crosses the Barents
Sea, and its bottom sediments record fluctuations in the position of this
boundary. Selected sediment cores, recently collected in the southeastern
Barents Sea in areas with elevated sedimentation rates, will be investigated for
paleobiological, mineralogical, grain-size, and geochemical composition.
Obtained proxy data will allow the estimation of Holocene variations in surface
and bottom water temperatures and salinities, sea-ice conditions, and
circulation patterns. Core stratigraphy will be time-constrained by AMS 14C
dating of selected calcareous faunal remains. A resolutions of 100-120 yr is
expected in the open Barents Sea, and up to 30-50 yr in the adjacent Kola Bay.
The study results will test the existence of long-term fluctuations in Arctic-
Atlantic interactions, a cornerstone for understanding modern Arctic climatic
changes.