* 9725587
* Stratigraphic and Tectonic Analysis of Neogene              Coal-Bearing Basins Along the Alaska Range Suture Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Kenneth Ridgway, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2002
* USD 133,126.00

9725587 Ridgway This proposal seeks funding for a three-year investigation of
Neogene sedimentary basins located along the north-central flank of the Alaska
Range. These basins contain the record of basin development along an ancient
suture zone, the uplift history of the highest mountain range in North America,
extensive low-sulfur coal reserves, and potential petroleum reservoirs. The
east-west trending basins were filled by fluvial and lacustrine deposits and
consist of the Miocene Usibelli Group (~ 600 m thick) and the Pliocene Nenana
Gravel (~ 1000 m thick). The general questions to be addressed include: (1) How
do basins form within the interior of collisional/accretionary orogenic
settings? Can a conceptual model be developed for basin formation along former
suture zones? (2) What can the synorogenic deposits contained within these
basins teach us about the Neogene uplift of the Alaska Range? Does the detrital
record contain information on how deformation and uplift changed along strike
and through time for this orogenic belt? What was the influence of paleoclimate
on detrital composition during unroofing of the Alaska Range? (3) Coal from the
Usibelli Group is becoming an increasingly important energy source for Alaska
and for export to Pacific Rim countries. What were the depositional, tectonic,
and climatic controls on coal deposition in these basins? A regionally
integrated stratigraphic, paleogeographic and tectonic framework for all the
Neogene basins will be needed to answer these questions. A database will be
established by reconstructing the depositional systems for each basin;
construction of a series of cross sections through the central Alaska Range; and
compositional analysis of sandstone's and conglomerates. Major contributions of
the proposed research include documentation of the long term evolution of
sedimentary basins along a suture zone; delineation of along strike variations
in the uplift history of the Alaska Range; and analysis of the distribution of
potentially commercial coals for future exploration.