* 9725017
* Second U.S.-China Symposium/Workshop on Recent Developments and Future Trends of Computational Mechanics in Structural  Engineering, Dalian, China, May 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,11/30/1999
* Jann Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1999
* USD 38,490.00

9725017 Yang This award supports a U.S.-China workshop on computational
mechanics in structural engineering. The U.S. organizer is Jann Yang, University
of California at Irvine; the Chinese organizers are Gu Yuanxian and Zhong
Wanxie, Dalian University of Technology. This workshop will focus on recent
advances in structural engineering and identify possible joint research efforts.
In the past two decades, the field of structural mechanics has made important
contributions to the practice of structural engineering. Computational
mechanics, failure and fracture mechanics, structural control and monitoring
have all made dramatic contributions to the improvement of construction and
maintenance of structural systems. The development of a systems approach to
civil infrastructure has dramatically changed the research agenda in countries
worldwide. Given China's susceptibility to events such as strong earthquakes,
China has also emphasized research in these areas, and has developed techniques
and technologies that are very competitive. This symposium will allow exchange
of current information and definition of mutually advantageous joint research
projects. Participation will include senior and junior researchers on both
sides. Support on the Chinese side will be provided by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China and by the State Education Commission.