* 9725381
* Sci-Squad
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2001
* Bill Jersey, KCTS Television
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 03/31/2001
* USD 1,353,388.00

9725381 Jersey KCTS is producing Sci-Squad, a national weekly science education
television series for children ages 8 to 10. The thirteen half-hour programs in
the series will show a team of kids, the Sci-Squad, who use inquire and
collaboration to seek the solution to a science problem. The team is led by
Howzit, a young woman computer whiz. Working cooperatively the team investigates
each scientific subject through a combination of first-hand experimentation,
Internet surfing, field research, and visits to real-world scientists. Each of
the characters models a different mode of science inquiry in search to a
question the team receives at the beginning of each program. Youth who view the
programs will be encouraged to follow along with the Sci-Squad and will be
challenged to observe, measure, think critically, analyze results, and devise
further experiments. Outreach materials to support science activities by viewers
include an Explorer's Guide for youth, a Parents Guide, and a Guide for
Teachers. There also will be collaborations with science and youth serving
organizations such as Boys &amp; Girls Club of America, Family Math, GEMS,
Science Linkages in the Community, the National Science Teachers Association,
the National PTA, and, for the Hispanic population, ASPIRA and the National
Council of La Raza. Bill Jersey, President of Quest Productions, will be the
Senior Producer, Director, and Co-Project Director. The creator of the project
and Co-Project Director is Pierre Valette, a producer and writer of
documentaries for Quest Productions and previously an Associate Producer in
Children's Programming at WGBH. Elizabeth Brock will be the Executive-in-Charge
of Production for KCTS. The Senior Science Consultant is Ted Ansbacher who
previously was Director of Exhibits at the New York Hall of Science and Director
of Education/Senior Scientist at The Chicago Museum of Science.