* 9725157
* Collaborative Research:  The Plutonic Foundation of a Very  Slow-Spreading Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* James Natland, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 08/31/2001
* USD 102,576.00

This award will support a marine geological and geophysical study of exposed
lower ocean crust in the southwest Indian Ocean. Exposed crustal rocks on
shallow uplifted seafloor were discovered in this region during Ocean Drilling
operations. ODP site 735B sampled a 400 meter vertical section of gabbros in
this area providing a detailed record of crustal formation processes. To date,
however, it has been difficult to place these results into a local context since
no data are available on surrounding seafloor geology. The present project will
rectify this situation by undertaking detailed near bottom observations and
sampling. Canadian scientists will provide the ROB ROPOS as primary survey
vechicle, and rock drill would be modified for deployment on ROPOS to allow
direct sampling of observed rocks. The primary objective is to provide detailed
near bottom examination and sampling of seafloor to tie existing ODP data to
local environment and to provide detailed site survey for drilling to be
proposed which would sample at sites surrounding existing hole. Additional work
would include newly developed British rock drill to provide deeper sampling than
could be done from ROPOS vehicle. Sample and data would be used to identify
crustal formation process at this unique exposure of lower crustal rocks.