* 9725566
* Inclusions in Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2001
* USD 180,014.00

9725566 Zhang Because the host mineral protects the inclusion, inclusions may
preserve information about the deeper upper mantle, about crustal rocks
subducted into the upper mantle, and the environment in the inclusion may be
different from that outside. Deciphering this information requires understanding
of the mechanics, thermodynamics, and kinetics of processes involving the
inclusion and host. This is a combined theoretical and laboratory project to
investigate the ability of the host to protect the inclusion. At (1200(C for
normal mantle minerals, stress relaxation is rapid and the host can not protect
the inclusion. Regular thermobarometry is applicable. At (800(C, most
metamorphic rocks including some UHP's stress relaxation due to viscous flow is
negligible over the age of the earth. The host can protect the inclusions. The
inclusion P can be very different than the host P. Quantitative thermobarometry
is possible only after inclusion-host equilibrium is understood under such
conditions. Due to differences in host and inclusion P, there is a stress field
in the host adjacent to the inclusion. This field may have an effect on
equilibrium and may also induce pressure diffusion. Demonstrating the presence
of pressure diffusion may open an new field of study and may lead to better
understanding of compositional profiles in the host and applicability of such
profiles in geospeedometry. Preliminary work suggests that early thermobarometry
may be wrong. The results of this research will correctly interpret inclusion-
host information and understand the applicability of geothermometry,
geobarometry, and geospeedometry.