* 9725768
* Lost Civilizations of the Tarim Basin - A Traveling Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County Exhibit
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1998,01/31/2000
* James Olson, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Orrin Shane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 84,691.00

9725768 Olsen The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County will develop Lost
Civilizations of the Tarim Basin. This will be a 6000 sq. ft. traveling exhibit
that will introduce visitors to the extraordinary archaeological discoveries
that have recently been made in the Taklamakan Desert in the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of China. Due to the arid desert
conditions the preservation of sites, artifacts, and human remains is
exceptional and the artifacts represent some of the oldest extant items made of
perishable materials (wood, paper, silk, and leather.) What has intrigued
scientists about these remains is the fact they are Indo-Europeans. These
remains have challenged the scholarly world by adding fuel to an already heated
debate considering the origins and development of the Indo-European peoples who
inhabited the Eurasian landmass for thousands of years. Who were these people,
where did they come from, and what was their role in the early development of
East/West cultural contact? Not only will visitors be able to see the artifacts
and learn about the culture of this extinct group, but they will also learn how
archaeologists and collaborating specialists work to unravel the mysteries posed
by these remains. The exhibit will be complemented by resources for formal
education programs. NHM will develop 1) an on-line presentation that will
include "virtual" elements of the archaeology sites and materials, 2) teacher
enhancement activities, 3) curriculum materials for older elementary and
secondary students, and a menu of non-formal lectures, classes, and a symposium.
The museum will also produce a comprehensive, fully illustrated catalogue in
both printed and digital formats. The exhibit will have five venues. It is
expected to reach between 150,000 and 300,000 people at each venue.