* 9725456
* Technician Support:  Upgrading and Expanding the Electron   Microprobe Facility, Department of Geosciences, University  of Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2001
* USD 70,098.00

9725456 Williams This grant provides three-years partial salary support for an
electron microprobe (EMP) technician at the University of Massachusetts. This is
a Phase I technician support (TS) request under the Instrumentation and
Facilities (IF) Program. Initially, Dr. Michael Jercinovic will help these
investigators establish new analytical procedures on their Cameca SX-50 EMP
using a recently acquired automation and imaging package (EAR- 9503054). Salary
support will cover a transition period as they spin up new analytical procedures
using their newly upgraded EMP and acquire outside contracts that will
eventually provide revenues to replace NSF support. The facility not only
supports the petrologic and materials research programs of faculty within the
Department of Geology and the College of Engineering, but also the research
programs of several other regional faculty and their undergraduate students
(i.e. Smith College, Williams College, Amherst College, Mount Holyoke and
Colgate University). Jercinovic will focus on developing new analytical
procedures including development of the remote control module that shipped with
the new SX-100 software. This feature allows for some remote operations of the
EMP via the internet and can return backscattered electron images in a similar
fashion. Remote operation offers an important advance for educational purposes
at regional colleges that do not have direct access to a functioning analytical
grade EMP. ***