* 9725852
* New England Regional Workshop on Climate Change Impact
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Berrien Moore, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/1999
* USD 236,419.00

As scientific research has improved understandings of the complex ways that
climate and other facets of the global environment are changing, increased
attention has focused on the impacts of those changes on people and ecosystems.
In response to these changes, the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP)
and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) have
coordinated planning for a series of workshops that will focus on the impacts of
global climate change on regional scales. Seven workshops in this series are
planned for the spring and summer of 1997; another dozen regional workshops are
expected to be held in the following year along with a national workshop, which
is scheduled for November 1997. This award provides support to the University of
New Hampshire for the conduct of a workshop that will focus on the regional
impacts of global climate change in New England. The workshop will be conducted
on the UNH campus on 3-5 September 1997. About two hundred people from
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont, and
upstate New York are expected to attend the workshop. The workshop will consist
of a set of alternating formats, including plenary sessions, panel
presentations, break-out discussions, and open-discussion sessions. Topics on
which attention will be focused include the impacts of global climate change on
forests, species diversity, coastal wetlands, aquatic ecosystems, coastal
resources, water resources, agriculture, human health, energy, and
transportation. A written report will be prepared and disseminated by the
workshop organizers soon after the conclusion of the workshop. This workshop
will provide valuable new insights into the impacts of global change on a
diverse set of sectors and activities in the New England states. Because it is
being conducted as part of a coordinated set of regional workshops, its outcomes
will also be useful in a comparative framework as the U.S. assesses likely
impacts of environmental change. In addition to its scientific value, the New
England workshop will engage local residents from many different fields into
discussions that will facilitate public education and outreach about this
important topic.