* 9725320
* Oceanic and Atmospheric Processes in the Formation and      Maintenance of the Cosmonaut Sea Deep-Water Polynya and     their Relationship to Antarctic Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1998,02/29/2000
* Amanda Lynch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/29/2000
* USD 60,593.00

*** 9725320 Lynch This project will apply a high resolution integrated numerical
model that represents atmospheric, oceanic and sea ice processes to the
maintenance of an antarctic coastal polynya. Polynyas are large recurrent areas
of open water or reduced ice concentration within the winter sea ice cover. This
project's study site is in the Cosmonaut Sea off East Antarctica, facing the
Indian Ocean. It is conjectured that this polynya is maintained primarily by the
upwelling of heat from the oceans rather than removal of ice by advection, and
is formed as the result of a confluence of atmospheric preconditioning, deep
ocean convection, modulated by local topographic interactions. Regularly
occurring polynyas have importance in the antarctic climate system by
influencing the surface exchange of heat, moisture, and momentum between the
atmosphere and ocean, as well as affecting the chemical and biological
composition of the ocean and sea ice. This project uses a combination of high
resolution modeling and analysis of remotely sensed imagery, station
observations, and experimental data to determine the mechanisms responsible for
the formation of this polynya. The scale of the polynya requires the use of a
high resolution limited area model, since global climate system models have
neither the resolution nor the sophisticated parameterizations necessary to
accurately model many of the important processes and feedbacks involved in
polynya processes. This study can serve as a conceptual model for other
antarctic deep water polynyas, such as the Weddell Sea polynya. ***