* 9725022
* SGER:  The Mechanism of Complete Bacterial Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Bruce Stocker, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 49,823.00

Schoolnik 9725022 Generalized bacterial virus transduction occurs when a virus
particle incorporates a piece of host (donor) DNA in place of viral DNA. When
that virus infects a recipient bacterium, a recombinant bacterium can be formed,
carrying genes from the donor bacterium in place of the recipient's homologous
genes. The fate of the recipient genes displaced by the incoming transduced DNA
has been a puzzle for many years. The objective of this project is to determine
the nature of the DNA molecule in which a displaced recipient gene persists
within a complete transductant clone and to discover how it was produced. The
working hypothesis is that the persistence of the recipient wild-type gene
results from incorporation of the whole injected fragment (with its ends held
together by protein) by a single cross-over into the recipient chromosome,
producing a chromosome with two copies (each including a crossover) of a segment
corresponding to the injected fragment, separated by a break bridged by protein.
Such a chromosome could not be replicated but it could give rise to a normal
chromosome by slippage recombination of the two copies of the repeated segment;
this would leave the abnormal chromosome intact, able to confer motility on its
viable recombinant host and to be transmitted to a single descendant, and so
production of a reverse trail. The methods to test the hypothesis of an
interrupted-chromosome intermediate in complete transduction will be genetic:
(i) isolation by micromanipulator of motile bacteria (abortive transductants or
of the postulated broken-chromosome class) in a cross of a donor with a Tnl0
insertion in one motility-essential gene to a recipient with a mutation in a
closely linked motility gene; (ii) examination of the growth of reverse trails;
(iii) search for minute colonies in transduction of biosynthesis genes
inactivated by transposon insertion; (iv) analysis of transductant clones for
genetic heterogeneity; (v) testing of the effect on the reverse-trail phen
omenon of rec and related mutations, bacterial or phage, including one which
reduces the ability of phage P22 to effect abortive transduction. The
significance of the research is that it may show that the process of complete
transduction involves an intermediate of a previously unknown sort, with an
interrupted chromosome, a finding of relevance to understanding of recombination
generally.