* 9725854
* Isotopic Reconstruction of Home Range and Migration in      Extinct Mammals
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2002
* USD 212,849.00

9725854 Koch Migration patterns, dispersal, and home range are important
attributes of the biology of living animals that have proven difficult to
reconstruct for extinct species. Current methods, based on analogy to modern
relatives, scaling relationships, or taphonomic interpretations of multiple
individual sites are either controversial or they lack resolution. Migration and
home range have figured prominently in ongoing debates about susceptibility to
extinction, differences in speciation rates, biogeographic patterns, and
patterns of co-evolution between predator and prey. Clearly, a method for
determining the scale of animal movement is essential. Strontium exhibits
geologically-controlled spatial variation in the isotope composition, whereas
oxygen isotopes differ among regions due to climatic differences. Animals
consume vegetation and drinking water and ingest the Sr and O isotope signature
characteristic of their local environment. Consequently analysis of isotopic
variations within and among individuals may indicate the habitat and movement
patterns of individual animals. This study has three sections. First, the
susceptibility of tooth enamel apatite to diagenetic alteration will be examined
through analysis marine fossils deposited in sediments derived from the
continent. This study will reveal if biogenic 87Sr/86Sr, phosphate (18O, and
carbonate (18O values are preserved in bioapatite of progressively older
fossils, and assess the rate and mechanism of alteration. This will be the first
test of the isotopic fidelity of Sr in enamel, and the first attempt to examine
whether known phosphate (18O values can be retrieved from ancient enamel and
bone bioapatite. A second study will take advantage of the extremely low Sr
isotope variability in peninsular Florida to examine home range size and
migration in extinct Pleistocene proboscideans. The study will reveal if late
Pleistocene proboscideans had large or small home ranges, if they undertook
seasonal migrations, and if either of these attributes of range use changed
between full glacial and late glacial ecosystems. Finally, it has been proposed
that Paleo-Indian hunters efficiently stalked and killed entire elephant family
groups. The empirical support for this conclusion, the age structure of multiple
death sites, has been controversial. Large Sr or O isotopic differences among
samples in enamel deposited in the last few years of life would falsify the
family group's hypothesis. Overall, isotopic analysis has the potential to cast
new light on old debates regarding animal movement, and it supplies a new method
for detecting time or spatial averaging in a multi-individual sample.