* 9725648
* Convective Instability of a Thickened Convecting Boundary   Layer (and Thickened Lithosphere)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Peter Molnar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9725648 Molnar The P. I. and collaborators will carry out an investigation of
convective instability of a mechanically thickened boundary layer, with the goal
of understanding processes that might occur beneath mountain belts when crust,
and presumably mantle lithosphere too, is thickened during mountain building.
They will perform numerical experiments with fluids in 2 and 3 dimensions, with
depth- and temperature-dependent viscosity and with non- linear viscosity. They
seek simple scaling laws that will allow a transfer of experimental results with
temperature-dependent and strain-rate-dependent viscosity to the range of
plausible conditions in the earth. Three-dimensional calculations will
concentrate on determining how planforms depend on magnitudes and distributions
of perturbations to the boundary layers of fluids with depth-dependent viscosity
and later temperature-dependent viscosity, both with and without moving top
boundaries. Two- dimensional calculations will focus on the effect of non-linear
viscosity on growth rates of instabilities and on magnitudes of thinning of the
boundary layer. It is anticipated that they will develop scaling laws that
relate magnitudes of perturbations and rheological structure to growth rates and
magnitudes of lithospheric thinning that can relate observed geologic structures
and measured timing of processes beneath mountain belts. ***