* 9725614
* 1997 Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in   Ceramics:  New Perspectives in Interface Science;           Meriden, NH; August 3-8, 1997
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 07/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

9725614 Storm The theme of the 1997 Gordon Research Conference for Solid State
Studies in Ceramics, to be held August 3-8, 1997, at Kimball Union Academy in
Meriden, New Hampshire is New Perspectives in Interface Science: From
Fundamentals to Practice. The promise of microstructural engineering of ceramics
relies in large part on the ability to manipulate interface structure and
chemistry. Powder processing techniques for producing high density ceramics rely
on our ability to control short and long range forces at surfaces and internal
interfaces in a reproducible way. Silicon nitride and some electronic ceramics,
such as lead ruthanate, have unique properties as a result of short range
surface forces that create stable intergranular layers on the order of one
nanometer thick. New measurement tools and new advances in theory have enabled
us to take a fresh look at our understanding of the structure, chemistry, and
properties of interfaces. The aims of this Gordon Research Conference are to
examine new interface phenomena from fundamental scientific and engineering
points of view, to take a critical look at interface science as it applies to
ceramic interfaces, and to learn how to exploit these phenomena in materials and
interface design. The conference format, in keeping with all Gordon Research
Conferences, consists of formal presentations by invited speakers with roughly
half of each session devoted to in depth discussion. In addition, a poster
session will be held which enables conference participants, especially graduate
students, to present their current research ideas in areas relevant to the
conference theme. %%% The theme of the 1997 Gordon Research Conference for Solid
State studies in Ceramics, to be held August 3-8, 1997, at Kimball Union Academy
in Meriden, New Hampshire is New Perspectives in Interface Science: From
Fundamentals to Practice. The promise of microstructural engineering of ceramics
relies in large part on the ability to manipu late interface structure and
chemistry. Powder processing techniques for producing high density ceramics rely
on our ability to control short and long range forces at surfaces and internal
interfaces in a reproducible way. Silicon nitride and some electronic ceramics,
such as lead ruthanate, have unique properties as a result of short range
surface forces that create stable intergranular layers on the order of one
nanometer thick. New measurement tools and new advances in theory have enabled
us to take a fresh look at our understanding of the structure, chemistry, and
properties of interfaces. The aims of this Gordon Research Conference are to
examine new interface phenomena from fundamental scientific and engineering
points of view, to take a critical look at interface science as it applies to
ceramic interfaces, and to learn how to exploit these phenomena in materials and
interface design. The conference format, in keeping with all Gordon Research
Conferences, consists of formal presentations by invited speakers with roughly
half of each session devoted to in depth discussion. In addition, a poster
session will be held which enables conference participants, especially graduate
students, to present their current research ideas in areas relevant to the
conference theme. ***