* 9725465
* Investigation of Sulfur Chemistry in the Antarctica         Troposphere (ISCAT)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Fred Eisele, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 04/30/2003
* USD 1,010,249.00

*** 9725465 Davis The proposed work is a four-year study of the sulfur chemistry
in the antarctic atmosphere, including two summer field seasons at South Pole
station in 1998-99 and 2000-01. It is a major project, involving ten principal
and senior investigators at five institutions with seven additional contributing
investigators. The study has two broad-based goals: to substantially improve our
current understanding of the oxidation chemistry of biogenic sulfur in the polar
environment, and to improve the climatic interpretation of sulfur-based signals
in antarctic ice core records. The decision to base the proposed study at South
Pole came from the recognition that the atmospheric boundary layer in the
interior would present a homogeneous and relatively simple environment from
which to unravel the photochemically driven oxidation chemistry of dimethyl
sulfide (DMS). It is based on and has evolved from a number of other sulfur
studies during the last decade, including an earlier study at a coastal
antarctic site by this group of investigators. Atmospheric sulfur chemistry is
an important component in climate change issues because both naturally and
anthropogenically emitted sulfur compounds form minute particles in the
atmosphere (so-called aerosols) that reflect solar radiation, produce
atmospheric haze and acid rain, and affect ozone depletion. Sulfate particles in
the atmosphere may also act as condensation nuclei for water vapor and enhance
global cloudiness. The primary natural sources of sulfur are volcanic emissions
and DMS production by oceanic phytoplankton. On the millenial time scale the
variability and natural background level of atmospheric aerosols can be
reconstructed from the preserved paleorecords of sulfur oxidation products in
ice cores. It is however necessary to understand how the physical and chemical
environment of the oxidation process affects the relative concentrations of the
oxidation products that become buried in the ice. This study requires s
imultaneous observations of a wide-ranging suite of sulfur species such as DMS
and its oxidation products: sulfur dioxide, dimethyl sulfoxide, dimethyl
sulfone, methane sulfonic acid, and sulfuric acid, as well as photochemically
important compounds such as carbon monoxide, nitrous oxide, water vapor, and
non-methane hydrocarbons. Secondary objectives will be to examine interior
antarctic air samples for other significant DMS oxidation products such as
sulfurous acid and methane sulfinic acid, and to assess the local variation in
hydroxyl and perhydroxyl radicals, a measure of the oxidizing power of the
atmosphere. This study will for the first time provide a quantitative picture of
exactly which atmospheric sulfur compounds are advected into the antarctic
interior, and a detailed picture of the sulfur chemistry that is active in the
antarctic atmosphere. *** ??