* 9725568
* Optimization of Delay Constrained Wireless Communication    Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Ramesh Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 08/31/2001
* USD 880,313.00

Traditionally, in order to address the many complex issues that arise in
communication networks, a ``layered" approach has been taken. The different
layers are typically assigned different ``responsibilities," so that the general
network design problem can be decomposed into simpler, more manageable problems.
However, the independent design of the different layers - which ignores the
detailed nature of their mutual interactions, shared constraints, and cumulative
impact on the network's overall performance - can lead to inefficiencies. Future
wireless communication networks will be required to provide wide coverage and
high capacity to mobile users generating bursty multi-media information. This
heterogeneous traffic will impose upon the network time-varying quality of
service (QoS) constraints. Since many multi-media applications have delay-
sensitive information with varying reliability requirements, such as numerical
data, voice, and video, the project will take end-to-end delay and data
integrity as its dominant system constraints. The goal of this project is, in
the broadest sense, to take a more global view of end-to-end performance, to
better understand the interactions among the layers, to develop techniques that
improve system performance through joint optimization over the various layers
and to do so in the context of a end-to-end delay constraint. One key theme of
the proposal involves the optimization of system performance in the context of
multiple users, particularly in a system which does not employ a cellular-type
architecture. This requires the development of techniques that, on the one hand,
address the deleterious effects of multiple-user interference at the physical
layer, yet also incorporate end-to-end QoS objectives, especially delay, just as
with the development of routing and scheduling algorithms. Another major theme
will be the determination of the optimal distribution and the real-time dynamics
of error control functions implemented across t he layers of the network,
subject to specified end-user requirements. This requires investigation of
inherent tradeoffs between error-rate and decoding delay of FEC employed at the
physical layer, as well as the interactions among error control functions,
including retransmission strategies, invoked at higher levels.