* 9725576
* GOALI:  Geochronology of Ultra-Fine-Grained Clay, an        Industry-University Collaboration
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Tullis Onstott, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2001
* USD 136,611.00

9725576 Onstott This proposal requests funds for further refinement of
methodologies for 40Ar/39Ar dating of fine-grained clay using the laser
microprobe. We have successfully developed a vacuum micro-encapsulation
technique for 40Ar/39Ar dating of microgram amounts of clay. This break through
will enable 40Ar/39Ar dating of pore filling illite in sandstone and
syndeformational illite in fault gouge when sample yields are too small for
K/Ar. Furthermore, we have shown that laser incremental heating can distinguish
between authigenic illite/smectite and detrital muscovite in clay mixtures and
can even detect trace quantities of detrital muscovite in a shale sample. This
result provides a partial solution to a vexatious problem for clay
geochronologists. As with every application of a new technology to an old
problem, however, controversies have arisen regarding the interpretation of the
40Ar/39Ar spectra for illite/smectite. When the 39Ar lost from clay during
irradiation, but captured by the encapsulating tube, is added to the Ar retained
in the clay, then the 40Ar/39Ar age (total gas age) agrees with the K/Ar age.
The 40Ar/39Ar age calculated from just the Ar retained in the clay (ignoring the
Ar lost during irradiation) yields an age, referred to as "retention age" that
is older than the K/Ar age. In some cases, the "retention age" appears
concordant with Rb/Sr and Sm/Nd ages; whereas the total gas age and K/Ar age is
significantly younger. If this phenomenon is generally valid, then the
"retention age" is a more accurate estimate of the timing of clay
crystallization than the K/Ar age. This proposition critically impacts the
underpinning of clay geochronology and hence is extremely debatable.
Fortunately, the hypothesis is easily tested, because a requisite corollary is
that a portion of the K in the clay resides in sites that are non-retentive to
Ar and that the amount of K in these sites equals the amount 39Ar lost from the
clay during irradiation. By performing 40Ar/39Ar analyses on clay samples before
and after they are subjected to cation exchange experiments, the amount of K in
Ar non-retentive sites can be determined. With respect to detrital contamination
of clay, the 40Ar/39Ar step-heating results would be far more beneficial if they
could be used to simultaneously estimate the ages of the authigenic
illite/smectite and the detrital micaceous end members. End member ages in clay
samples are currently ascertained by plotting the K/Ar dates of separates of
varying grain size versus their proportions of diagenetic and detrital
components as determined by XRD, and then extrapolating to 100% of each
component. This approach referred to as Illite Age Analysis (IAA) is quite
successful, but the accuracy's of the resulting ages are limited by the
imprecision's of the XRD estimates. The combination of 40Ar/39Ar, K/Ar and XRD
analyses could potentially reduce these errors significantly. Inferring the end
member ages from the 40Ar/39Ar step-heating requires an independent measure of
proportion of Ar contributed by each end member for each heating step. Because
Ar release in clays occurs by dehydroxylation, we propose determining the H2O/K
of the end members by TGA and AEM/TEM, the proportion of Ar from each end member
can be calculated for each heating step, and their ages extrapolated in a manner
directly analogous to IAA, correcting for 39Ar recoil by modeling. In summary,
the scope of this two year proposal is to perform experiments that will fully
elucidate; 1) the proportion of K in Ar non-retentive sites, thereby determining
which age (retention vs. K/Ar) represents the clay crystallization age; 2) the
Ar mixing ratio in 40Ar/39Ar incremental analyses for two component clay
mixtures in order to deduce end member ages. This will be accomplished by
performing 40Ar/39Ar, quadrupole gas, high resolution TEM, and thermal stage XRD
analyses on well-characterized samples of varying grain size. These samples are
authigenic illite/smectite, detrital musco vite, and mixtures thereof, each of
known age, crystallinity and composition. The research will be undertaken with
the collaboration of Drs. Pevear and Vrolijk of Exxon Production Research
Company following the guidelines of GOALI. Drs. Pevear and Vrolijk are
acknowledged experts in the field of clay mineralogy and clay geochronology. The
proposed duration of the research program is two years.