* 9725154
* Exploratory Research and Biological Inventory of St. MatthewIsland, Bering Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* David Murray, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 09/30/1998
* USD 4,950.00

This study proposes to study the biological diversity of St. Matthew Islands, a
remote archipelago located in the center of the Bering Sea. This archipelago is
an isolated remnant of a formerly more extensive Beringian ecosystem. They offer
the chance to sample directly the remnants of a region that has had important
effects on the fauna of two continents. Beringia today represents an area of
considerable interest to arctic science, and this archipelago is host to several
endemic species and populations. The PIs plan to collect tissue and specimens of
plants, mammals, birds, and invertebrates for further systematic and ecological
study. These surveys will be the first comprehensive study of the biota, and the
PIs will compare their findings with historical collections and will provide
baseline data for studies of the effects of global change in the Arctic. Travel
to St. Matthew is extremely difficult and expensive because of the isolation and
logistical requirements. The PIs plan to take advantage of unique opportunity
afforded by USFWS, which is providing space for the PIs aboard their research
vessel R/V Tiglax on a cruise to nearby Hall Island. Because the logistical
demands are extreme and the window for opportunity is time-sensitive, the PIs
have chosen to submit a proposal of limited scope under the guidelines of the
Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) program.