* 9725989
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Experimental Study of Basin         Stratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Christopher Paola, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2000
* USD 168,070.00

9725989 Paola We propose a three-year program of experimental studies o the
formation of physical stratigraphy, using a large new experimental basin with a
subsiding floor at the St. Anthony Falls Laboratory (SAFL). This facility allows
study of scaled basin processes with complete control of base level, sediment
supply and, especially, subsidence pattern and rate. The basin is 13m by 6.5m
and allows up to 1.3m of accommodation space for deposition. The subsiding floor
comprises 432 independently controllable subsidence cells arranged in a
honeycomb pattern. This design allows the creation of a nearly unlimited range
of spatial and temporal subsidence patterns. Sediment and water can be fed from
anywhere along the basin margin and base level (i.e. water level) is
independently controllable. Our first experiments will be aimed at testing some
of the first-order predictions of models that have been proposed for formation
of physical stratigraphy at basin scales, such as: (1) the relationship of
shoreline migration and associated stratigraphy to the interplay between
subsidence rate and eustatic sea level; (2) the control of subsidence rate and
geometry, and sediment supply, on alluvial coarse-facies distribution (i.e. the
origin of syntectonic gravel's); and (3) the influence of subsidence rate and
sediment supply on the development of alluvial architecture. Initial results
suggest that the experiments can also provide insight on processes such as
growth faulting that have not been widely incorporated into existing models.
These experiments will use relatively simple subsidence and sediment-feed
geometries and will focus on demonstrating "unit" stratigraphic response to
changes in one or at most two variables simultaneously. The second set of
experiments will focus on 3-D effects in both subsidence and sediment supply,
including: 1) 3-D effects of base-level change; 2) propagating active folding in
the proximal basin associated with blind thrusts and development of progressive
un conformities; 3) sedimentation in an asymmetric half graben combining both
transverse and axial drainage. The principal products of the experiments will
include: time records of the imposed variables (water and sediment supply, base
level, and basement topography); measurements of bed-surface topography through
time; video records of flow pattern, shoreline position and other surface
features; 3-D block diagrams of the resulting deposits, presented both as
directly digitized (photographic) and synthetic seismic images; and synthetic
geophysical logs of selected profiles. The synthetic seismics are a crucial link
with field observations, since the only way that researchers can obtain views of
the rock record comparable to those generated by the experimental basin is
through the filter of seismic reflection profiling. The synthetic seismics and
well logs, when contrasted against the actual experimental stratigraphy, will
also advance our understanding of what is and is not retained from the rock
record when it is imaged via these widely used techniques. The experimental
results would represent the first test under fully controlled conditions of a
wide variety of theoretical predictions of stratigraphic response that have been
developed since Pitman's (1978) model of shoreline response to changing sea
level. They would also provide a template that could be compared with field
observations and interpretations based on seismic and outcrop data. Although
laboratory scale models can never capture all of the complex processes that
occur in real basins, they serve as a bridge between untested theoretical models
and difficult-to-constrain natural examples.