* 9725679
* Study of the Structure and Tectonics of the South Shetland  Trench and Bransfield Backarc Using Ocean Bottom            Seismographs
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Douglas Wiens, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2002
* USD 174,399.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
Foundation, supports research to investigate the seismicity and tectonics of the
South Shetland Arc and the Bransfield Strait. This region presents an intriguing
and unique tectonic setting, with slowing of subduction, cessation of island arc
volcanism, as well as the apparent onset of backarc rifting occurring within the
last four million years. This project will carry out a 5-month deployment of 14
ocean bottom seismographs (OBSs) to complement and extend a deployment of 6
broadband land seismic stations that were successfully installed during early
1997. The OBSs include 2 instruments with broadband sensors, and all have
flowmeters for measuring and sampling hydrothermal fluids. The OBSs will be used
to examine many of the characteristics of the Shetland- Bransfield tectonic
system, including: --- The existence and depth of penetration of a Shetland
Slab: The existence of a downgoing Shetland slab will be determined from
earthquake locations and from seismic tomography. The maximum depth of
earthquake activity and the depth of the slab velocity anomaly will constrain
the current configuration of the slab, and may help clarify the relationship
between the subducting slab and the cessation of arc volcanism. -- Shallow
Shetland trench seismicity?: No teleseismic shallow thrust faulting seismicity
has been observed along the South Shetland Trench from available seismic
information. Using the OBS data, the level of small earthquake activity along
the shallow thrust zone will be determined and compared to other regions
undergoing slow subduction of young oceanic lithosphere, such as Cascadia, which
also generally shows very low levels of thrust zone seismicity. -- Mode of
deformation along the Bransfield Rift: The Bransfield backarc has an active rift
in the center, but there is considerable evidence for off-rift faulting. There
is a long-standing controversy about whet her back-arc extension occurs along
discrete rift zones, or is more diffuse geographically. This project will
accurately locate small earthquakes to better determine whether Bransfield
extension is discrete or diffuse. -- Identification of volcanism and
hydrothermal activity: Seismic records will be used to identify the locations of
active seafloor volcanism along the Bransfield rift. Flowmeters attached to the
OBSs will record and sample the fluid flux out of the sediments. -- Upper mantle
structure of the Bransfield - evidence for partial melting?: Other backarc
basins show very slow upper mantle seismic velocities and high seismic
attenuation, characteristics due to the presence of partially molten material.
This project will use seismic tomography to resolve the upper mantle structure
of the Bransfield backarc, allowing comparison with other backarc regions and
placing constraints on the existence of partially molten material and the
importance of partial melting as a mantle process in this region. Collaborative
awards: OPP 9725679 and OPP 9726180