* 9725551
* Bringing the Universe Down to Earth: De-Mystifying the      Forces that Shape the Solar System
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Michael Reynolds, Chabot Space and Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Ucko
* 05/31/2003
* USD 1,251,082.00

9725551 Reynolds The Chabot Observatory and Science Center (COSC) in Oakland
California will develop and present Bringing the Universe Down to Earth:
Demystifying the Process that shapes the Solar System. This exhibition will
utilize thirteen interactive works by Ned Kahn, a nationally recognized artist.
The exhibition will consist of twenty-six exhibits: two per theme, one for
Chabot, and one for the traveling component. The exhibition will be incorporated
into the structure and network of COSC. It will invite visitors to draw on their
general knowledge of this world by focusing on familiar earthly phenomena, such
as volcanoes, whirlwinds, wind storms, avalanches, and to consider them in a
broader context. Also, the project will take advantage of Chabot's well
developed, online connection with schools and community groups in the area to
create new opportunities for individualized inquiry. A direct product of this
work will be a series of curricular outlines designed to help teachers make full
use of the exhibition. This effort can be used to foster a strong collaboration
between the informal and formal science education programs. An important feature
of this exhibition is that it will travel to nine sites around the country under
the auspices of the Association of Science and Technology Centers (ASTC). It is
projected that over one million people at the nine sites will see this traveling
exhibition. Educational and marketing materials, as well as workshops materials
prepared for the COSC exhibition will accompany the traveling exhibit.