* 9725033
* ESH - COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Continental Ostracode         Assemblages &amp; Shell Geochemistry:  Calibrating a Tool for   Paleoclimatic and Paleohydrologic Reconstruction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Emi Ito, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2001
* USD 281,551.00

9725033 Ito The study of high-resolution proxy climate records covering
interannual through millennial time scales is growing importance in the field of
global climate change. Many of these proxy climate records include isotopic and
trace-element geochemical data derived from fossil ostracode shells in
continental deposits, such as lakes, springs, and wetlands. Ostracodes
(microscopic crustaceans) play a role similar to that of foraminifera in the
marine world by providing vital information about the interactive nature of
climate and the hydrologic cycle through their ecology, shell geochemistry, and
biogeographical distribution. In fact, ostracodes are the primary calcareous
microfossils in continental records. Despite the increasing amount of research
presently underway involving oxygen isotopes and ostracode shell geochemistry in
continental records, there is significant gap in the knowledge base. There are
no existing studies available that provide, through both field and laboratory
calibration, the modern relationship between isotope fractionation and ostracode
isotopic composition will remain at best a qualitative indicator of past
conditions. The high resolution continental climate records that rely on
ostracode isotopic information have at present no quantified basis for
interpretation. We propose to conduct both field and laboratory calibration
studies of ostracode species and shell chemistry. This research focuses on
modern distributions of ostracodes and their isotopic and trace-element
signatures, with the purpose of developing them as proxy indicators for past
Earth system processes. The field-based study will calibrate ostracode species
distributions and shell chemistry ((18O, (13C, Mg/Ca, Sr/Ca), against
hydrochemistry (cation, anion, TIC, (18O, (D, (13C of DIC) and climate data.
This will include a study of intra-and inter-annual variation. The laboratory-
based study will verify the oxygen-isotope and trace element fractionation
behavior of several common speci es of ostracodes as a function of
hydrochemistry and temperature. The results of this study will provide, for the
first time, experimental verification through both field and laboratory
calibration, of ostracode isotopic and trace-element composition as a
quantifiable indicator for paleoclimate analysis . Basic issues revolving around
seasonality, hydrochemical variability, vital effects, and different hydrologic
regimes will have been examined and assessed. A fundamental gap in the
paleoclimate knowledge base will thus be filled.