* 9725610
* CyberChase
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Carey Bolster, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1999
* USD 450,000.00

9725610 Burns WNET is producing and evaluating the pilot phase of a multi-media
mathematics education project for children aged nine to eleven. The centerpiece
of the project will be an animated television series for national broadcast via
PBS. In each of the weekly programs, a team of young characters would be drawn
into a computer and become protagonists on intriguing missions in locations as
varied as a contemporary theme park or the deserts of ancient Egypt. Facing an
evil adversary, the young heroes use mathematics to overcome challenges in the
course of their travels and adventures. At the end of each episode viewers will
be invited to use mathematics to solve a cliffhanger. The series will be
supported by a targeted national outreach campaign with cooperating public
television stations and three national partners. Ancillary material will consist
of an interactive Internet site and print materials including a magazine with
activities, puzzles, problems, and comics. The PI for the project will be Ruth
Ann Burns, Vice President and Director of Educational Resources Center at WNET.
The two key Math Content Directors will be Mari Muri, currently an advisor to
the Connecticut State Department of Education, and Carey Bolster, Director of
the PBS Mathline K-12 projects. Joel Schneider of Children's Television Workshop
will be the Lead Content Advisor. The Series Producer will be Kristin Martin who
has most recently served as Lead Producer for The Magic School Bus. Edward
Kaskt, a computer animator with extensive experience with Children's Television
Workshop, Nickelodeon, ABC, NBC, CBS, and HBO will be the series' Creative
Director.