* 9725607
* The 87Sr/86Sr Record of Himalayan Paleorivers During the    Neogene: Patterns and Causes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2000
* USD 335,764.00

9725607 Quade The Himalayas stand at the center of the debate on how mountain
building can alter climate. One of the clearest proxies of the global effects of
Himalayan uplift is the marine 87Sr/86Sr record. Yet the specific contribution
that past and present Himalayan rivers make to the marine 87Sr/86Sr record, and
how this contribution translates quantitatively into silicate weathering rates
and therefore consumption of atmospheric CO2 is unclear. Our recent research
demonstrates that the 87Sr/86Sr ratios of Himalayan paleorivers can be
reconstructed from carbonates preserved in the Siwalik Group foreland basin
deposits in the frontal part of the Himalayan fold-thrust belt. These data show
87Sr/86Sr ratios have increased markedly in the late Neogene, probably in
response to unroofing of high 87Sr/86Sr (0.720-0.729) marble and dolostone in
the Lesser Himalayan and frontal Himalayan nappes. We propose to (1) expand our
Himalayan river 87Sr/86Sr record into easternmost Nepal, and back to the
beginning of the Miocene, thereby completing the isotopic history for the paleo-
Ganges river system, (2) quantify the contribution of carbonate versus silicate
weathering in a modern Nepali river, and (3) combine the isotopic data with
sedimentological, structural, and provenance data from the foreland basin
deposits in order to document the entire record of erosional unroofing of the
Nepal Himalayas since the beginning of the Miocene. The results of the proposed
research will have major implications for our understanding of the relationships
between collisional orogenesis, climate, and ocean water chemistry.