* 9725072
* Geochemical Evolution and Mineralization of Felsic          Liquids:  The Function and Behavior of Volatiles, Fluxing   Components, and Ore Metals During Late-Stage...
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2002
* James Webster, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2002
* USD 132,275.00

9725072 Webster The proposed study will determine compositions of granitic,
pegmatitic, and aplitic liquids that generated tin and tungsten mineralization
in the historic Erzgebirge mountains of southern Germany and will investigate
the evolution of granitic to pegmatitic and aplitic liquids by analyzing
silicate melt inclusions in rocks from several mineralized systems in this
mining district. Particular attention will be directed at the behavior of the
volatiles water, fluorine, chlorine, phosphorus, and boron, because these
constituents exert strong controls on magmatic processes and concomitant
processes of hydrothermal alteration and ore formation. Another goals of the
study will be to determine the abundances of the ore metals tin and tungsten in
the silicate melt inclusions. The melt inclusions will be analyed by electron
and ion microprobes and infrared spectroscopy. The behavior of tin in
mineralizing, magmatic systems will be investigated through experimental study
of the dissolution of cassiterite (the chief ore mineral of tin) in granitic
liquids that are variably enriched in fluorine, water, and phosphorus. The
results of these investigations are important for understanding how granitic
liquids evolve, form pegmatite and aplite facies, and generate tin and tungsten
ore deposits.