* 9725811
* Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Studies of Igneous Rocks and    Associated Hydrothermal Alteration
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Hugh Taylor, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2001
* USD 277,678.00

9725811 Taylor This proposal is part of a continuing effort to understand water-
rock interactions in the Earth's crust and the mechanisms of 18O/16O exchange
between minerals and fluids. Recently, the PI and coworkers have discovered a
new type of 18O/16O signature was discovered in the welded ash-flow tuffs,
namely the coexistence of 18O-depleted volcanic glass with feldspar and quartz
phenocrysts that have preserved their primary magmatic 18O/16O values. This
implied that large amounts of low-18O meteoric groundwater had tocirculate
through the tuff at high temperatures (500(-650(C), on a short enough time scale
((25 years) that the feldspar (18O values were undisturbed, suggesting an analog
to the spectacular fumarolic activity that occurred in 1912-1924 at the Valley
of Ten Thousand Smokes, Mt. Katmai National Park, Alaska. The present proposal
aims to test these concepts on an outflow-tuff sheet; such a study would be more
directly analogous to the activity seen on the surface at Katmai. The 760,000
year old, 200-m thick Bishop Tuff in California appears to be an ideal field
area, because of good zones of shallow-dipping columnar joints. The amounts of
magmatic H2O in these systems and the mechanisms of hydrologic recharge for
these fossil fumaroles will be investigated by making detailed 18O/16O studies,
as well as making a regional 18O/16O map and comparing it to what is known about
the pre-eruptive surface topography of the BishopTuff. This will allow a test as
to whether these fossil fumaroles were fed by groundwater flow from the newly-
formed Long Valley Lake down through the upper zone of permeable, partially
welded ash-flow tuff. The role of columnar jointing in fumarolic meteoric-
hydrothermal circulation will also be studied.