* 9725311
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Towards a Milankovitch-Scale Stable Isotope Stratigraphy For the Late Oligocene to Early Miocene
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Benjamin Flower, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 91,370.00

9725311 Flower We propose to develop the first astronomically tuned stable
isotope time series for the late Oligocene to early Miocene (21-27.5 Ma) with
cores collected during Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Leg 154 to Ceara Rise,
western Equatorial Atlantic. This time series will be a composite record,
constructed with the carbon and oxygen isotope records of benthic foraminifers
from three Holes on Ceara Rise (Sites 926, 928, and 929). Through splicing, the
composite will be stratigraphically continuous over a 6.5 m.y long interval. As
such, it will be one of the single longest high-resolution isotope time series
ever assembled. Preliminary work has demonstrated the feasibility of the
proposed approach. In fact, efforts are now underway to tune the magnetic
susceptibility and existing stable isotope records to orbital spectra for this
interval (in collaboration with N.J. Shackleton). With the astronomically tuned
isotope record we will be able to (1) estimate the relative ages of the
Oligocene/Miocene boundary, (18O maxima Oi2a, Mi1, Mi1a (as well as all minor
events), and (2) characterize in unprecedented detail the evolution of late
Oligocene/early Miocene climate variability (ice-volume/temperature). Several
important benefits will be derived from the results of this investigation. For
one, the proposed astronomically tuned isotope time series will serve as a
global standard reference section by which all other late Oligocene-early
Miocene marine sequences are compared. It will be possible, using stable isotope
stratigraphies, to correlate and calibrate either long or short segments of
sedimentary sections to this record, thereby significantly improving the
accuracy of age models. More importantly, by providing the framework for
reconstructing changes in climate, deep ocean circulation and chemistry, the
tuned Ceara Rise isotope records should greatly enhance paleoceanographic and
paleoclimatic research on this interval. In sum, the proposed Milankovitch-scale
records will rep resent a significant advance in Cenozoic stratigraphy and Earth
history.