* 9725976
* Mechanistic Controls of Carbon Flux by Mesozooplankton: A   Joint Global Ocean Flux Study Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2001
* Michael Roman, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2001
* USD 261,421.00

*** 9725976 Roman As part of the JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Initiative, Drs.
Roman and Dam will synthesize JGOFS mesozooplankton research. A major objective
of the JGOFS Synthesis efforts will be to determine how food web structure
influences carbon cycling within the euphoric and the sinking carbon flux.
Mesozooplankton grazing (consumption of phytoplankton and protozoa), sloppy
feeding (DOM release), fecal pellet production and downward carbon transport due
to diel vertical migrators (part of carbon export) are essential elements of
this analysis. Although this proposal focuses on mesozooplankton, the our
efforts will be collaborative with other JGOFS synthesis efforts. They will
participate with other groups who are synthesizing and modeling biological
control of biogeochemical fluxes. Using the JGOFS datasets from the Sargasso Sea
(ZOOSWAT), North Atlantic (NABE), Equatorial Pacific (EqPac), Arabian Sea (ASPS)
and Southern Ocean (AESOPS, when available), as well as other appropriate data
(i.e. from VERTEX and SUPER) they will examine the predictive relationships
between mesozooplankton biomass, grazing and fecal pellet production with
phytoplankton biomass (by size), protozoa biomass, total primary production (by
size), new production and export flux. The results will provide essential
parameters for realistic models of carbon cycling in the euphoric zone. ***