* 9725885
* Petrogenesis of Diamonds and Their Host Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Lawrence Taylor, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2000
* USD 83,000.00

9725885&lt;br/&gt;Taylor&lt;br/&gt;This research involves an integrative
approach to the study of the age, formation and evolution of diamonds and their
host xenoliths form Yakutia, Siberia. Three carefully chosen diamond-bearing
eclogite xenoliths and two large diamonds (cut into &lt;10 carat plates) will be
used as recorders of the evolution of the Earth's mantle. Mineral inclusions
within diamonds are considered reliable indicators of mantle conditions during
diamond formation because these inclusions were isolated from post-diamond
formation mantle processes. Since mineral inclusions within a single diamond can
be variable it is important to document how the inclusions fit within the growth
history of the diamond. This research will provide the first comprehensive
geochemical and petrologic study of inclusions within diamonds that links the
chemical characteristics to the diamond growth history. This will involve
cathodoluminescence and C and N isotopic analyses of the diamonds prior to the
study of the xenoliths and inclusions. The xenoliths will be imaged by X-ray
computed tomography, prior to disaggregation, to examine the diamond-host
textural relationships. Mineral inclusions and host xenolith minerals will be
studied by a variety of techniques: major and trace element and O isotopic
analyses of silicates; and Re-Os and S isotopic analyses of sulfides. This
integrated study of diamonds, inclusion minerals and host xenoliths will make a
significant contribution to the knowledge of mantle conditions necessary for
diamond formation, and the evolution of the mantle beneath the Siberian
Platform.&lt;br/&gt;