* 9725643
* Mississippi River Web Museum Consortium
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Patrick Hamilton, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 03/31/2003
* USD 417,408.00

9725643 Hamilton The Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) in collaboration with the
Illinois State Museum (ISM), the St. Louis Science Center (SLSC), and the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications(NCSA) at the University of
Illinois in Champaign, Illinois, will form a museum consortium to develop two
virtual reality interactive displays (River Pilot Simulator and Digital River
Basin) and other web-based activities that focus on the Mississippi River. This
group will be known as the Mississippi River Web Museum Consortium. Each museum
will end up with both software modules that will lead visitors to the story of
the River. The river's local presence will serve as an entry point for the
visitors at each museum. The NCSA will contribute their access to and knowledge
of powerful computer simulation, scientific visualization, and collaborations
technologies that are usually restricted to research settings and rarely
available to a museum audience or the general public. The Consortium will also
develop a shared site on the WWW that will invite users to engage in guided
inquiry that will deepen their understanding of the large, complex, and
integrated river system. The science content underlying the project will include
river hydrology and geomorphology, life sciences, environmental studies
employing geographic information systems, and the physics of motion. The
activities will address a number of the National Science Education Standards.
Complementary programming linking these activities with formal education include
a RiverWeb(tm) Posting Board and a RiverWeb(tm) Classroom Resource Guide.