* 9725937
* U.S.-U.K.-Japan Collaboration:  The Relationship Between    Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Ann Kinzig, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2002
* USD 107,139.00

9725937 Levin Support for this project will enable American researchers to
collaborate with and benefit from researchers and facilities at the Center for
Ecological Research at Kyoto University in Japan and the Center for Population
Biology at the Imperial College in the United Kingdom. The impact of
environmental variability and competitive exclusion on the number of species
required to maintain a certain level of function in communities will be
determined mathematically. Those relationships will then be tested in a series
of experiments in which species numbers and environments are manipulated. The
U.S. team will be primarily responsible for the derivation of the theoretical
diversity-function relationships, and will, in cooperation with the U.K. team,
conduct field experiments in which species number, precipitation, and herbivory
are manipulated. The Japanese team will perform growth-chamber experiments on
communities subjected to different levels of predation or parasitism. Many
current analyses of ecological diversity-function relationships ignore
variations in the performance of individual species with varying environmental
conditions, and ignore the impacts of competitive exclusion on multi- year
measures of community function. This project will combine the expertise and
facilities of American, Japanese and British research groups to investigate the
level of biodiversity preservation required to maintain essential ecosystem
services and functions. ***