* 9725166
* Origin of Basaltic Magmatism in the Tectonically            Enigmatic High Lava Plains of Southeastern Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2000
* USD 131,126.00

9725166 Grunder Volcanic rocks of the High Lava Plains (HLP) of central and
southeastern Oregon are unique because: (1) they lie at the northwestern margin
of the Basin and Range Province; (2) they mirror Late Tertiary and Quaternary
volcanism of the Yellowstone-Snake River Plain Province in that silicic
volcanism is younger to the west; and (3) they are strongly bimodal, being
composed of basalts with oceanic affinities and high-silica rhyolites. Because
of these characteristics, the HLP have been idenfied as an outstanding problem
in understanding tectonism and volcanism in the western U.S. The tectonic models
invoked for the formation of the HLP magmas have been associated with : a) the
evolution of the Yellowstone mantle plume; b) an extensional setting related to
Late Tertiary development of the Basin and Range Province; and c) a back-arc
setting related to the Cascadia subduction zone. In order to discriminate among
these models we will investigate a potential age-progressive trend in basaltic
volcanism, determine its genetic link to the associated silicic volcanism,
evaluate the mantle sources involved in the basaltic magmatism of the HLP, and
determine if geographic and temporal geochemical variations are analogous to the
Yellowstone hotspot track. These questions will be answered with an integrated
field, geochronological and geochemical study of basalts from representative
areas in the High Lava Plains. Four areas have been selected for mapping and
dating by high precision 40Ar-39Ar methods. The most important samples will also
be analyzed for major- and trace-element composition and Sr, Nd, Pb, O and He
isotopic ratios.