* 9725044
* Investigation of Stratigraphic Manifestations of Younger    Dryas Climate at Paleoindian Sites in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Owen Davis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2002
* USD 136,912.00

Approximately 11,000 years ago a wide range of North American large fauna went
extinct over a short time period and scientists wish to understand the cause.
Two main theories have been proposed: one invokes climate change and
accompanying vegetation shifts. The other notes the presence of Paleoindian
hunters and gatherers and sees hunting as the primary cause. In his prior work
Dr. Vance Haynes has recognized the presence of a distinct dark organic strata
which is present in many sites in the US West, Southwest and High Plains. It is
extremely rare to find such a well defined horizon over this large an area and
its presence implies a major climatic event. Artifacts associated with the
Clovis culture are found under the horizon but never within or above it. Stone
tools from the succeeding Folsom group occur only in or above the horizon. This
fact leads Dr. Haynes to speculate that the organic layer is in fact synchronous
across sites and was deposited in a very short time period. He associates the
layer with the Younger Dryas cooling event, a period of major climatic change.
He also notes that this coincides with a period of maximum faunal extinction.
Unfortunately the organic soil horizon is not well dated and with NSF support
Dr. Haynes will visit a series of sites which contain the horizon and are also
important because of the archaeological and paleontological materials they
contain. He will record the stratigraphic sequence and collect suites of
materials for radiocarbon dating. Specific organic compounds will be isolated
for stable isotope analyses to determine relative amounts of C3 vs. C4
vegetation. In this way floral change can be both noted and dated. This research
is important because it will provide precise dates for past climate and
environmental change in North America. This will refine the framework for
understanding changes in both human behavior and faunal extinction.