* 9725114
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Phillip Huebner, Oglala Lakota College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

The Scientific Knowledge for Indian Learning and Leadership (SKILL) Program at
Oglala Lakota College was established in 1989. This precollege program addresses
academic support and career guidance for a large number of students at the
elementary, middle and high school levels. The program indicates an excellent
record of influencing transition into post-secondary institutions. The high
school graduation rate among participants is 100 percent. Complementing this
record is an ACT performance average which exceeds the national average. SKILL's
participants have also received several local and national awards. There is
evidence that the SKILL's model for academic reinforcement and support has
attracted the attention of other academic institutions. SKILL has reached a
relatively large number of American Indian students (3,000), fostering their
interest in math and science. The program shows good success in student
retention and transition to college from high school. Twenty of the 24 original
first year students graduated from the SKILL program in 1996 and all applied for
admission to a university and identified a major in science or engineering. The
strengths of the nominee include: . Continuity of focus on Native Americans is
clear and very distinctive. . Early and sustained intervention. . Demonstrated
staff dedication and leadership. . Holistic approach to supplemental learning
that covers elementary through high school students. . Large number of
experiments flown on space shuttle missions. . Promotion of dual course
enrollment. . Summer residential activity for eligible high school students. In
summary, this is a holistic approach to supplemental learning. The program
intervenes at key grade levels at which precollege students encounter difficulty
in science and mathematics. This latter activity has the potential of
influencing systemic change.