* 9725149
* Modeling and Control of Nonlinear Micro-distributed Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Paul Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9725149 Wang Advanced applications of micromachined devices and systems call for
precise control of their dynamic behavior with respect to both space and time.
The design and control of such systems require consideration of distributed-
parameter models. Since the physical size of such systems is of the order of
10-3 meter to 10-6 meter, it is necessary to take into account the minute
nonlinear forces and moments in modeling. The resulting mathematical models are
in the form of nonlinear partial differential and/or integral equations. The
objective of this proposed study is to develop applicable theories for the
modeling and control of such systems referred hereafter as nonlinear micro-
distributed systems. The initial effort will be focused on the modeling of
specific micro-distributed systems derived from applications, in particular,
systems with free boundaries; bifurcation phenomena and parameter estimation in
micromachined elastic structures including deformable mirrors with nonlinear
electrostatic or magnetostatic actuators, and elastic structures coupled with
liquid films. The subsequent efforts will be focused on the design,
stabilization and control of micro-distributed systems. They will include the
optimal design of actuator patterns; the determination of attainable shapes in
micromachined deformable mirrors using electrostatic actuation; the derivation
of stabilizing feedback controls for vibration damping and precise alignment in
micromachined elastic structures using electromagnetic, piezoelectric, or
thermal actuation; and for laminar flow via boundary surface perturbations.
Emphasis will be placed on the development of applicable mathematical theory,
efficient computational algorithms, and practical implementation for micro-
distributed systems. The proposed study represents a new research direction for
distributed-parameter control system theory. Preliminary studies in mathematical
modeling already led to new nonlinear partial differential equations which are
not only useful for control development, but they are also interesting from the
mathematical standpoint. The results have potential applications in micro-
sensors, micro-imaging systems, and adaptive optical systems. ***