* 9725295
* Surface and Ground Water Mixing and Reactions in aSemi-     Confined Karst Aquifer:  An Example from the Florida Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2000
* USD 47,782.00

9725295 Martin The extent of chemical exchange and mixing between surface water,
ground water, and aquifer rocks has been poorly constrained in karst aquifers,
although they provide (25% of the world's potable water. Although these aquifers
are important sources of water, they appear to be more susceptible to
contamination than other types of aquifers because of large amounts of mixing
and rapid subsurface flow. Mixing, as well as fluid-solid reactions in the
subsurface, should be reflected in natural chemical variations of water
discharged from karst aquifers. This hypothesis will be tested along a 10 km
stretch of the Santa Fe river where it flows through the subsurface at the
boundary of confined and unconfined portions of the Floridan aquifer in north-
central Florida. Samples will be collected from the sink and rise at high
frequency (one sample every two hours) for two 4 day periods: one at low
discharge and one at high discharge. Variations in compositions of non-reactive
solutes (Cl and (18O) with river stage should provide information on residence
time of the water in the subsurface. Additional sets of samples will be
collected at high and low discharge from the sink , rise, and two water supply
wells, one at the sink and the other at the rise. Sampling of water at the rise
will be delayed by the length of time necessary for water to flow from the sink
to the rise. The sink, rise, and well samples will be measured for a suite of
solutes (Ca, Mg, Na, K, DIC, NO3, SO4, Cl, F, Si, Mn, Fe concentrations, (D and
(18O values pH, alkalinity, and DO) that will serve as constraints for NETPATH
models of mixing and natural fluid-solid reactions. Measurement of residence
time, calculation of the extent of mixing, and models of fluid-solid reactions
should provide information about the susceptibility of karst aquifers to
contamination including the length of time available for natural remediation of
polluted water, the quantity of polluted water that might recharge the aquifer,
and t he background natural chemical variability caused by reactions. These
results should be important for management of water supplies in the Floridan
aquifer, the primary water source for all of Florida.