* 9725820
* Use of a Long-Term Data Base and Molecular Genetic          Techniques to Examine the Behavioral Ecology and Dynamics ofWeddell Seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) Population
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Donald Siniff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/2003
* USD 510,005.00

Donald B. Siniff OPP-9725820 Abstract The Weddell seal is found in regions of
pack ice or fast ice close to the Antarctic continent. This species has been the
focus for long-term population studies in McMurdo Sound since the mid-1960's.
This data set, one of the few of its kind in the world, has provided valuable
knowledge towards an understanding of the survival and reproductive patterns of
a long-lived vertebrate. Within the framework of this study, an examination of
the breeding system and reproductive fitness will be conducted, using recently
developed techniques in molecular biology. An examination of the behavioral
ecology and mating system through paternity analysis of breeding males will
provide precise estimates of reproductive success and effective population size
in this aquatic breeding species. A second aspect of the study will focus on
population demographics, which is a continuation of the annual analyses,
parameter estimation and hypothesis testing associating with the existing
30-year data base. A new addition to this aspect is a comprehensive analysis of
the population dynamics focusing on the role that immigration and emigration
play in the population dynamics. As the southern-most breeding mammal in the
world, the Weddell seal exemplifies an extreme in environmental adaptability.
Knowledge of the strategies employed in this environment will contribute to the
basic understanding of pinniped evolution and population dynamics and
competition in marine mammals.