* 9725676
* Stars & Our Galaxy
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Evalyn Gates, Adler Planetarium
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/2002
* USD 1,466,977.00

9725676 Gates The Adler Planetarium & Astronomy Museum proposes to develop a
10,395 square foot permanent exhibition. Five major exhibit areas - The Milky
Way; Billions and Billions; The Life Cycle of Stars; Properties of Stars; and
The Dynamic Galaxy -will orient visitors to the Milky Way, and explore in detail
the fascinating objects found within. Each gallery will represent different
content areas, but there are several underlying connecting themes. 1. Science
does not distract from the appreciation, beauty, and mystery of the Universe,
but rather deepens it; 2. The universe is a vast, dynamic, evolving, and
fascinating place, where we are always learning about new things; 3. We can
organize our picture of the Universe in ways that help us understand its
structure, and our place in it; 4. We can begin to understand the Universe
through observation and interpretation; 5. Based on the fundamental laws of
nature, there are some concepts that will help us to explain the phenomenons of
the universe. The Adler's new exhibits and programs will reflect the principles
and pedagogy articulated in the new National Science Education Standards. It
will also be reflected in the national and local reform efforts such as the
Urban Systemic Initiative. The Adler staff will collaborate with the Chicago
Systemic Initiative of the Chicago Public Schools. The CSI teachers, parents,
and students will be involved the program development and evaluation process
through focus groups, working teams, and pilot testing activities on-site at the
museum The project Principal Investigator (PI) Dr. Evalyn L. Gates received her
Doctorate in Physics from Case Western Reserve University in 1990. Currently,
she serves as Chair of the Astronomy Department at the Adler Planetarium and
Astronomy Museum. Dr. Gates is a Research Scientist on the faculty in the
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics at The University of Chicago in
Chicago, Illinois. In addition to the project team, a broad-based advisory comm
ittee will serve as counsel to the project. Serving on the project advisory
committee are: Minda Borun; Director of Research and Evaluation, The Franklin
Institute Science Museum; Richard G. Kron, Ph.D., Director, Yerkes Observatory
and on the faculty at The University of Chicago; Catherine A. Pilachowski,
Ph.D., Kitt Peak National Observatory; Phillip M. Sadler, Ed.D. Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics; James W. Thuran, Ph. D., The University of
Chicago ; Melanie Wojtulewicz, M.A., the Chicago Public Schools; and Fahrad Y.
Zadeh, Ph.D. Northwestern University.