* 9725735
* Upgrade of the Geophysical Computing Network at the         University of South Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Thomas Owens, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2002
* USD 55,286.00

9725735 Owens This grant provides partial support of the costs of upgrading the
University of South Carolina geophysics computer network. Eight existing Sun
workstations (SUN SPARC 1's, SLC and LX's) purchased between 1990 and 1994 will
be upgraded to Ultra 1 configurations and two existing servers to Ultra 2
configurations. Increased computational speed and disk storage capacity will
benefit presently funded and planned computationally intensive research programs
in lithospheric seismology, GPS geodesy and seismotectonics. Additionally,
increased disk storage capacity will serve as archival support for the South
Carolina Seismic Network funded by the USGS and the DOE-Savannah River Site but
maintained by South Carolina geophysics faculty. Recently funded research
(EAR-9706663) will require state-of-the-art processing power and massive data
storage for development of seismic models of the lower mantle based on data
collected from temporary broadband regional networks. Powerful graphics
capabilities will allow visualization of 3-D seismic models of the deep
continental structure of cratonic lithosphere in Tanzania inferred from PASSCAL
data and real-time visualization of geological time-scale tectonic motions at
convergent margins in Central and South America calculated from campaign and
permanent GPS data. ***