* 9725538
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Geochemical and Isotopic Constraintson Mesoproterozoic Ocean Chemistry Working Toward a         Global Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Timothy Lyons, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 184,409.00

9725538 Lyons The Mesoproterozoic Eon (1600-1000 Ma) represents a critical
period in Earth history from the standpoint of eukaryotic diversification
(Knoll, 1991), fundamental transitions in the oxidation state of the Earth's
atmosphere and oceans (Des Marais et al., 1992; Canfield and Teske, 1996), and
global tectonic reorganization (Dalziel, 1991). Yet despite this obvious
significance, the Mesoproterozoic remains one of the most poorly understood and
poorly documented intervals in Earth history. For example, in reference to an
apparent stability in the Mesoproterozoic marine carbon isotopic record, the era
between 1600 Ma and 1000 Ma has been reported as 'the dullest time in Earth's
history' (Buick et al., 1995). However, a large positive shift (3-4%) in marine
carbonate (13C values has recently been recognized in late Mesoproterozoic
(&lt;1300 Ma) successions from Siberia, Arctic Canada, Greenland, and the United
States. Rather than a short-lived excursion, this shift appears to represent a
prolonged and fundamental change that may represent a significant transition in
the Earth's global carbon cycle. The timing of this observed transition, between
~1300 and ~1150 Ma, is particularly intriguing in that it occurs in conjunction
with the early assembly of the Rodinian supercontinent and a purported rise in
the concentration of atmospheric oxygen. The goal of the proposed research is to
generate carbon, sulfur and strontium isotopic data for this interval and,
thereby, document and begin to address mechanistically the most fundamental
(first-order) shifts in the chemistry of the Mesoproterozoic ocean. These
objectives will be achieved through a multidisciplinary study that integrates
depositional, diagenetic, and geochemical information into a single
comprehensive framework. Although no single stratigraphic succession adequately
encompasses the interval surrounding the observed carbon isotopic shift, two
distinct successions (Society Cliffs Formation, northern Baffin Island; Dismal L
akes Group, Coppermine homocline, Northwest Territories) can be effectively
spliced to provide coverage across the interval of the observed transition. Each
of these successions has been chosen on the basis of accessibility and exposure
of stratigraphic units, the presence of a wide variety of facies and lithologies
suitable for geochemical analysis, and the abundance of a variety of allochems
and marine cements from different depositional environments. Combined, these
prerequisites assure recognition of depositional and diagenetic trends that
would otherwise hamper the interpretation of geochemical and isotopic data. Such
an integrated approach will provide the clearest path toward understanding the
complex evolution of the Proterozoic biosphere.