* 9725082
* Periodic Structures in the Study and Control of Surface     Microtopography and Lattice Strain
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,06/30/2001
* John Blakely, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2001
* USD 317,700.00

9725082 Blakely This project utilizes periodic structures for fundamental
studies of the dynamics of semiconductor surfaces, the production of stepfree
substrates, and oxidation of high aspect-ratio nanostructures. The evolution of
mesoscale structure will be studied in a context in which connection to the
underlying physical mechanisms and appropriate theoretical approach to
describing macroscopic structure evolution are addressed. Focus of the project
is on fundamental understanding and control of surface structural defects, the
kinetics of surface morphological changes, and the effect of morphology on
lattice strain in the near-surface region. Initially most of the experiments
will be done with silicon, but extension to other materials, Ge, C, GaAs and
SiGe alloys will be considered. Major experimental methods for the structural
and kinetic studies will be scanning tunneling and atomic force microscopy, low
energy electron diffraction and microscopy and surface X-ray diffraction.
Conventional nanofabrication methods of sample preparation will be complemented
by novel techniques to create periodically patterned surfaces of very small
periods. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of electronic/photonic devices. Experimental tools are now available to
allow atomic level observation of elementary surface processes which when better
understood will allow advances in both fundamental science and technology. The
basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
contribute to improving the perform ance and stability of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of researc h and education through the
training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***