* 9725194
* Collaborative Research:  Hydrogeologic Analysis of Oriented Carbonate Concretions, Sierra Ladrones Formation,           New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* J. Matthew Davis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2001
* USD 106,916.00

9725194 Davis The effect of geological heterogeneity on fluid flow is one of the
most difficult issues when dealing with problems of contaminant transport.
Spatial variations in permeability result in spatial variations in velocity
which in turn result in dispersion. Significant theoretical advances have
provided a quantitative framework for understanding the relationship between
geologic heterogeneity and dispersion. However, many questions remain regarding
the nature of geologic heterogeneity and how fluids flow through media
exhibiting multiple scales of heterogeneity. Two types of field studies have
traditionally been used to complement the theoretical models. Large-scale
subsurface tracer experiments focus on the spatial variation in hydraulic
conductivity and the resulting plume behavior. Outcrop studies have provided
insight into the nature of geologic heterogeneity and its relation to stochastic
models. However, these two approaches are somewhat isolated in that the large
scale tracer experiments have studied the evolution of plumes but are limited in
their ability to document geologic heterogeneity and velocity correlation
structure. Conversely, outcrop studies provide high-resolution information on
the geologic heterogeneity, but historically, have not quantified an explicit
flow component. We have found evidence that elements of diagenetic fabrics
preserve quantitative information about the paleogroundwater flow in the Sierra
Ladrones Formation, New Mexico. The orientations of elongate carbonate
concretions ranging in size from centimeters to 10s of meters are interpreted as
indicators of paleogroundwater flow direction. The proposed research will obtain
important additional data and employ state-of-the-art quantitative methods to
further test the hypothesis that concretion orientations record local
groundwater flow directions. We will test this hypothesis by 1) obtaining
additional data on the hydrogeology and concretion orientations, 2) obtaining
high-resolution i mages of concretion chemistry and growth history, and 3)
conducting numerical experiments of flow and chemical reactions to test
conceptual models of concretion growth. Our mapping will include both meter-
scale studies of primary sedimentary structures, concretion orientations, and
permeability as well as mapping concretion orientations and facies assemblages
at the scale of 100s of meters. We will test alternative models of concretion
origin by characterizing geochemical zonation (ICP-MS and Ion Microprobe) and
presence of relict microbial populations (SEM). Numerical modeling of flow,
transport, and reactions will provide the quantitative means of synthesizing our
hydrogeologic, petrographic, and geochemcial results. The research under this
collaborative arrangement between Davis (EAR 9725194) and Mozley (EAR 9726416)
will focus on hydrogeologic mapping (concretion orientations and hydrogeologic
properties) and characterizing concretion growth characteristics (petrography
and geochemistry). The reactive transport modeling will be conducted in a
cooperative arrangement with Dr. H. Rajaram under EAR-9734404. If these oriented
concretions do record paleogroundwater flow directions, they may provide further
insight into how fluids flow through porous media over large spatial scale
exhibiting multiple scales of heterogeneity.