* 9725345
* Control of Denitrification in a Permanently Ice Covered     Antarctic Lake:  Potential for Regulation By Bioactive       Metals
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Mark Wells, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2001
* USD 251,371.00

Abstract OPP97-25345 P.I. Mark L. Wells

Denitrification is the main loss term for fixed nitrogen from ecosystems, and
thus its rate and regulation may directly affect primary production and carbon
cycling over short and long time scales. The proposed research investigates the
role of bioactive metals in regulating denitrification by exploiting a natural
experimental system that occurs in a permanently ice-covered lake in the Taylor
Valley of East Antarctica. Chemical distributions in the two lobes of Lake
Bonney imply that denitrification occurs in one lobe but not the other. Most of
the obvious biological and chemical variables that usually influence
denitrification, and might account for the difference between the two lobes,
have been ruled out by previous study. Denitrifiying bacteria are present in
both lobes of the lake and isolates derived from the lake show temperature and
salinity optima consistent with their persistence in this environment. The
proposed research represents a combination of culture experiments and field work
to examine this paradox, and include: (1) Experiments to determine the metal
tolerances and requirements for growth and denitrification by the denitrifying
isolates, (2) Measurement of metal concentrations and metal speciation in
surface transects and depth profiles, and (3) Experiments to determine how
denitrifying bacteria respond to alterations in metal availability. This
approach allows examination of the relationship between microbial activity and
metal distributions in Lake Bonney and has implications for elemental cycling in
other aquatic systems. Moreover, the insights will be useful for evaluating the
proposed used of paleo-denitrification indicators for past climate
reconstructions, as well as the potential significance of the global marine
denitrification/nitrogen fixation ratio on atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.