* 9725336
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Comparison of Regional Flood        Frequency Responses to Climatic Variability in the Western  United States
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Lisa Ely, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2002
* USD 128,594.00

9725336 Ely The connection between floods and decadal-to centennial-scale
climatic variations in the past has tremendous implications for probability
assessments of the magnitude and frequency of future floods, especially in
relation to scenarios of future regional or global climate change. This study
will use paleoflood data to compare the influence of decadal-to millennial-scale
climatic variability on the magnitude and frequency of large floods on rivers in
three district hydroclimatic regions of the western U.S: the Southwest,
Northwest, and western Great Basin. The paleoflood studies will provide physical
evidence of individual flood events in the past, extending the record of severe
floods on each river by 100s to 1000s of years through stratigraphic analysis of
flood deposits. Previous studies in the Southwest and preliminary field work
conducted during the summer of 1997 on the John Day River in Oregon and the
Truckee River in Nevada confirm the availability of excellent paleoflood records
from rivers in all three regions. Paleoflood chronologies on rivers in the
southwestern U.S. indicate a connection between regional climatic conditions and
centennial-scale variations in the frequency of large floods over the last 5000
years. A principal aim of this project is to determine whether demonstrated
regional differences in the timing and controls on floods at the short time
scales of the modern records hold true for the regional responses of floods to
longer-term climatic variations. This broad, new perspective on flood
hydroclimatology is achievable even with the relatively coarse resolution of
radiocarbon dating methods. With the collaboration of Kelly Redmond, Deputy
Director and Regional Climatologist for the Western Regional Climate Center,
modern discharge, meteorological and atmospheric-pressure data will be analyzed
to serve as analogs for the paleofloods in each region and thus aid in
understanding the underlying physical bases for the patterns observed in each
reg ional flood series. The study will also take advantage of recent refinements
in statistical computer programs for incorporating paleoflood information into
single-site flood frequency analyses (developed by the Bureau of Reclamation),
and methods for the quantification and reduction of paleoflood discharge-
modeling uncertainties (House, 1996). Understanding links between climate and
floods from the basis of real information on the magnitude and frequency of
great, rare floods will improve the ability of water-supply managers to foresee
the regional consequences of glodal-and regional-scale climatic phenomena, an
increasingly important component of long-term planning in the face of uncertain
future climate conditions.