* 9725661
* Development of Gneissic Banding and its Significance for    Rheological Stratification of the Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1998,07/31/2003
* Virginia Sisson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2003
* USD 80,073.00

9725661 Sisson This project will address the metamorphic and structural
processes associated with the development of gneissic banding in the migmatitic
core of a low-pressure/high-temperature metamorphic belt in the eastern Chugach
Mountains, southern Alaska. Two processes which may be responsible for formation
of the gneissic banding are: (1) injection of felsic melts or (2) segregation by
diffusive mass-transfer. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and may
occur simultaneously. These two mechanisms predict very different crustal
rheologies for the ductile regions in the middle and lower crust. This
difference in rheological properties will influence large scale mechanics of the
lithosphere. This research will attempt to distinguish between the two
mechanisms for development of gneissic banding by looking at textural and
compositional differences throughout the transition zone from schistose to
gneissic fabrics. The PI will investigate several regions where the width of the
metamorphic belt changes from 15-25 km. The proposed work includes detailed
flied work to elucidate kinematics of the gneissic transition zone, detailed
petrographic studies of both textural and compositional difference, and high
resolution computed x-ray tomography.