* 9725117
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Charles Watkins, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/2000
* USD 10,000.00

The City College of New York's Program for the Retention of Engineering Students
(PRES), begun in 1987, was established to increase the number of
underrepresented minorities in the engineering field. PRES concentration is on
freshman. Data indicate that half of engineering students drop out during the
first two years of school. PRES services are focused on improving academic
performance and providing career information. Among the services listed, are, 1)
pre-freshman and pre-transfer summer enrichment programs; 2) mathematics and
science workshops; 3) frequent academic monitoring and advisement; 4) career
orientation and professional development sessions, and 5) cooperative education
and summer job placement. Comparison data provided indicate that student
retention rates are impacted with 90 percent of the students staying in
engineering versus 50 percent for those students not in the program. Another
highlight of the proposal is the program's impressive impact on graduation rates
and matriculation into graduate programs. In addition, the proposal indicates
PRES will continue to grow through the support it receives from its 18-member
advisory board composed of corporate and foundation representatives. The
strengths of the nominee include: . Largest enrollment of engineering students
in New York state (50 percent of the state's engineering students). . Pre-
freshman enrichment, personal counseling, block registration, tutoring by peers
and upper classmen, required non-credit course in problem solving, math and
science workshops, frequent academic monitoring and advisement, career
orientation and professional development services, summer job placement.
Significant impact on student retention, graduation, academic performance. 90
percent of the students remain in engineering. PRES student graduation rates are
twice as high as other minority engineering students. Founda tion and corporate
support. Innovative and replicable. In summary, PRES is a sophisticated and
comprehensive student support system. The population of assisted students
overwhelmingly satisfies the NSF criteria for diversity and underrepresented
populations. The program offered the unique component of involving transfer
students in the support process even before transfer from the feeder school.