* 9725251
* Predictive, Sensor-Assisted Wireless Multimedia Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Terrence Fine, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 08/31/2001
* USD 892,465.00

ABSTRACT NCR-9725251 Stephen Wicker, Terrence Fine, and Joseph Halpern Cornell
University Predictive, Sensor-Assisted Wireless Multimedia Systems The PCS
systems of the future will provide a variety of services to mobile users,
including voice, high speed data, video, e-mail, teleconferencing, and the
transfer of medical Images. The intelligent PCS network will be required to
provide channel access with a minimum of call blocking, negotiate quality of
service, allocate resources, and track users throughout their sessions. It is
proposed to develop a series of expert systems that will optimize random access,
resource allocation, and mobility management protocols. These expert systems
will use a number of technologies and techniques from the fields of neural
networks, artificial intelligence, and knowledge representation. There are three
levels of agents in the proposed intelligent PCS network: mobile user, Base
Station Controller (BSC), and the Mobile Switching Center (MSC). It is assumed
that the PCS system is cellular, with several BSC's interacting with a single
MSC. It is proposed to determine a means for representing and exploiting the
information available to each type of agent. At the physical layer, in-band
transmitted power levels will be tracked by a grid of low-cost sensors
(radiometers). The sensors will provide power measurements as a function of time
and location. In the proposal it is shown that this information can be used in
the development of a BSC-based intelligent ALOHA multiple access scheme. Neural
networks are described that can efficiently use the sensor data to estimate the
number of users involved in individual collision events. This information is
used in turn to estimate the number of backlogged users and to select an optimal
backoff algorithm, thus maximizing Aloha channel throughput. The sensor grid can
also be used by the BSC and MSC to support resource allocation, handoffs, and
the tracking of scheduled user transmissions. In the proposed research program,
sensor-based expert systems will be developed for three distinct phases of PCS
operation: system planning and layout, multiple access, and adaptive resource
allocation. Higher level information can be acquired and used at the BSC's and
the MSC. The BSC's will obtain information regarding the local users' bandwidth
and quality of service requirements as a function of time. The BSC's will also
track local channel conditions, and develop a detailed propagation model for the
cell. The model will be used to as an aid to power control within the cell. The
BSC is expected to act as an autonomous agent in local resource allocation and
power control. The MSC will be responsible for allocating resources between
cells. An allocation protocol will be developed to move resources between cells
in response to traffic information acquired by the BSC's and passed to the MSC.
The BSC's will also pass propagation and user tracking information to the MSC.
The MSC will use this information to create a global propagation and user
tracking model that will support the handoff decision process. An effort will be
made to develop usage tendency profiles for individual users. The collection of
user profiles will be used to develop models for global resource allocation.