* 9725591
* Planning Meeting for Workshop on Future Directions in       Molecular Simulation and Computational Chemistry:           Fundamentals and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Peter Cummings, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1997
* USD 4,675.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9725591 Peter Cummings This project supports a planning meeting for
the "Workshop on Future Directions in Molecular Simulations and Computational
Chemistry: Fundamentals and Applications", at which the Steering Committee for
the workshop will develop detailed plans (including the invitee list, location
and schedule of the workshop). Additionally, as part of its deliberations the
Steering Committee will produce a short, 2-4 page document outlining
identifiable trends in molecular simulation and computational chemistry,
measures of the growing importance of the two years, synergism between the two
areas, and potential funding directions. This document will serve as a very
preliminary version of the more detailed report, which will emerge, from the
full workshop, as well as providing a focal point for the presentations and
discussions in the workshop. The Steering Committee for the Workshop on Future
Directions in Molecular Simulation and Computational Chemistry may consist of
Peter T. Cummings (Chair, University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National
Laboratory), Keith E. Gubbins or Athanassios Z. Panagiotopoulos (Cornell
University), Phillip R Westmoreland (University of Massachussetts) and Matthew
Neurock (University of Virginia). The funds provided in this award would permit
these five individuals to meet for a 1.5-day planning meeting at NSF in
Arlington, VA. A report will be developed in draft form over the course of the
meeting and communicated by the principal investigator to Dr. Wellek at NSF for
expenses. ***