* 9725366
* Production and Ascent of Magma at Convergent                Margins:  Information From Small Eruptive Centers in the    Central Southern Volcanic Zone, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Rosemary Hickey-Vargas, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2000
* USD 91,000.00

9725366 Hickey-Vargas The proposed research is a geochemical study of basaltic
volcanic rocks from small eruptive centers in the central Southern Volcanic Zone
(CSVZ), Chile. Together with basalts from composite stratovolcanoes in the CSVZ,
the fault-aligned small centers define a spatial and geochemical pattern
suggesting that they were formed by melting with widely, but systematically
varying amounts of hydrous subduction-related fluids. The objective of the
research is to test competing hypotheses for melting and ascent of magma from
above the subduction plate. Geochemical and isotopic data will be used to
determine the relationship between the amount of hydrous fluid component and
extent of melting. 10Be and 238U/230Th activity ratios will be determined for
selected samples and compared with existing data from the composite
stratovolcanoes, to determine whether basalts from the small centers include
smaller amounts of recently extracted lithosphere. Petrography and electron
microprobe analyses of phenocryst minerals will be used to infer liquid
compositions. The results of this research will advance knowledge by
contributing to our understanding of convergent margin magmatism, specifically,
by identifying some of the controls on the siting of large and small volcanic
centers, defining sources of subduction zone magma, and the pathways for cycling
some elements between mantle and crust. Further, the research will advance
education through the training of one Ph. D. student, and promote collaboration
between U.S. and Chilean scientists.