* 9725177
* ADVENTURES IN SCIENCE:  An Interactive Exhibit Gallery Exploring Biological Diversity and the Changing Nature of Life on Earth
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Allen Young, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Ucko
* 12/31/2003
* USD 1,513,931.00

9725177 Young The Milwaukee Public Museum will develop Adventures in Science: An
Interactive Exhibit Gallery. This will be a 7250 sq. ft. interactive exhibit
with associated public programs and materials that link the exhibit with formal
education. The goal of Adventures in Science is to promote understanding of
biological diversity, the forces that have change it over time, and how
scientists study and affect change. The exhibit will consist of three areas.
"Our Ever-Changing World" will feature "dual scene" habitat dioramas that will
convey at-a-glance how environments change over time. "The Natural History
Museum" will be a reconstruction of a museum laboratory and collections area to
protray behind-the-scenes scientific and curatorial activities that further the
study of biological diversity, ecology and systematics. An "Exploration Center:
will bridge these two areas and will be designed to accommodate live
presentations, group activities and additional multimedia stations for Internet
and intranet access. Using interactive devices, visitors will be encouraged to
make hypothesis, examine evidence, compare specimens, construction histories of
biological and geological changes, and develop conclusions about the science
behind biodiversity and extinction issues. Visitors should also come away with
an increased understanding of the role of systematic collections in
understanding biological diversity. Information on MPM research programs will be
highlighted in "The Natural History Museum" section and will be updated
frequently. Annual Teacher Training Institutes for pre-service and in-service
teachers will present strategies for using the gallery's multimedia stations,
lab areas, and Web site links. Special attention will be given to reaching new
audiences including those in the inner city and people with disabilities.