* 9725347
* Collaborative Research:  Petrotectonic Study of             Ultrahigh-Pressure Rocks From the Kokchetav Massif,         Northern Kazakhstan, and the Maksyutov Complex...
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Juhn Liou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2001
* USD 119,848.00

9725347 Liou This proposed U.S.-Japan-Russia-Kazakhstan cooperative project will
continue field, petrologic, stable, isotopic, geochronologic, and tectonic
investigations of intracratonal ultrahigh-pressure and high-pressure metamorphic
rocks in the Kokchetav Massif and the Maksyutov Complex, where coesite (
microdiamonds have been described. Primary objectives are to: (1) determine the
regional distribution and structural relationships among diamond-bearing gneiss
and marble, coesite-bearing eclogite and gneiss, and other UHP and HP rocks in
the Kokchetav Massif and the Maksyutov Complex; (2) identify and characterize
the mineral inclusions in garnet and zircon from eclogite, gneiss, marble, and
schist to establish conditions of UHP metamorphism and the effect of such
elevated pressures; (3) delineate mineral parageneses and P-T-t paths for
eclogite, whiteschist, garnet peridotite, blueschist, gneiss and marble; (4)
characterize 18O/16O ratios of silicates and carbon isotopes of diamond,
magnesite, and other carbonates in order to evaluate the role of fluids at
mantle depths; (5) determine the structural and geochemical characteristics of
protoliths in order to infer their plate tectonic settings; (6) establish the
ages of blueschist, eclogite, and retrograde metamorphism through U-Pb and
40Ar/39Ar dating; and (7) compare findings from central Asia with those from
eastern China in order to elucidate the genetic relationships among recognized
metamorphic, igneous, and tectonic features.