* 9725148
* Towards a System Design Discipline
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2000
* USD 411,515.00

ECS-9725148 Varaiya System design is a craft and a discipline. Practice of the
craft requires domain knowledge. This proposal seeks to formulate a discipline
of design through a graduated approach to system description frameworks,
behavior, implementation and performance. The approach will build on existing
work in hybrid systems, hierarchical and distributed control, and elements of
cognitive science and intelligent systems. Some new theoretical and
computational material will be developed while filling in gaps and exploring
promising directions. The end product of this effort will be: (1) articles and a
monograph describing our approach to system design; (2) software tools that aid
in the creation of the design, its validation and implementation; and (3)
designs that offer solutions to concrete problems in transportation and
communication networks. The approach is intended for engineers and students
engaged in the design of large, distributed dynamical systems. The approach will
be elaborated in three passes, successively deepening theoretical understanding
and examining more difficult, concrete problems of design. Pass I provides a
rapid introduction to system modeling in SHIFT, a programming language for
representing and simulating a dynamic network of interconnected hybrid systems.
Pass II is devoted to modeling frameworks, analysis of system behavior, and
real-time implementation. Pass III develops a theory of system architecture and
principles for architecture design. The material for Pass I already exists, so
the work here is to create a felicitous notation for hybrid systems that is
mathematically familiar and syntactically convenient as a programming aid. This
effort should last not more than six months. The significant body of hybrid
systems theory produced in the last five years provides much material for Pass
II. That material will be augmented by extending recent results on
approximations and robustness of hybrid systems behavior. Also needed will be a
formul ation of what is meant by real-time implementation, making use of
existing work in real-time languages and operating systems. This part will draw
upon research in real-time automotive control in the California PATH Program.
The first version of Pass II should be complete within eighteen months. Pass III
will attempt to develop a theory of system architecture as a hierarchical,
distributed organization of functions necessary for perception and control. The
attempt will draw upon ideas from cognitive science, distributed, hierarchical
systems, and intelligent systems, and upon experience in the design of automated
highways and communication networks. This part will also be concerned with the
evaluation of system performance (including both logical and quantitative
criteria) and show how a properly structured design assists performance
evaluation. Pass III is the riskiest portion of the proposed research. It should
be complete within two years. The third year of the project will be devoted to
testing the theory and software tools within the context of specific
applications. Art introductory graduate-level course developed alongside this
work will also serve to evaluate how well the approach can be learned.