* 9725948
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Recent Developments in the       Symmetry Aspects of Many-Body Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Akif Baha Balantekin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

9725948 Balantekin This award supports the participation of American scientists
in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Recent Developments in the Symmetry Aspects of Many-
Body Physics, to be held in Hawaii, in August, 1998. The co-organizers are
Professors Akif Baha Balantekin of the University of Wisconsin in Madison and
Professor Takaharu Otsuka of the University of Tokyo in Japan. The objective of
the seminar is to bring together researchers who work in the field of nuclear
physics as well as condensed matter physics to discuss implementation of
symmetry principles in many-body phenomena. The focus will be on symmetries in
quantum systems which contain relatively small number of particles. In these
systems it therefore becomes important to consider the symmetries the system
possesses, in order to clarify the underlying dynamics of the system. The
session will focus on six theme topics: (l) dynamical symmetry and supersymmetry
in nuclear collective motion as described by the interacting boson model and its
extensions; (2) symmetry in electronic many-body systems including mesoscopic
systems and micro-clusters; (3) chaos and broken symmetries, quantum integrable
systems; (4) utility of symmetry concepts in nuclei near the drip lines; (5)
symmetries of relativistic problems; and (6) symmetries in the scattering
theory. Results of the seminar should define new directions in the field, start
new collaborations between U.S. and Japanese researchers and reinforce the
existing ones. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this
field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the
stage for future collaborative projects. Seminar organizers have made a special
effort to involve graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. The
proceedings of the meeting will be made available on the World Wide Web. ***