* 9725004
* High Performance Simulation of Multiphysics Problems in     Turbulence, Control, and Structural Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Charbel Farhat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vittal S. Rao
* 04/30/2002
* USD 1,975,250.00

This research program will address the high-performance parallel simulation of
multiphysics problems that couple dynamic models in fluid mechanics, heat
transfer, structures and control. This program requires the close collaboration
of researchers in engineering, computer science and computational mathematics.
The activities in Engineering are driven by the simulation, on high performance
parallel computers, of problems involving the dynamic interaction of physical
models from disciplines of importance in aerospace, civil and mechanical
engineering. Four specific applications of this class of problems will be
considered: the mitigation of turbulent vorticity in high-temperature engines;
the study of high turbulent flow in pipe bends, the use of active and semi-
active control to safeguard composite structures in civil and aerospace
engineering; and the implementation of topology/shape structural design and
optimization for aeroelastic design. These application are unified by their
multidisciplinary nature which involves at least two mechanical fields, use of a
common basis in modeling, visualization, problem decomposition, parallel
simulation methodology, and software/hardware infrastructure. The research in
Computer Science will focus on the development of a problem Solving Environment
(PSE) for the applications problems which is suitable for the parallel
implementation of large-scale multiphysics simulations. The primary goal of the
PSE is to provide transparent, portable and scalable access to all of the
resources needed for execution of large parallel applications on heterogeneous
and/or distributed systems, including interprocessor communication, access to
disk, visualization, debugging and performance monitoring. The following
application s of the PSE will be investigated: network-based distributed object
systems, distributed shared memory systems, parallel persistent I/O, and
computational steering and debugging. In addition we propose to integrate
quality of service protocols in high-speed networks with our distributed object
system to provide a true real-time distributed environment, and to investigate
numerical algorithms for optimal memory access using the PSE to facilitate
distributed performance analysis. The application problems are interconnected in
modeling, computational and software integration aspects, facilitating the
common use of tools such as domain decomposers and response visualization. This
project will provide unique opportunities for the training of students and
postdocs in an interdisciplinary setting. Regular weekly meetings of the full
research group will introduce all researchers to the breadth of issues involved
and will allow students to locate suitable thesis topics. Students will be
encouraged to have advisors from two disciplinary areas represented by the
research team, and each student will be paired with a postdoctoral student as a
mentor.