* 9725527
* Genetics of Organized Gliding Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Armin Kaiser, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2002
* USD 330,000.00

Kaiser 9725527 Myxococcus exhibits multicellular gliding movements that are
highly coordinated. Coordination spans the range of few to many thousands of
cells. While growing, a dozen cells may associate and move as a cohort. In
fruiting body development, many thousands of cells move coordinately. The aim of
this project is to work out the cellular and molecular basis for movement
coordination. Despite the apparent complexity of their movements, myxobacterial
cells have the structural, chemical and genetic simplicity of Gram-negative
bacteria. Previous work on Myxococcus had distinguished two motility patterns
called "adventurous" and "social". This project will seek to identify genes that
control social motility and to learn their biochemical functions. For this
purpose, mutants defective in social motility will be analyzed. Earlier work had
identified pili, long thin hairs that projected from one pole of each cell, as
necessary for social motility. This project will investigate the biogenesis of
pili and the way that pili support social motility. The finding of mutants that
assemble normal pili, yet fail to show social motility shows that pili are
necessary but not sufficient for social motility. Steps in transducing a pilus
"signal" might be found in this way. Many social motility genes are clustered in
one long contiguous continuous stretch of Myxococcus DNA. More motility genes
will be sought in the neighborhood of this block. The structure and function of
the new genes will be analyzed. Regulation of expression of the pilin gene will
be studied. Pilin is the protein monomer of the pilus fiber. The motors
responsible for gliding movement have not yet been uncovered in any of the
gliding bacteria. The search for new genes and mutants will be structured in a
way that should allow mutations which inactivate the gliding engines to be
detected. Coordinated multicellular movements are particularly important in
early developmental steps of multicellular organisms, but little is known about
how they are organized or regulated. Myxobacteria offer a realistic way to begin
to investigate this general problem.