* 9725509
* Secondary School Curricular Reform and Postsecondary        Education Success
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Barbara Schneider, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2000
* USD 483,333.00

9725509 Schneider The purpose of the proposed project is to examine the
relationship between students' academic experiences in high school and their
success in postsecondary education. In 1990, the National Science Foundation
created the Statewide Systemic Initiatives (SSI) program to create broad-based
statewide coalitions to undertake extensive coordinated reforms of science,
mathematics, and technology education. Evaluations of the first wave of these
programs pointed out that many educational practitioners remain unconvinced that
the type of standards-based reforms envisioned by educational and policy leaders
are needed (Zucker, Shields, Adelman, and Powell, 1995). This project is
designed to determine whether high school curricular programs that exemplify
standards-based reforms lead to increased student achievement in science and
mathematics and have enduring effects on student matriculation, persistence, and
career development in postsecondary school. Currently, SSI relies on changes in
student achievement as one of the major indicators of program success. However,
we are interested in examining the wide-range effects of standards-based
curricular reforms on postsecondary school experiences, particularly those of
students traditionally underserved in high schools. The logic underlying the SSI
program is that student attainment of high standards of learning requires
meaningful improvements in classroom teaching, the implementation of more
challenging curricula and materials, and regular assessments of learning aligned
with instruction. Furthermore, effective implementation of these initiatives
requires better-trained teachers and administrators, support within and outside
schools, and collaborative working relations among key constituencies. Launching
these major reforms is a significant task, and there has been some concern among
local and state educational leaders that such initiatives may not be worth the
time and resources needed to implement them (Zucker et al., 1995). Therefore, it
is not surprising that the response to their implementation has been less than
enthusiastic. This project will provide information on the connection between
high school and college success, and the different paths through which students
arrive at college. In doing so, it also has implications for how to prepare a
more educated and equitable work force for the 21 st century. Our results will
highlight how schools and communities can encourage traditionally
underrepresented students to pursue studies and careers in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology. Furthermore, our analysis will reveal the returns
to course sequences, classroom learning environments, school organizational
resources and family and community involvement in terms of postsecondary
success. Finally, through an examination of students' educational experiences
with NELS:88-94 compared with data from TIMSS and HS &amp; B we can determine
how contemporary young Americans fare in the new context of the global
marketplace and international competitiveness. ??