* 9725501
* U.S.-Colombia Cooperative Research:  Infrared Emission from Charge Oscillations in Quantum Wells in a Laser Field
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* David Hoffman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 05/31/2001
* USD 19,425.00

9825501 Hoffman This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative research
project between Dr. David Hoffman, Iowa State University, and Dr. Yuri
Dakhnovskii, University of Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia, on a study of electron
tunneling in quantum wells irradiated by light. The proposed work addresses
factors that control electron tunneling in systems where charge oscillates
coherently in a double quantum well and far infrared light is emitted. They will
seek a theoretical understanding of electron (exciton) tunnelling in these
circumstances by deriving the master equation describing dynamics of an
excitation governed by the spin-boson Hamiltonian in a laser field; solving this
equation analytically and numerically; and exploring the dynamics of an exciton
interaction with acoustical phonons under the influence of a laser by a direct
solution method based on the Path Integral Approach. The effects of this quantum
coherence can be potentially used as a source of coherent microwave irradiation
that can be manipulated by infrared lasers, and a way to control the direction
and magnitude of tunneling photocurrent in GaAs/AIGaAs heterostructures. This is
a new collaboration that brings together two outstanding scientists with
established strengths in quantum dynamics, a very active area of research, on a
project that has a potential for basic and applied impact. ***