* 9725799
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Selenium Stable Isotopes as         Indicators of Selenium Transport and Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2000
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2000
* USD 158,504.00

9725799 Johnson The proposed work develops measurements of selenium (Se) stable
isotope ratios in surface water and ground water systems for use in studies of
Se transport and chemical cycling. Previous work is very limited because of
technical limitations that we have recently overcome. Parallels between selemium
and sulfur isotope systematics combined with previous Se isotope work, suggest
that the dominant mechanism for Se isotope fractionation is reduction of
soluable oxyanions (Se6 or Se4) to insoluble SeO. Because this transformation
can determine the mobility and bioavailablity of Se, Se isotope measurements
could be a valuable tool in Se transport and cycling studies. For example,
isotope ratio shifts in groundwater over time or flow distance could provide
evidence for active reduction of selenium. In contrast, Se concentration
decreases could be caused by reduction, reversible sorption or changing input
concentration. Se isotope studies thus provide complementary information to
standard techniques. Also, if sources of selenium in a given system are
isotopically distinct, Se isotope measurements may serve to determine the
dominant source or delineate areas impacted by point source inputs. Experiments
in the first half of the study will measure isotope fractionation caused by
various processes, build on previous work, and fill in major gaps in the basic
understanding of Se isotope variation. The experiments focus on chemical
reduction (bacterial and abiotic) as the dominant isotope fractionation
mechanism, but alos investigate plant growth, volatilization of alkyl selenides,
sorption and precipitation. After the isotpic fractionation "rules" have been
ascertained, field experiments in groundwater, surface water, and estuarine
settings are planned to demonstrate three distinct applications of the new
technique. The group assembled includes a unique combination of expertise: 1) It
is currently the only group measuring selenium isotope ratios on environmental
sample s. 2) One collaborator has extensive expertise in bacterial reduction of
selenium. 3) The group has experience with Se-impacted sites in the San Joaquin
Valley and elsewhere, and has good connections with many other researchers in
the field.