* 9725116
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Ronnie Vickers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

SECME, Inc., formerly the Southeastern Consortium for Minorities in Engineering,
has been in existence since 1975 and is structured to impact the educational
pursuits of K-12 students and influence their selection of science, engineering
and mathematics careers. SECME programs are now established in 12 states. The
organization provides year-long support for a large number of K-12 students.
Since 1980, more than 49,000 SECME participants have graduated from high school.
The partnership brings together students, teachers and administrators and
influences SEM career selection through a variety of institutes, workshops,
conferences and competitions. In addition to educational support from more than
65 corporations and/or government agencies. This program appears to be an
excellent feeder toward SEM careers. The strengths of the nominee include: .
Since 1980, SECME has coordinated programs which have mentored an impressive
number (49,475) of K-12 students, who have enrolled in post-secondary
institutions. . Documentation indicates that more than 50 percent of the SECME
alumni have enrolled in SEM. . Data indicate that a large number of SECME
students enroll in college. Currently, five SECME alumni are pursuing the Ph.D.
degree. . SECME has imparted the educational exposure of minorities by
influencing enhancement of both teaching and learning at the K-12 level. . In
1996, SECME received the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering
(NACME) Reginald H. Jones Award for its influence on the education of minority
groups. . As a model SECME involves students, teachers, faculty and
administrators through a team approach. . Linkages with several K-16 systems
have already been established. . The SECME network demonstrates collaboration
among businesses, governmental agencies, foundations, universities, school
systems, students and parents. . SECME's impact on the K-12 system has been
documented and is significant. . SECME, as an enhancement program, has the
potential for improving K-16 education and impacting the SEM careers. In
summary, this nomination for the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science,
Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring is a great one. The organization has been
in existence since 1975 and has reached over 50,000 students. The impact on
enhancing the number of students pursuing science careers has been excellent.
The organization has had steady success with its impact on students.