* 9725291
* National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Eric Cornell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence S. Brown
* 07/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

*** 9725291 Cornell Dr. Eric A. Cornell of the University of Colorado and a
Fellow of the Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics (JILA) and at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, is the 22nd recipient of the
Alan T. Waterman award. Dr. Cornell will receive $500,000 in research support
over the next three years as part of this award. The Alan T. Waterman Award
Committee overviewed the recommendation process after receiving 84 nominations.
The National Science Board unanimously agreed to present the award to this
atomic, molecular, and optical (AMO) physicist. The National Foundation presents
this annual award to this annual award to a promising scientist, no more than 35
years of age or within five years of receiving his/her Ph.D., who is judged to
be in the forefront of his/her field. The committee recognized Dr. Cornell for
his demonstration of Bose-Einstein condensation in a gas. He is an AMO physicist
who noted that Bose-Einstein condensate is a new macroscopic state with unique
and fascinating properties. The applications have included the transformation of
the field of atom interferometry much as the laser revolutionized optical
interferometry. This work has opened up a rich and fascinating physical system
with a host of further questions to explore. Dr. Cornell has emerged as a leader
among his generation as an AMO physicist. His creativity, originality, and
leadership ability set him apart in this field and have inspired progress in the
AMO field. The award is the most prestigious honor of the National Science
Foundation for young researchers. ***