* 9725898
* Upgrade of a Ruby-Fluorescence System
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Raymond Jeanloz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2001
* USD 25,545.00

9725898 Jeanloz This grant provides partial support to upgrade the ruby
fluorescence spectrometer at the UC-Berkeley high-pressure laboratory with a
charge-coupled device (CCD). The ruby fluorescence spectrometer is used to
rapidly determine pressure and pressure variations across very small samples
(50-500 microns) inside diamond anvil cells (DAC). Accurate determination of the
pressure distribution within a DAC allows calculation of shear stresses within
the cell and/or viscous stress relaxation of materials that have been laser
heated in conjunction with high pressure DAC experiments. The current detector
for UC-Berkeley ruby fluorescence system is an antiquated photomultiplier tube
(PMT) that has exceeded its estimated 10 yr. life span. New PMT's are currently
manufactured on a made-to-order basis only and have therefore increased in price
over the years as digital CCD's have entered the market and become more
affordable. While still less expensive than CCD detectors, PMT's are far less
sensitive to emitted EM radiation and cannot be used in experiments requiring
pressures exceeding 60-70 GPa where sample sizes are necessarily very small and
emitted fluorescence is therefore weak. PMT detectors thus limit high P-T
experiments to upper mantle conditions. Additionally, a CCD array can later be
adapted for use in Raman spectroscopy A ruby fluorescence spectrometer is a
required tool in DAC experimentation and the PI's choice of a CCD detector to
replace his PMT is well reasoned and forward looking. This upgrade will allow
this PI, his students and colleagues to continue provocative research aimed at
understanding early Earth and planetary differentiation and the structure of
high pressure mantle phases and synthetic materials. ***