* 9725086
* Stochastic Analysis of Virus Transport in Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Claire Welty, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/2000
* USD 125,650.00

9725086 Welty The objective of the proposed work is to develop a three-
dimensional stochastic model of virus transport in aquifers and to evaluate the
usefulness of the model by comparing it to available field observations. The
hypothesis to be tested is that the stochastic spectral approach provides an
improved representation of field-scale virus transport compared to other
currently available models. The motivation for the proposed work arises from:
(1) the public health need to predict virus transport in shallow drinking water
aquifers due to evidence that many waterborne disease outbreaks can be
attributed to contamination of water supply wells by nonindigenous viral
pathogens emanating from land-disposed wasters, and (2) the lack of appropriate
existing models to represent virus transport at large scales (tens to hundreds
of meters) in heterogeneous settings. A stochastic approach is needed over a
deterministic computation because defining a heterogeneous aquifer structure
deterministically for large scales is difficult and impractical. The model will
be derived by using spectral perturbation analysis to evaluate the effect of
coupling of local-scale virus transport phenomena with a three-dimensional,
correlated-random-field model of aquifer permeability. The result will be a set
of mean differential equations representing the transport of free viruses and
conservation of mass of attached viruses at the field scale. It is expected that
the mean equations will include mathematical expressions for field-scale
advection, dispersion, detachment, filtration and adsorption coefficients that
are dependent on aquifer statistical properties and local-scale virus transport
parameters. The theory will predict the interaction between local-scale
processes and field-scale heterogeneities and the importance of this interaction
on large-scale virus transport. The resulting model could be simplified and
applied also to the movement of abiotic colloids in groundwater.