* 9725845
* Mn Speciation and Mechanisms of Mn(II) Oxidation at         Microbe-Water Interfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2002
* USD 315,000.00

9725845&lt;br/&gt;Tebo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbial oxidation of aqueous
Mn(II) and subsequent precipitation of Mn(III) and (IV) oxides and hydroxides
are important controls on the speciation of Mn in soils and aquifers, and the
compositions of natural waters. At present, the processes by which microbes
adsorb and oxidize Mn are poorly understood and the compositions and structures
of microbially precipitated oxide and hydroxide solids often are not known.
Microbes may control the aqueous reactivities for these Mn-oxide precipitates in
aqueous solution by modification of surface areas and charge properties and may
sequester deleterious contaminant metal ions within the Mn oxide precipitates.
Knowledge of these processes is necessary to the development of physically
realistic geochemical models and could be used in the design of microbe-based
remediation technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this three-year
multidisciplinary and multiinstitutional collaborative effort is to investigate
the mechanisms of Mn(II) adsorption, oxidation and precipitation at microbe-
water interfaces and the identities (i.e., structures and compositions) of
Mn(III) and (IV) precipitates using XAFS spectroscopy and aqueous geochemical
techniques. Complementary surface characterization techniques and electron
microscopy will be used to constrain design and interpretation of XAFS
measurements. Initially, the oxidation of Mn(II) by spores of the marine
bacterium, Bacillus sp. SG-1, will be studied as functions of pH, Mn
concentration, and major ion water composition. SG-1, is an excellent model
organism for the proposed studies because its mechanism of oxidation has been
well characterized, it oxidizes Mn(II) over a range of environmentally
significant conditions, and growth does not have to be sustained. In the second
and third years of this study, other microbes, including freshwater and marine
strains recently isolated from the environment, will be investigated. Specific
hypotheses we wish to address are:&lt;br/&gt;1) Microbe-and/or enzyme-bound
Mn(III) species are intermediates in the oxidation of Mn(II) to
Mn(IV);&lt;br/&gt;2) Mn(II) cations are bound by microbes predominantly by
inner-sphere complexation mechanisms under the experimental
conditions;&lt;br/&gt;3) Mn(IV) solid phases are the principal products of
microbial Mn(II) oxidation under the experimental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;4)
Microbes influence the aqueous reactivities of Mn precipitates via modification
of the surface areas, porosities, charge density and compositions of the Mn
precipitates they produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide
information on the factors that control the reactivities of bacteria surfaces
and bacterially produced Mn oxides in aqueous solution. Furthermore, since other
metal ions are microbially oxidized by similar metabolic pathways as Mn(II), the
results of this project will contribute to the knowledge base on microbially
mediated metal redox reactions in natural ecosystems. These studies on
controlled model systems are a necessary starting point for understanding the
complex suites of chemical reactions and transformations that occur at microbe-
water interfaces in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;