* 9725942
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Ecophysiology of Larval-Stage Dispersal in Estuarine Fishes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2001
* David Secor, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2001
* USD 23,250.00

9725942 Secor This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor David Secor of the University of Maryland and Professor Masaru
Tanaka of Kyoto University in Japan. The researchers will be exploring
ecophysiology of larval-stage dispersal in estuarine fishes. A critical phase in
estuarine fishes is the transition between larval and juvenile stages. For
Japanese sea bass, transition- phase fish move from brackish to freshwater
habitats. The researchers will examine the timing of this habitat shift in
relation to: (l) the physiological ability of larvae to adapt to changing
salinity habitats; (2) the size and age of larvae; and (3) environmental
conditions. The project will couple methodologies in otolith microanalysis and
immunocytochemistry. The otolith's chemical record will serve as a chronometer
on the timing of the habitat shift relative to age and size. Individual level
analysis of endocrine function will indicate whether a larva is competent to
change habitats. This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
that have complementary expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The
collaboration will unite the U.S. researcher's expertise in otolith
microanalysis with the Japanese expertise in immunocytochemistry. Research
results of otolith microanalysis will establish the where's and when's of larval
ingress or egress into juvenile habitats. Also the endocrine status and larval
growth rate will provide information on how the habitat shift is successfully
accomplished. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. ***