* 9725778
* High-Performance, Low-Power Wireless Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mari Maeda
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,081,619.00

We propose an integrated approach to minimizing power consumption of high-
performance wireless communication systems. Our interdisciplinary approach will
simultaneously address key levels of system design: minimum-energy communication
techniques, energy-efficient signal processing electronics, high efficiency RF
front-ends, and concurrent optimization methods. Our objective will be reached
by developing design methodologies in the following research areas: (a)
Modulation, detection, equalization, diversity, and resource allocation
techniques for time and code-division multiple-access channels, which instead of
concentrating on achieving channel capacity without regard to complexity, focus
on minimum-energy communications while accounting for energy consumption for
their implementation (b) Low-energy mixed-signal electronics to perform baseband
functions such as data processing, coding, equalization etc. Our approach
includes two components: digital logic with energy recovery using switch-mode RF
circuits, and very low-power analog neural hardware. (c) High-efficiency
integrated active antenna arrays, with a potential for manifold increase in
overall DC to radiated carrier power efficiency. Our approach saves space and
power by integrating high-efficiency switch-mode RF circuits with compact
antenna arrays, allowing added functionality such as beam forming and (d)
Concurrent design optimization over stochastic parameters, which can yield
significantly lower power consumption in existing designs, and can take further
advantage of the above methodologies. These savings will yield smaller, lighter,
more reliable, and more capable wireless, hand-held, lap-top, and vehicular
communication devices. The developed technologies and design methodologies will
apply to mobile communication systems for the more than 25 million U.S. cellular
subscribers as well as the millions of PCS subscribers over the horizon.