* 9725928
* Mathematical Discourse in Bilingual Settings: Learning and  Teaching Mathematics in Two Languages
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Judit Moschkovich, Institute for Research on Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1998
* USD 170,417.00

9725928 Moschkovich This project will examine the nature and development of
mathematical discourse in bilingual settings. The premise of this research is
that the design of teaching environments for this population of students would
be facilitated by developing a deeper understanding of classroom mathematical
discourse in general, descriptions of how learning mathematics in two languages
involves acquiring more than a technical vocabulary, and a consideration of the
resources bilingual students bring to the mathematics classroom. The main
research questions to be examined are 1) how bilingual students negotiate the
meaning of mathematical descriptions, explanations, and arguments and what
resources they use in constructing these; and 2) whether and how students'
mathematical discourse and conceptions change as a results of participation in
conversations with their peers or a teacher. Observational, videotape, and
interview data will be collected in secondary classrooms reflecting "best
instructional practices" related to success with bilingual Latino students. The
project will focus on two types of data: classroom conversations (among students
or between teachers and students) and non-classroom discussion among students
arranged to occur after school. Based on the results of this research, the
project will provide 1) a descriptive and theoretical account of classroom
mathematical discourse in bilingual settings, 2) a collection of illustrative
resources that can support bilingual students' learning, 3) a set of principled
teaching strategies for supporting the refinement of students' mathematical
discourse, and 4) a pilot set of video cases of mathematical discourse in
bilingual settings for use in preservice and inservice teacher education.