* 9725003
* The Study of Elusive Neutrals and Ion Structures by         Neutralization-Reionization Mass Spectrometry Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Chrys Wesdemiotis, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 294,100.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the studies of
Professor Chrys Wesdemiotis on the synthesis of neutral, gas-phase intermediates
and their characterization by neutralization-reionization mass spectroscopy.
Neutral intermediates, such as carbyne, silanone, amino acid radicals and
hypermetalated species, will be prepared from the corresponding mass-selected
cations or anions under conditions of endothermic neutralization at low kinetic
energy. Ionization energies, proton affinities and heats of formation of these
neutral intermediates will be extracted from the measured neutralization
endothermicity. The different stabilities and reactivities of amino acids and
peptides neutralized by proton attachment will be exploited to distinguish
proton binding sites and their relative proton affinities in multi-functional
biomolecules. Graduate and undergraduate students carrying out the experiments
will be exposed to the construction of the neutralization-reionization mass
spectrometer, its application to different chemical systems, and the analysis of
the resulting data. With this New award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program supports the research and educational activities of Professor
Chrys Wesdemiotis of the University of Akron. Professor Wesdemiotis will focus
his research on the synthesis and characterization of neutral intermediates that
are currently thought to be short-lived intermediates in a number of chemical
transformations. A number of intermediates will be prepared in the gas phase and
examined under low-energy neutralization conditions in order to obtain long-
sought thermodynamic parameters. The educational activities of Professor
Wesdemiotis will include the training of undergraduate and graduate students in
the theory and applications of neutralization-reionization mass spectroscopy.