* 9725151
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Catherine Didion, Association for Women in Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

The main force of the Association for Women in Science (AWIS) Mentoring Project
model stems from its ability to be replicated nationwide. With AWIS
presentations made throughout the United States, at a UN Conference on Women in
Beijing, China (1995), in the former Soviet Union, South Africa, and throughout
Europe, this mentoring model has realized international influence and
distinction. The program has reached across disciplines with diverse
organizations participating such as Americorps, Association for Women in
Mathematics, U.S. Department of Energy, Iowa Department of Transportation, and
the U.S. Forest Service; corporations such as Bell Atlantic Foundation or The
Scripps Research Institute; and institutions such as Edmunds Community College,
Iowa State University, and Stanford University. The strengths of the nominee
include: . Have created a national model for attracting female students into
science. . Model strategy has been adapted in many institutions. . The multi-
strength nature of the program. . The program has mentored over 6,000 female
students since 1990. In summary, this nomination for the Presidential Awards for
Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring is an excellent
one. The program has produced numerous written materials that other
institutions/organizations have used to implement successful mentoring models of
their own. Through its large scale operation and influence, the AWIS mentoring
project is significantly increasing the number of women scientists who can in
turn be mentors for others just beginning their training.