* 9725106
* 1997 International Symposium:  "The Ribosome-Its Nucleolar  Synthesis and Structure" to be held in Noordwijkerhout,     The Netherlands, August 16-20, 1997.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Craig Pikaard, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 3,300.00

9725106 Pikaard The National Science Foundation is providing funding for the
travel of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the United States to
attend an international symposium entitled "The Ribosome: Its Nucleolar
Synthesis and Structure." This meeting will be held in Noordwijkerhout, the
Netherlands, August 16-20, 1997. This conference will be the fourth incarnation
of a meeting that has previously been held at Cold Spring Harbor (1988, 1991,
1994). The study of ribosome biosynthesis encompasses the sub-disciplines of
biochemistry, biophysics, genetics, cell biology, developmental biology and
physiology. Numerous prokaryotic and eukaryotic species are model systems
including E. coli, yeast, Acanthamoeba, trypanosomes, plants, Drosophila, and
mammals. Ribosome synthesis meetings bring together research laboratories from
around the world, all unified by a single topic. The breadth of expertise of the
scientists assembled for this meeting facilitates interdisciplinary interactions
and the development of new insights. This meeting presents students with the
larger context in which their research figures and often introduces them for the
first time to sophisticated research in disciplines distinct from their own.
Ribosomes are composed of multiple rRNAs and approximately 80 proteins whose
synthesis and assembly must be precisely coordinated. In eukaryotes, all three
nuclear RNA polymerases are required to express the requisite genes. Cellular
trafficking of rRNAs and ribosomal proteins is also a major logistical problem
for the cell. Control in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes occurs at multiple
steps including transcription initiation, RNA processing, RNA turnover, post-
transcriptional modification, transcription termination and protein turnover.
Assembly of the proteins and rRNAs into a functional ribosome is a problem that
also attracts structural biologists to this field. To encourage US students to
seek out international experience in their education, the meeting will provide a
mechanism by which students interested in postdoctoral experience abroad can
meet with laboratory directors (mostly in Europe) who anticipate openings in
their laboratories. In this way, the organizers hope to facilitate international
research training and experience for American students, consistent with one of
the many educational missions of the National Science Foundation. Ribosomes are
responsible for protein synthesis in all organisms. Scientists specializing in
the study of these essential cellular "machines" will gather from all over the
world in the Netherlands for the meeting entitled "The Ribosome: Its Nucleolar
Synthesis and Structure." The meeting provides scientists having a wide range of
expertise the opportunity to share information and insights into this field.
Funding from the National Science Foundation will enable United States graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to attend the meeting and will provide them
with the opportunity to arrange international collaborations. ***