* 9725110
* Presidential Awards for Excellence in science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

With communication technology and the use of mentors, the Disabilities,
Opportunities, Inter-networking, and Technology (DO-IT) program builds a
communication network for disabled high school students who would otherwise
remain isolated and segregated. The network opens these students to new
possibilities in science, mathematics, and engineering and helps sustain them
through their high school and college academic experiences. Another strength is
the program's emphasis on developing college faculty awareness of how the
barriers and challenges for the disabled can be overcome, contributing to a more
positive and diverse learning environment. DO-IT has positively altered the
educational infrastructure by creating a self-sustaining community, free from
spatial constraints and creatively links new isolated populations such as the
Seattle Children's Hospital to its communication network. The strengths of the
nominee include: . Innovative, strong and working. . Ninety percent of the
participants have graduated from high school and are pursuing post-secondary
degrees. . Showcased in President's Summit for America's Future. In summary,
this nomination for the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science,
Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring is outstanding. The program is innovative
and timely. The total number of participants is not large but the level of
quality is high.