* 9725543
* The Geochemistry of River Particulate Matter from           High-Standing Oceanic Islands  (EPSCoR)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2000
* W. Berry Lyons, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2000
* USD 149,828.00

9725543 Lyons Recent sediment flux work by Milliman and Syvitski (1992) suggest
that rivers draining high-standing oceanic islands between Australia and Asia
may contribute 50% of the total sediment flux to the oceans. This material is
likely to be transferred directly into the deep ocean due, in part, to the
narrow coastal-shelf areas associated with the active margins surrounding these
islands. If this is true, terrestrial geochemical inputs to the ocean, and,
hence, balances based on sediment measurements from larger river systems may be
in error. We have collected and analyzed riverine sediments from four river
systems in New Zealand. Our data indicate that these river sediments are
depleted in Ba, Co, Cu, Hg, Mo, Ni, Zn and Pb and enriched in Sr, relative to
marine clays. Shele-normalized REE patterns show intermediate REE enrichments
with positive Eu anomalies. Our preliminary results indicate that these New
Zealand sediments have different geochemical signatures than marine clastic
sediments. During the three years of support for the research, the PIs plan to
collect 200 to 300 riverine particulate matter (RPM) samples from streams and
rivers in New Zealand. These samples will be analyzed, using state-of-the-art
techniques in order to establish if the RPM geochemical flux to the oceans from
these high-standing islands are different than from the major riverine flux
established by Martin and Meybeck (1979). If they are, new flux calculations
will be undertaken in order to better quantify the importance of RPM on marine
geochemistry. In addition, samples will be collected from watersheds of similar
geology and climate but of different area and sediment yield in order to
evaluate the importance of storage on the RPM geochemistry. In Year 2, samples
from watersheds of differing geology but similar climate will be compared in
order to establish the linkage between bedrock types and RPM chemistry. All this
work will be done in close cooperation with colleagues at the National Institute
for Water and Atmospheric Research Ltd. in Christchurch, New Zealand.