* 9725507
* U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research:  Database Integration  in the Drosophila Developmental Pathway
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,08/23/1999
* Su-Yun Chung, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 08/23/1999
* USD 88,550.00

9725507 Chung This is a 36 month award proposed by Drs. Su-Yun Chung, Uniformed
Service University of the Health Science, and Subramanian Subbiah, Wistar
Institute, collaborating with Dr. Limsoon Wong, National University of
Singapore. Drs. Su- Yun Chung and Subramanian Subbiah request funds for travel,
communications, laboratory supplies, and computer time to carry out a pilot
experiment involving a data integration and information synthesis system using
the genetic data collected from the fruit fly eye as a model. The purpose of
this study is to develop a database query and integration tool to handle complex
biological problems. Dr. Chung's expertise is in the area of homeobox gene
regulation. Dr. Subbiah is trained in protein structure and function. Their
Singapore counterpart scientist, Dr. Limsoon Wong, is a system scientist with a
strong background in bioinformatics. Their areas of expertise are complimentary
for meeting the project goals. This study addresses a very important fundamental
question of integrating biological information from disparate sources and could
have a significant impact on bioinformatics. This is a cutting edge project,
which will use the very Fast Backbone Network System (vBNS) connection between
the U.S. and Singapore. The project is jointly supported by the Singapore
Science and Technology Board and the NSF.