* 9725042
* Living On Earth
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Stephen Curwood, World Media Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 10/31/2000
* USD 450,033.00

9725042 Curwood ABSTRACT: Living On Earth is a weekly, impartial news journal
devoted exclusively to coverage of ecology that is carried on 274 NPR stations
in the United States. It has had previous support from the Informal Science
Education Program for initial series production and to help expand the series
from a half hour formation to an hour-long show. This grant will enable the
World Media Foundation to deepen and strengthen the reporting of the science and
technology of environmental change by employing a staff science reporter and a
staff researcher with a Ph.D. in biology. The science reporter will enable the
project to respond more quickly to emerging issues, as well as providing more
consistent and better prepared science coverage. The research will help the
producers better interpret new developments and studies, help identify new
topics, and improve accuracy and balance. The series also will add the topic of
marine environments to their major areas of concern. There currently is little
media coverage of the rapid loss of healthy coral reefs, the collapse of
commercial fisheries, and the changing ocean chemistry. The project will
continue to covers such major topics as biological diversity, climate change,
environmental toxicology, and agricultural science. Steve Curwood, the Executive
producer and host of Living on Earth, will continue as the PI for the project.
The science producer/editor will be Dan Grossman. He has a B.S. in physics and a
Ph.D. in political science and has taught science journalism at Boston
University. The project advisory committee consists of Arjun Makhijani, Greg
Watson, Theo Colborn, Catherine Vandermoer, William Moomaw, George Woodwell,
Michael McElroy, Jane Lubechenco, Carl Safina, Sylvia Earle, and Jerry Schubel.
The series is produced by the World Media Foundation in cooperation with WBUR,
National Public Radio, and Harvard University.