* 9725273
* Evolution of a Species Complex During Faunal Turnover:      Morphometric Analyses of the Montastraea Annularis Reef     Coral Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2003
* USD 175,461.00

9725273 Budd More than 60% of the modern Caribbean reef coral fauna arose
between 4-1.5 Ma during an episode of accelerated faunal turnover, documented as
part of previous NSF funded research. The proposed research shifts from a
taxonomically broad characterization of this episode to an in-depth analysis of
some of its most important participants, and focuses on morphologic evolution
within a clade of Montastraea. The selected clade has been ecologically dominant
for the past 30 myr and consists of at least 10 species. Among them are members
of the modern Montastraea annularis species complex, which arose early during
the turnover episode and have widely been used as a model organism in marine
ecology and geology; e.g., to study coral beaching and paleoclimatic change. The
complex has long been thought to represent one species, whose colony morphology
varied extensively in response to light at different reef depths. However,
Knowlton &amp; co-workers have recently used reproductive and molecular data and
field studies of colony morphology to propose that M. 'annularis' is actually a
complex of at least 3 species. A pilot study with Knowlton has shown that,
although the 3 species overlap in traditional morphologic characters, they are
clearly distinct in morphometric analyses of non-traditional characters
including: (1) the 3D relief of septa on calical surfaces and (2) the 2D
structure of the corallite walls. Moreover, evolutionary relationships inferred
from 3D morphometric results correspond with those based on DNA. These findings
suggest that the evolutionary study of faunal turnover may be compromised by the
inadequacy of traditional procedures to consistently recognize genetically
distinct species. The proposed research will therefore develop more refined
morphometric methods for recognizing species in the fossil record and tracing
their evolution through geologic time. It involves: (1) conducting a survey of
morphologic characters using 3D morphometrics to determine which char acters
best match the results of ongoing DNA work by Knowlton &amp; co-workers; (2)
devising a procedure based on a subset of the characters above, which can be
used to recognize species in fossil material and trace them through geologic
time; (3) examining the morphologic stability of these species at intervals of
&lt; 100 kyr through series of Late Pleistocene reef terraces at scattered
geographic locations; (4) Reconstructing the phylogeny of the clade using
combined morphometrics &amp; phylogenetic approaches. In the first 2 sets of
analyses, I will collaborate with Nancy Knowlton, and in the third, with John
Pandolfi. Except for field and shipping expenses, Knowlton &amp; Pandolfi are
funded separately by the Smithsonian Institution. The material will consist of
genetically characterized colonies (provided by Knowlton); newly collected,
ecologically characterized Late Pleistocene colonies (collected with Pandolfi);
and well-dated Oligocene to Early Pleistocene in museum collections, most of
which I made as part of earlier NSF funded work. The results will be used: (1)
to document the timing and pattern of speciation and extinction events within
the M. annularis complex, and relate them to patterns of overall faunal
turnover, and (2) to examine trends of morphologic evolution at various levels
within the clade and interpret their cause. They will thus contribute valuable
information for assessing the roles of external environmental factors and
biological interactions in causing turnover. The proposed research will provide
an elegant model system, integrating molecular, reproductive, morphologic, and
fossil data in an ecologically important but manageable size clade. It will be
the first such system in reef corals to incorporate fossil data and use them for
inferring evolutionary processes. In addition to paleontology, the proposed
research will contribute in important ways to coral reef biology, systematics,
and molecular evolution. Interpretation of modern distributions will be aided by
eval uation of the past ecological roles of these species, new morphological
techniques for reliably separating closely related species will be developed,
and the combination of fossil and molecular data will provide the first
estimates in corals for rates of molecular evolution for relatively recently
diverged taxa. Funds are requested for image analysis equipment; salary for a
grad student R.A. &amp; the PI; field work collecting Late Pleistocene colonies;
and the use of university SEM &amp; confocal microscopes.