* 9725403
* Surface UV Irradiance and PAR Variability over Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* Catherine Gautier-Downes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2002
* USD 521,082.00

9725403 Ricchiazzi The discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole in the early 1980's
focused concern on whether enhanced ultraviolet (UV) surface irradiance levels
due to ozone depletion would have a negative impact on the Southern Ocean
ecosystem. While subsequent photobiology research has shown negative effects on
photoplankton, zooplankton and fish larvae due to increased UV radiation, it is
difficult to extrapolate localized studies to a broad spatial scale. Satellite-
based UV and photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) mapping techniques,
developed through prior research support, offer a way to extend the results of
photobiology point- measurement to large spatial scales. The mapping algorithm
uses specific satellite images of cloud and ozone distribution to estimate UV
and PAR irradiance levels of large geographic areas. The goal of this research
is to test and improve performance of the UV and PAR mapping algorithm. Since a
significant fraction of the overall biological productivity occurs in near-
coastal waters, this project will focus special attention on improving the
performance of the mapping technique near the coast. Simulations made with Monte
Carlo radiative transfer models suggest that these coastal regions are subject
to significant surface irradiance enhancement. The field study will deploy a
newly modified surface radiometer with spectral sensors selected to optimize the
retrieval of cloud optical depth and surface albedo. The improved retrieval
performance of this system should significantly enhance the ability to test the
accuracy of the mapping algorithm. This project will also investigate how the
new AVHRR-3A satellite sensor can be used to improve the algorithm. Initial
analysis indicated that information from this new sensor could be useful for
obtaining much more frequent and accurate surface albedo maps, information that
is a necessary ingredient for the mapping algorithm. These new approaches to
interpreting satellite and surface mea surements will provide information
critical for an interpretation of the effects of ozone reduction on the
biological communities in Antarctica.