* 9725354
* Acquisition of a Four-Circle Single-Crystal Diffractometer  with CCD Detector
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Charles Prewitt, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2000
* USD 117,500.00

9725354 Finger This grant provides partial support of the costs of acquiring a
new four-circle single-crystal X-ray diffractometer with a CCD detector. This
area detector has much higher sensitivity than previous models, and collects
two-dimensional sections of the diffracted intensity that can be combined to
construct a full three-dimensional view of reciprocal space. With such
information, it is possible to study very small or twinned crystals, and to
study diffuse scattering arising from various sources of disorder. The X-ray
group at the Geophysical Laboratory, consisting of Larry Finger, Charles
Prewitt, Robert Hazen, and Hexiong Yang, will develop the necessary techniques
to use the CCD detector system with the diamond-anvil cell. With the new
instrument, it will be possible to measure lattice constants and perform a
crystal- structure refinement in less time than currently used for a lattice-
constant determination. High-pressure crystallography is an essential component
in understanding phase relations in the deep earth. Once this instrument is
installed, 25% of the operating time will be available as a regional resource,
with emphasis on the earth science community. It will also be used as a resource
in the Laboratory's summer intern program, which is funded a by a REU grant. ***