* 9725803
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Organic Carbon Burial, Anoxia, and  Ecological-Evolutionary Events in the Appalachian Basin     During the Middle and Late Devonian (Givetian-Famennian)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,03/02/1999
* Carlton Brett, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/02/1999
* USD 22,115.00

9725803 Brett The widespread but episodic deposition of organic carbon-rich
facies (ORF) in marine basins during Earth history has been recognized as an
important problem in the geological sciences. Water column stratification and
consequent anoxia has commonly been the favored hypothesis to account for
ancient ORF deposition, but in recent years alternate hypotheses have emerged
that highlight the importance of coupled biogeochemical and sedimentological
processes (e.g., high productivity, stratigraphic condensation), and even
suggest that water column anoxia may not have been as prevalent as once thought.
Yet oxygen deficiency, whether as a cause or consequence of organic carbon
burial, has been postulated as a potential driving force for evolutionary change
and extinction during the Phanerozoic. For example, it was recently implicated
as a possible cause of overturn events punctuating distinct Silurian and
Devonian benthic faunas of the Appalachian basin. These benthic faunas are
termed ecological-evolutionary subunits, the pattern of punctuational change at
the community level is called coordinated stasis has rapidly become a forefront
of research in evolutionary paleoecology, very few studies have integrated
analyses of faunal changes with independent assessments of coeval environmental
change, and none have focused on the role of redox dynamics. What are the
spatial and temporal relationships between organic matter burial events and
oxygen deficiency? How does oxygen depletion relate to evolutionary change
within a community, a basin, or an ecosystem? This proposal outlines a plan to
re-evaluate hypotheses for the origin of ORF deposits in the Middle to Late
Devonian Appalachian basin (late Eifelian through early Famennian), and to use
the data collected for this purpose to investigate the causes of faunal stasis
and overturn. A preliminary data set of geochemical analyses from core samples
has been generated (Fig.3, Table 2) that illustrates why previous hypotheses for
the o rigin of ORF in the Appalachian basin need to be updated. This data set
has provided a foundation for the development of working hypotheses relating OFR
deposition and coordinated stasis, as well as a trial for selection of the best
paleoenvironmental parameters to employ in the study. The two year project will
focus on two cores from west central New York that will be analyzed for
sedimentologic and ichnologic trends and sampled for geochemical analyses. Three
types of geochemical data sensitive to redox dynamics will be collected (carbon
isotopes; abundance of C, Fe, S, and P; and concentration of trace metals), and
the results will be compared to a compilation of published and unpublished data
on macrofaunal trends within and around the Appalachian basin. Tests for the
statistical covariance of redox sensitive proxies and faunas will allow the
fundamental hypothesis, that oxygen depletion controls faunal turnover, to be
confirmed or refuted. Alternate mechanisms, such as species-area effects related
to relative sea level changes, will also be considered. In recent years the
importance of changes in ocean circulation and biogeochemistry to past global
change have been increasingly recognized. The results of this study will provide
a major contribution to the understanding of organic carbon accumulation
processes in the evolution of epicontinental foreland basins, and of the
relationship between carbon cycling, redox history, and ecological-evolutionary
events in the rock record.