* 9725326
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Organic Carbon Burial, Anoxia and  Ecological-Evolutionary Events in the Appalachian Basin     During the Middle to Late Devonian (Eifelian-Famennian)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Timothy Lyons, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 31,297.00

9725326 Lyons The widespread but episodic deposition of organic carbon-rich
facies (ORF) in marine basins during Earth history has been recognized as an
important problem in the geological sciences. Water column stratification and
consequent anoxia has commonly been the favored hypothesis to account for
ancient ORF deposition, but in recent years alternate hypotheses have emerged
that highlight the importance of coupled biogeochemical and sedimentological
processes (e.g., high productivity, stratigraphic condensation), and even
suggest that water column anoxia may not have been as prevalent as once thought.
Yet oxygen deficiency, whether as a cause or consequence of organic carbon
burial, has been postulated as a potential driving force for evolutionary change
and extinction during the Phanerozoic. For example, it was recently implicated
as a possible cause of overturn events punctuating distinct Silurian and
Devonian benthic faunas of the Appalachian basin. These benthic faunas are
termed ecological-evolutionary subunits. The pattern of long-term stability and
punctuated change at the community level is called coordinated stasis, and many
of the identified faunal overturns are coincident with ORF deposits. Although
coordinated stasis has rapidly become a forefront of research in evolutionary
paleoecology, very few studies have integrated anallyses of faunal changes with
independent assessments of coeval environmental change, and none have focused on
the role of oxidation-reduction chemistry at or near the sediment-water
interface (redox dynamics). What are the spatial and temporal relationships
between organic matter burial events and oxygen deficiency? How does oxygen
depletion relate to evolutionary change within a community, a basin, or an
ecosystem? This proposal outlines a plan to re-evaluate hypotheses for the
origin of ORF deposits in the Middle to Late Devonian Appalachian basin (late
Eifelian through early Famennian), and to use the data collected for this
purpose to inv estigate the causes of faunal stasis and overturn. A preliminary
data set of geochemical analyses from core samples has been generated (Fig. 3,
Table 2) that illustrates why previous hypotheses for the origin of ORF in the
Appalchian basin need to be reconsidered. This data set has provided a
foundation for the development of working hypotheses relating ORF deposition and
coordinated stasis, as well as a trial for selection of the best
paleoenvironmental parameters to employ in the study. The two year project will
focus on two cores from west central New York that will be analyzed for
sedimentologic and ichnologic trends and sampled for geochemical analyses. Three
types of geochemical data sensitive to redox dynamics will be collected (carbon
isotopes; abundance of C, Fe, S, and P; and concentrationof trace metals), and
the results will be compared to a compilation of published and unpublished data
on macrofaunal trends within and around the Appalachian basin. Tests for the
statistical covariance of redox sensitive proxies and faunas will allow the
fundamental hypothesis, that oxygen depletion controls faunal turnover, to be
confirmed or refuted. Alternate mechanisms, such as species-area effects related
to relative sea level changes, will also be considered. Past global climate and
environmental changes have been linked to variability in ocean circulation and
biogeochemical processes/cycles. This study is directed at assessing the linkage
between physical, chemical, and biological processes within an ancient marine
system, and the results will provide important constraints for currently
evolving ideas about past global change. The research will make a significant
contribution to the understanding of organic carbon accumulation processes in
the evolution of epicontinental foreland basins, and of the relationship between
carbon cycling, redox history, and ecological-evolutionary events in the rock
record.