* 9725298
* Second-Phase Isotopic and Trace Element Studies of the DufekLayered Mafic Intrusion and Comparisons with Dikes and Sillsof the Ferrar Magmatic Province
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2001
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2001
* USD 170,000.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
Foundation, supports research to continue isotopic and trace element studies of
the Dufek layered mafic intrusion in the Pensacola Mountains, Antarctica. This
research utilizes 338 samples that were collected on field expeditions in 1993
and 1995. The Dufek intrusion is one of the largest bodies of its kind in the
world, and mineralogical relationships preserved in it offer insights
crystallization and chemical differentiation processes in large volumes of
relatively homogeneous magmas. New work to be done under this project will focus
on measuring elemental concentrations and isotopic ratios of Nd, Sr, and Pb
within individual mineral grains from two stratigraphic intervals in the
intrusion (the Frost Pyroxenite to Spear Anorthosite section and the Lower
Inclusion Member to Upper Inclusion Member section). These analyses will be used
to model chemical differentiation of key minerals during the crystallization
process and to identify possible chemical signatures of magma chamber recharge
event or magma contamination by melting of the surrounding wall rocks which are
known to occur in large mafic magma bodies. Both sequences of rock contain
abrupt changes in mineralogy and chemical composition. These chemical and
mineralogical studies will allow comparison of the Dufek to the intrusive sills
of the Ferrar Group from other parts of the Transantarctic Mountains. Inasmuch
as data from the first phase of study suggested that assimilation and fractional
crystallization were important processes in the Dufek magma chamber, the new
data acquired under this project will also be modeled using differential
equations that calculate the mass rate of assimilation of surrounding rock
relative to crystallization within the intrusion.