* 9725945
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Study of Pattern Formation in Growing Ice Crystals and Influence of Microscopic        Interfacial Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* John Wettlaufer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 19,058.00

9725945 Wettlaufer This award supports a three year collaborative research
project between Professor John Wettlaufer of the University of Washington and
Professor Yoshinori Furukawa of Hokkaido University in Japan. The researchers
will be undertaking studies relating to pattern formation in growing ice
crystals and the influence of microscopic interfacial structure. This involves
understanding the dynamics of liquid water existing at the boundaries of ice
crystals at temperatures below the freezing point of pure water. This process,
called premelting, has significant consequences in the redistributing of brine
in sea ice, the apparent migrating of contaminants through glacier ice, and the
rate of frost heave and weathering in soils and rocks. The experimental and
theoretical program will include studies of ice crystal growth and unfrozen
water transport between crystals as functions of temperature and temperature
differences, as well as such studies between ice crystals and various
substrates. An important objective will be the development of useful models for
ice growth and impurity transport under natural conditions in order to assess
how grain interfaces may serve as chemical conduits. This project brings
together the efforts of two laboratories that have complimentary expertise,
research capabilities and equipment. The research should provide new insights
into the theory of near equilibrium growth and melting of ice. The project is
technically relevant because surface phase transitions occur in a host of
materials, many of which are important to industrial processing. It is also
environmentally relevant since the most abundant crystal growth problems in the
natural environment involve ice. Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***