* 9725271
* Wireless Channel Characterization with Implications on      Coding and Throughput Optimization for Multiuser Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 272,223.00

In this project, flexible and robust models for mobile radio channels will be
created and used in the analysis of joint detection and decoding algorithms and
for throughput optimization of multiuser wireless systems. The research has
three closely related thrusts. In the first component, fundamental issues in
estimation, equalization and modeling of multipath fading channels will be
addressed. Accurate models will be selected for rapidly time-varying mobile
radio channels, and the impact of the nature of propagation on estimating
channel coefficients will be investigated. A performance comparison of robust
channel estimation and adaptive equalization techniques will be carried out,
taking into account issues arising due to error propagation. Robust diversity
combining techniques will be developed. The other two directions will utilize
channel modeling and estimation techniques developed in the first component of
this project. Reliable low complexity detection methods for multiuser systems
with error control coding will be the focus of the second component. Joint
equalization, multiuser detection, and decoding will be addressed taking into
account the effects of interleaving and error propagation. In the third
component, the throughput of realistic wireless spread spectrum packet radio
networks (PRNs) with multiuser detection will be evaluated. In this work,
accurate channel models, reliable joint detection and decoding methods, and
antenna diversity techniques will be utilized to optimize the throughput.
Receiver complexity, the coding-spreading trade-off, and access schemes will be
considered in this optimization. The