* 9725037
* Condensed Matter - Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Philip Allen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2000
* USD 285,000.00

Allen 9725037 This is a renewal award to conduct theoretical research on
metallic, or nearly metallic, oxides and on glasses. The normal modes of thermal
vibration in glassy solids have been characterized in computer studies of up to
4096 atoms. These models yield realistic vibrations for amorphous silicon. Four
new projects are planned: (1) Clarify the concept of diffusivity of normal
modes; (2) Find connections between low energy "resonant"modes and low energy
structural rearrangements which couple strongly to the resonant modes; (3)
Develop a theory of the viscosity of the thermal vibrations and apply this to
the study of internal friction in glasses; (4) Develop a new theory of hopping
conduction of heat when localized states are concentrated. Although most
important oxides are insulating, some are very good metals and the most
interesting ones are on the borderline. The transition from metallic to
insulating has usually two equally strong and very different driving forces,
Coulomb correlation and lattice distortion. The former causes great theoretical
difficulty even in the simplest fully interacting model, whereas the latter,
solvable in principle, has multiple manifestations depending on the chemical
species and crystal structure. A study of BaBiO3, where Coulomb effects are
minimal, is currently being completed. To extract the common physics of many
oxides, a simplified model due to Rice and Sneddon is used, where the only
lattice degrees of freedom is the displacement of oxygen atoms parallel to the
metal-oxygen bond. This not only captures the breathing distortion that drives
the Bi(3+)/Bi(5+) disproportionation (and causes insulating behavior), but also
captures the principle Jahn- Teller displacement which couples to the metal-
insulator behavior of Eg metals and T2g metals and many isoelectronic materials.
%%% This theoretical research will continue studies of metal oxide materials and
their unusual properties. These materials are intr iguing due to their widely
varied properties. Some conduct electricity, like normal metals, while others
are insulating. Some are on the borderline between metallic properties and
insulating properties. The research supported by this grant will investigate
this difficult, but technologically important class of materials. ***