* 9725158
* Sudbury Igneous Complex:  The Ultimate Test of the Null     Hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Bruce Marsh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2001
* USD 165,000.00

9725158 Marsh It has long been a mystery why some large bodies of igneous rock
are nearly uniform and other outwardly similar bodies are not. There are two
groups, those initially containing large crystals (phenocrysts) and those
initially free of phenocrysts. The former tend toward compositional and textural
uniformity. Crystal nucleation and growth seem to be controlled by upper and
lower inward propagating solidification fronts (SF) that stifle crystal
fractionation. The Null Hypothesis says that sheet-like magmas initially free of
phenocrysts undergo little differentiation. We have tested this hypothesis on a
thick (330 m) diabase sill and find it holds. To be a general, fundamental
concept it must be tested on a large body. The Sudbury Igneous Complex (SIC) is
an ideal large body to both test the Null Hypothesis and also to gain insight
into the solidification dynamics of phenocryst free systems. The history of
solidification will be tracked by making a comprehensive study doing Crystal
Size Distributions (CSDs) of the SIC using a series of drill cores through the
entire body. For this purpose, Falconbridge Limited has allowed unlimited access
to their vast holdings of core from the SIC. This work will contribute
substantially to and complement other studies of Sudbury, and will contribute
fundamentally to the understanding of large magmatic systems.