* 9725035
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Fairweather-St. Elias Orogenic System:  A Slip-Partitioned Transpressional Orogen?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Terry Pavlis, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Goldstein
* 02/28/2002
* USD 204,790.00

9725035 Pavlis A lingering controversy in plate tectonics surrounds the way in
which continental crusts interact in collision zones. The arguments center on if
and how strain is partitioned among or around several possible crustal blocks.
In southeast Alaska the St. Elias collision region includes the largest
concentration of high peaks in North America. The conventional explanation for
this region is that a continental microplate (the Yakutat block) is converging
with the North American plate. An alternative hypothesis holds that slip is
partitioned into a strike-slip component and a contractional component allowing
a transpressional boundary and that microplates are not involved. This Pavlis
and Bruhn study will test these hypotheses by looking for the predictions of the
second. In particular, field mapping and structural analysis will be done to
evaluate recent an active motion on the predicted strike-slip faults, and
examining off-shore seismic reflection data will be analyzed to look for
deformation in the predicted off shore fold and thrust belt. The results will
bear directly on the resolving the controversy here in Alaska, but will also
reveal generic results that will allow generalizing about the behavior of
transpressive plate boundaries in general.