* 9725554
* Developing a Cosmogenic Chronology of Late-Pleistocene      Glaciation, Wallowa Mountains, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 115,895.00

9725554 Clark Glacial record are an important and, in many areas, the only
archive of late-Pleistocene climate variability from the western U.S. Alpine
glaciers are sensitive to relatively small climatic perturbations and can
respond rapidly (on order of 100-101 km within 101-102yr) to relatively small
climate change (on order of 1(-2( K). Developing a chronology of alpine
glaciation thus represents a significant strategy for extracting paleoclimate
information associated with late-Pleistocene climate change. Exposure-ages of
large boulders from moraines using cosmogenic nuclides offer great promise for
developing such chronologies, but questions remain as to the level of resolution
that such an exposure-age chronology can achieve. Our primary objective is to
directly date a well-preserved moraine sequence in the Wallowa Mountains, OR
using cosmogenic nuclides in order to develop a numerical chronology of mountain
glacier fluctuations. In addition, we will be able to address the issue of
whether exposure ages of closely spaced; well-preserved moraines having similar
weathering characteristics can resolve significant differences (i.e., 5-10 ka)
in the timing of moraine formation. Regardless of the resolution issue, these
data will contribute geographic coverage to existing glacial records for
examining spatial and temporal late-Pleistocene mountain glacier variability. As
a further contribution to evaluating an exposure-age chronology based on
cosmogenic nuclides, we also propose sampling moraines deposited by the northern
Yellowstone outlet glacier. The existing U-series and radiocarbon chronology
indicate that the moraines represent 3 major advances of the outlet glacier
between 14 and 30 ka. Our Yellowstone data thus will compare the age resolution
of a cosmogenic chronology with an established (U-series) chronology.