* 9725769
* Dolphins
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Greg MacGillivray, MacGillivray Freeman Films
* Continuing grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,670,000.00

9725769 MacGillivray MacGillivray Freeman Films, in collaboration with Texan A&M
University's Marine Mammal Research Program, Mote Marine Laboratory, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, ASPIRA Association, Inc, and Media Education
Consultants, is producing a 40 minute, large format film on wild dolphins. The
film will feature the research being done by two scientists: Dr. Kathleen
Dudzinski, a young marine scientist investigating dolphin communication and
social systems, and Alejandro Acevedo-Gutierrez, a young Hispanic Ph.D.
researching dolphin behavior and ecology. The film will inform the audiences
about the methods, tools and significance of dolphin research and immerse them
in on-going scientific investigations of wild dolphins in their natural habitat.
The film will be supported by teacher's guides, a Science Career Exploration
Unit for Hispanic youth distributed through ASPIRA, a School Trip Package for
distribution to 11,000 teachers, and a Museum Educator Kit. The project also
will provide theaters with 2,000 free passes for minority and low-income
outreach programs. Greg MacGillivray, President of MacGillivray Freeman Films
will be Executive Producer/Co-Producer/Co-Director/Co-Director of Photography.
The other Co-Producer will be Alec Lorimore, Vice President for Film Production
and Development at MacGillivray Freeman Films. The Co-Director/Co-Director of
Photography will be Bob Talbot, an independent marine photographer. Dr. Bernd
Wursig, Professor of Marine Mammalogy, Director of the Marine Mammal research
Program, and Co-Director of the Institute of Marine Life Science at Texas A&M
University will serve as the chief content advisor. Other science advisors
include Alejandro Acevedo-Gutierrez, Kathleen Dudzinski, Randy Wells, Peter
Tyack, and the staff scientists from the Mote Marine Laboratory. Informal
science education and outreach advisors include Raylene Decatur, David Ellis,
Freda Nicholson, Simone Bloom-Nathan, and Hilda Crespo. Project evaluation will
be conducted by Barbara Flagg.