* 9725993
* Acquisition of Optical Second Harmonic Generation           Instrumentation for the Study of Molecular Adsorption at    the Mineral/Water Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2000
* USD 40,600.00

9725993 Eggleston This grant provides partial support of the costs of acquiring
components to develop optical second harmonic generation (SHG) instrumentation
to study molecular structure of adsorbed organic molecules on mineral surfaces.
Coupled with the existing scanning probe microscope (EAR-9634143) at the
University of Wyoming, this technique could yield unprecedented information on
the orientation of adsorbed organics on mineral surfaces with single-crystal
face specificity. SHG promises significant advantages over other analytical
techniques for the analysis of molecular structure at mineral-fluid interfaces
(i.e. X-ray absorption spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy), the most important being that is useable in situ, at atmospheric
pressure, and on non-powdered samples. Knowledge of the atomic-scale structure
of fluid-rock geochemical interactions is fundamental to studies of mineral
dissolution/growth and the fate of environmental pollutants. Therefore,
analytical advances in mineral surface chemistry are at the frontier of our
understanding of problems of pressing environmental significance. To that end,
development of SHG should advance our knowledge of the pH dependency of surface
electric fields, molecular adsorption and orientation, and fundamental electron
transfer properties of redox centers at mineral surfaces. ***