* 9725728
* Collaborative Research:  Magmatic Chronology, Processes,    and Composition of the Bingham Porphyry Cu-Au-Mo System,    Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Jeffrey Keith, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Glen S. Mattioli
* 12/31/2001
* USD 130,000.00

9725728 Keith As a result of over 100 years of mining, drilling, and
exploration, the Bingham porphyry copper-gold-molybdenum deposit in Utah is the
most well-exposed porphyry copper deposit in the world, in addition to being the
largest in North America. Our recent work at Bingham has demonstrated that
unusual primitive alkaline magma (minette) was intermixed with more normal
latitic magma at the approximate time of ore formation. The minette magma is
among the most copper- and sulfur-rich magmas of this age in western North
America and may have contributed metals and sulfur to this world-class deposit.
We will develop a new model for formation of Bingham-type ore deposits that
accounts for the role of magmatic sulfides and primitive alkaline magma in ore
formation. The resulting model could be used to better understand and explore
for porphyry copper deposits in the United States and throughout the world in
order to develop adequate supplies of this strategic metal. To accomplish these
goals, geologic mapping, sampling, and whole-rock analysis, by a wide variety of
methods, will be used to characterize each volcanic and intrusive lithology.
Analysis of minerals erupted from this system will be done to determine the
temperature, pressure, and volatile fugacities of ore-related magmas. Isotopic
analysis of minerals will be used to determine the age and origin of ore-related
magmas and possible ore-forming processes.