* 9725883
* Collaborative Research:  Magnetotelluric Transect of a      Modern Continent-Continent Collisional Orogen:  The SouthernAlps, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 02/29/2000
* USD 79,010.00

9725883 Wannamaker On the South Island of New Zealand, convergence of the
Pacific and Australian plates has given rise to a relatively narrow (~80 km
wide) and less complex zone of active mountain building than in most other
regions of the world. The dominant structural elements of the plate boundary are
the Southern Alps where vertical movement and accompanying rates of erosion are
among the highest in the world, and the Alpine Fault which has components of
both strike- slip and dip-slip movement. The magnetotelluric work that willl be
done under this project is part of a four year cooperative study of the South
Island plate boundary involving U.S. and New Zealand scientists at USC, MIT,
Woods Hole, UC Berkeley, Purdue, San Diego State, Utah, Institute for Geological
and Nuclear Sciences (IGNS, NZ), Victoria University (NZ), and Otago (NZ).
Support is being provided by both countries. The centerpiece of the project is a
pair of multifaceted geophysical transects across the South Island including
active source seismology, offshore multichannel and OBS data acquisition,
passive seismology, petrophysics, magnetotellurics, gravity measurements, and
surface geology. Experiments are aimed at delineating the crustal and upper
mantle structure beneath the Southern Alps and adjacent regions. MT data
collected so far has led to a high-quality magnetotelluric transect across the
central South Island. The MT response of the interior of this orogen holds the
exciting promise of understanding the thermal regime and rheology of the South
Island at depth. The complete resistivity structure will provide essential
bounds on crustal strain partitioning, metamorphism in the lower crust, relative
deformation of the crust versus the mantle, compensation of the South Island
uplift, and several other important processes. However, there presently exists a
crucial gap in the MT coverage along the transect due to lack of land vehicle
access across the principal region of u plift through the Main Divide of the
South Island. The data collected in this project will close this gap in coverage
with six-eight new MT soundings supported by helicopter transport. Personnel
from the IGNS will participate in this effort and will provide manpower and
logistical support. ***