* 9725914
* WORKSHOP:  Management of Technology and the Paradigm Shift  in Education in Response to the Technology Revolution;      Orlando, FL, February 16-20, 1998
* ENG,IIP
* 06/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Tarek Khalil, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 30,000.00

9725914 Khalil The University of Miami will organize a workshop to examine the
industry's demand for education in the Management of Technology (MOT) field. The
fast pace of technological change and the globalization of the marketplace are
forcing industry to change. These changes require personnel who are educated and
capable of dealing with the emerging paradigms of technology and business.
Educational programs have been slow in their response to the need for MOT
education. They continue to compartmentalize education into either engineering
or business schools, and barriers motivated primarily by turf protection
continue to exist. The proposed workshop will identify the needs that justify
the creation of MOT programs as well as the rationale for revamping existing
curricula in science, engineering, and business schools. The participants will
examine whether there is a demand for MOT education, and if so, what its content
should be. They also will examine whether education is meeting that demand. This
approach is based on listening to industry. Representatives from major
industrial corporations will be invited to the workshop. In preparation for it,
they will be asked to attend or to send a representative to the Seventh
International Conference on Management of Technology in Orlando, Florida in
February 1998. Each invitee will be asked to prepare a short position paper
summarizing his/her industry's demand for education and training in MOT. A
follow-up one-day workshop to discuss responses and summarize ideas will be held
in late March or early April, and a report will be published in the summer of
1998. It is postulated that if there is an industrial demand and the demands are
clarified, universities are likely to respond.