* 9725462
* Semiclassical Molecular Dynamics in Extended Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Vartkess Apkarian, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 04/30/2001
* USD 325,700.00

V. Ara Apkarian is suported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to perform semiclassical molecular dynamics simulations of
quantum dynamic effects in extended systems. This approach has already been
developed and employed successfully for gas-phase spectroscopy. The methodology
is now being applied to the spectroscopy of cryogenic solids, condensed
hydrogen, and hydrogen-bonded networks, as well as room-temperature liquid
resonance-Raman and photon-echo spectroscopies. Quantum effects are simulated
with a `black box` dependent only on inputted potential energy parameters. Due
to the many degrees of freedom in these applications, the computations are very
intensive. This is partially remedied by relying on short-time propagation with
wavefunction reconstruction through repeated Monte Carlo sampling. In order to
understand quantum dynamics in systems of large dimensionality, such as liquids
and solids, new simulation methods are needed. In condensed phase spectroscopy
in particular, connecting observables to the underlying molecular structures and
their motions currently relies on approximate techniques. Theoretical
developments that aim toward a microscopic understanding of condensed phase
spectra are invaluable tools in the interpretation and design of experiments.