* 9726588
* Reproduction, Habitat, and Phylogeny: A Study of the        Chlorophycean Flagellates
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Mark Buchheim, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9726588 Buchheim The unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas and its flagellate
allies are traditionally regarded as representing the simplest of freshwater
organisms. However, when one takes a closer look, these green algae are far from
simple. They are diverse in morphology (for example, some species are
unicellular while others form colonies), habitats (different species occur in
ponds, seashores, soils, even snow), and modes of reproduction. Comparisons of
DNA sequences from these algae have revealed unrecognized additional diversity,
and this molecular diversity is not always consistent with perceptions of
species diversity that are based on morphology. For example, in some cases,
species from comparable habitats (especially those from snow) are close
relatives, according to molecular sequence information; the relationship is not
necessarily obvious from the appearance of the species under the microscope. In
this study, Mark Buchheim will obtain new DNA sequence data from the nuclear and
chloroplast genomes of green algae related to Chlamydomonas, and use these data
to produce new, more informative reconstructions of the phylogenetic
relationships among these algae. Dr. Buchheim will explore the taxonomic
boundaries among these algae, determine to what degree habitat preferences of
species are correlated with their phylogeny, and explore the relationship
between history of descent and mode of reproduction. In this way, an ecological
dimension will be added to studies of the taxonomy and phylogeny of these
"simple" green algae.