* 9726502
* The Genetic Control and Evolutionary Significance of a      Barrier to Interspecific Hybridization
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Daniel Howard, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2002
* USD 405,000.00

Howard 9726502 Ten years of research have demonstrated that the ground crickets,
Allonemobius fasciatus and A. socius, are reproductively isolated by conspecific
sperm precedence. In other words, the two species produce few hybrids in nature
because sperm from one species operates poorly in the reproductive tract of
females from the other species. This is one of the very few situations in which
biologists have a clear understanding of the trait that reproductively isolates
two closely related species. The genetic control of this reproductive barrier
will be assessed through a quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping study. This is
a relatively new technique that allows biologists to enumerate and locate the
genes (or QTLs) that control a complex trait, such as conspecific sperm
precedence. The mapping populations will be large enough to detect QTLs that
have even a small effect on conspecific sperm precedence. Thus the study will
allow a clear evaluation of the role of genes with large effects and the role of
genes with small effects on the development of reproductive isolation. Once QTLs
have been identified, the effects of each will be examined on an individual
basis. Through carefully designed genetic crosses, single QTLs from A. fasciatus
will be introduced into A. socius and vice-versa. The crickets so produced will
allow a QTL to be studied in isolation from its usual genetic background, and
thereby directly test the role of the QTL in controlling conspecific sperm
precedence. Finally, recent studies indicate that conspecific sperm precedence
evolves quickly and may often be the first reproductive barrier to arise between
diverging populations. Therefore, it is important to understand how such a
barrier influences zones of overlap between closely related species. The effect
of conspecific sperm precedence on zones of overlap will be analyzed through a
genetic and demographic modeling approach. Speciation, the process by which new
species are formed and ther efore the process responsible for the diversity of
life on earth, is relatively poorly understood by biologists. This is a critical
shortcoming in humanity's efforts to preserve species diversity, which cannot
succeed unless new species continue to be generated. Reaching an understanding
of the genetic basis of reproductive barriers between closely related species
has proven particularly difficult. The difficulty can be attributed to two
factors: 1) the multi-faceted nature of reproductive isolation makes it hard to
identify the traits that isolate two species, and 2) the tools necessary to
dissect complex traits were not, until recently, available. In the case of A.
fasciatus and A. socius the first difficulty was overcome by ten years of
painstaking research. The second difficulty has been overcome by recent advances
in genetics that have led to the development of markers that can be mapped in
virtually any organism. Mapped markers allow the effects of different regions of
the genome on a reproductive barrier to be monitored. Combining the current
understanding of the Allonemobius system with these new developments in genetics
will provide unprecedented insight into the genetics of reproductive barriers.
In particular, the proposed research will allow a determination of whether
reproductive isolation between A. fasciatus and A. socius is controlled by a few
genes of major effect or by many genes of small effect. This distinction is at
the center of a debate that has raged for more than a century and is critical
for understanding whether spatial separation of populations is necessary for
speciation and whether the time required for speciation is large or small.
Finally, the study of the genetic control of conspecific sperm precedence boils
down to the study of the genetic control of fertility problems. Thus, the
insights into infertility provided by this research will be relevant to many
organisms, including humans.