* 9726927
* Collaborative Research:  Impacts of a Strong Interactor     Along a Productivity Gradient:  Linking Watersheds with     Reservoir Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Patricia Soranno, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Michener
* 08/31/2002
* USD 107,399.00

9726927&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soranno and
Bremigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this multi-investigator
collaborative proposal the PIs propose an ambitious project that will utilize
the diverse strengths of the participants in a multi-faceted investigation of an
aquatic food web. Specifically, they will study how gizzard shad influence the
trophic structure and community organization in reservoirs and tie this to
watershed processes. They examine the central question of whether or not the
influence of shad on different groups of organisms is dependent upon lake
productivity. Gizzard shade is an omnivorous fish that dominates warm-water lake
and reservoir food webs and becomes more important as productivity increases.
This research will quantify the watershed features that lead to gizzard shade
dominance and investigate how impacts of gizzard shade vary across the
productivity gradient. The study will test hypotheses related to the factors
causing gizzard shade dominance in hypereutrophic systems and how gizzard shade
impacts vary with productivity. Specifically, this research will examine the
relationships between nutrient loading, productivity and gizzard shade abundance
and effects in 12 Ohio reservoirs, ranging from mesotrophic to hypereutrophic.
These comparative field studies will be coupled with a modeling effort aimed at
relating these patterns to a broadly applicable theory of aquatic food webs and
ecosystem processes.&lt;br/&gt;