* 9726205
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Novel Multifunctional       Peptides in Insects and Their Role in Cellular Immunity
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Michael Strand, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 20,600.00

9726205 Strand This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Professor Michael Strand of the University of Wisconsin and Professor
Yoichi Hyakawa of Hokkaido University in Japan. The researchers will undertake a
study of novel multifunctional peptides in insects and their role in cellular
immunity. The investigators believe that the biological activities reported for
PSPl and GBP reflect a multifunctional role for this family of peptides in
response to invasion by infectious agents. They plan to characterize the
function of these peptides in insect immunity. The specific objectives are: (l)
compare the functional activities of PSPl and GBP in P.includens and P.separata;
(2) isolate a PSPl cDNA and characterize its expression during wounding and
encapsulation; and (3) develop an in vitro system for production of PSPl/GBP and
investigate its processing. The long-range goal of the research is to understand
the function of these peptides in invertebrate immunity. This project brings
together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise,
research capabilities and equipment. Both researchers were studying different
biological processes related to parasitism in larvae of noctuid moths and
converged upon the same hemolymph peptide as the biological effector molecule
for stimulating plasmatocyte spreading and for retarding development through
altering juvenile hormone level. The planned experiments will enable the
researchers to work together to understand the functions of this family of
peptides. Events associated with formation of hemocyte clots and capsules are
fundamentally conserved across most insects and many other invertebrates.
Therefore, results of this research will be relevant to many taxa and will
provide an important foundation for future comparative studies. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understandin g and cooperation. ***