* 9726556
* Dissertation Research: Schooling and Population Growth in   Cameroom
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Caroline Bledsoe, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1999
* USD 10,325.00

Throughout the developing world, educated women bear fewer children, and bear
them later than do uneducated women. Demographic modernization theory proposes
that schooling itself induces women to bear fewer children; this project
suggests instead that cumulative processes of selection over the life course
produce the observed correlation. Selection includes both intentional choices
and the structural contexts in which people make choices. This dissertation
project involves an anthropology student from Northwestern University, studying
how processes of selection into and out of a Catholic school in Cameroon,
Africa, influence the life-historical moment at which a woman bears her first
child. The project will collect demographic event histories and conduct open
ended life history interviews with students and former students of a private
secondary school. The parents will be interviewed about socialization and
schooling choices for their children, and preadolescent girls will be
interviewed about their aspirations for school, career and family. Finally the
student will conduct participant observation at the school itself to understand
the social organization of the school and its effect on the student's perceived
opportunities. This research is important because it will advance our
understanding of a key relationship affecting population growth in the
developing world, as well as contribute to the training of young social
scientist and advancing our expertise about this important region of the world.