* 9726524
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  The Effects of Environmental     Conditions on CO2 Fixation and the Photosynthetic Apparatus
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1998,04/30/1999
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1999
* USD 12,000.00

9726524 Grossman This award supports the participation of American scientists
and engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on the effects of environmental conditions
on CO2 fixation and the photosynthetic apparatus, to be held in Pacific Grove,
California in November, 1998. The co-organizers are Dr. Arthur Grossman of the
Carnegie Institution of Washington and Professor Tatsuo Omata of Nagoya
University in Japan. The emphasis of the seminar will be on the ways in which
photosynthetic organisms cope with their environment and will include
researchers from different disciplines; some of these disciplines emphasize a
reductionist approach while others view acclimation processes at the more global
scale. The former gains strength by helping to provide detailed mechanistic
information that can help us predict the consequences of change, while the
latter can often identify major large scale problems and give the reductionists
a perspective on the problem. A binational dialogue among the researchers of
different disciplines will help identify important areas for further analysis
and lead to collaborative efforts to meet the challenge of coping with changing
environmental conditions. Developing a more detailed understanding of this broad
area of research will help in understanding factors that limit plant growth and
productivity in given environments. Additionally, it might enable us to extend
the range of environments in which specific plants can survive and might also
provide new insights into the ways in which long-term changes in the atmosphere
of the earth (gas composition, incident light intensity and quality and
temperature) will affect the growth and photosynthetic activity of plants. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve
younger researchers, postdoctoral resea rchers and graduate students.
Proceedings of the meeting are expected to be made available by the organizers.
***