* 9726009
* A Test for the Interpreted Cause of the Mid-Miocene         "Monterey Excursion" Using the Boron Isotopic Composition   of Benthic Foraminifera
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 109,000.00

9726009 Hemming A major challenge to earth scientists is to document past
changes in the earth's atmosphere and chemistry, and to constrain the causes of
those changes. We propose to use the boron isotopic composition of mid-Miocene
benthic foraminifera to test the hypothesis of Woodruff and Savin (1991) that
the "Monterey Excursion", a time of anomalously high d13C compositions in
benthic foraminifera, was the result of carbon fixation which lowered
atmospheric CO2. The boron isotopic composition of foraminifera is an ideal way
to test this hypothesis, as the lower pCO2 should result in higher ocean pH (and
hence higher d11B values) at this interval. The ability to determine paleo-pH
will allow us to better understand the CO2-H2O equilibrium between oceans and
atmosphere in the past, which will contribute to our knowledge of global climate
change and the processes that lead to glaciations. This in turn may help us to
better understand recent changes in earth's chemistry, such as the 30% increase
in atmospheric CO2 that resulted from fossil fuel burning. Recent evidence
suggests that the boron isotopic composition of carbonates is controlled by the
pH of their parent fluid (e.g., Vengosh et al., 1991; Hemming and Hanson, 1992;
Spivack et al., 1993; Hemming et al., 1995). Success in the application of boron
isotopes as a pH proxy for Pleistocene glacial oceans (Sanyal et al., 1995;
Sanyal et al., in press) lays the foundation for looking at ocean chemistry
further back in geologic time. The viability of this tool is dependent on
preservation of a primary marine signal in the foraminifera. The marine
composition appears to be preserved in the samples studied by Sanyal et al.
(1995), but preservation needs to be evaluated in older samples. The time
interval of interest to our study was a period of particularly high
preservation, so we are reasonably confident that it will be possible to
determine primary marine boron isotope signatures through the mid-Miocene.