* 9726116
* Innovative, Internet-Based Protocols for the Rapid          Acquisition of Biodiversity Collection Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Robert Haynes, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research proposes to develop innovative data
acquisition protocols for information associated plant biodiversity voucher
collections. The conceptual innovation of the proposed work is the separation of
the process of specimen data acquisition from the processes of keystroke data
entry. Acquisition of data will be accomplished by imaging plant specimens, in
situ, within the collection galleries. The images will then be communicated over
the Internet to a remote data entry contractor where the scientific data within
the image will be converted to structured data records and then returned via the
Internet to the collection. This data acquisition protocol development project
is significant for two reasons: 1) There are an estimated 60+ million plant
specimens in research collections in the U.S. alone. Each specimen includes
historical distribution data on the world's flora and data from only an
estimated 2% of the specimens in U.S. collections have been captured in
automated systems. This information stored in museum cabinets is the result of
300 years of biodiversity inventories on the planet and represents a monumental
human and financial investment in the US biological infrastructure. 2) The
project is critically examining the scientific and management components of data
entry protocols, with the primary objective of minimizing cost. The largest
impediment to bringing the data archived on the labels of 60 million plant
specimens into currency is the scale of the challenge. This project will examine
several work protocol variations to attempt to find efficient and economically
scalable techniques that could be implemented generically across the collections
community for the rapid development of computerized indexes of the holdings of
biodiversity research institutions. The results of this work will likely
contribute significantly to the National Biological Infrastructure (NBII) by
producing tools, protocols and standards for rapid data entry from biological
collections.