* 9726683
* Epsiodic Events and Cross-Margin Transport in the Great     Lakes:  HF Radar Observations of Currents, Winds and Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* John Vesecky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/2002
* USD 537,781.00

9726683 Vesecky Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This
collaborative research project between investigators from 13 academic and
government research institutions is being conducted under the auspices of the
NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program.
This 5-year research program will focus on the importance of episodic events on
nearshore-offshore transport and subsequent ecological consequences. The study
seeks to 1) determine what processes control the cross-margin (inshore to
offshore) transport of biological, chemical, and geological materials in the
coastal margins of the Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test scientific
strategies for assessing, quantifying, and predicting the impacts of multiple
stresses both natural and anthropogenic, in the Great Lakes or selected coastal
sub- regions. A tight coupling between contaminated sediments and overlying
water exists in lakes and coastal ecosystems through the process of sediment
resuspension. Satellite observations in Lake Michigan illustrate an annually
recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km wide plume of
resuspended material extending over 200 km along the southern shores of the
lake. Preliminary evidence indicates that this episodic event may be the major
mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan. This type of
event impacts recycling of biogeochemically important materials (BIMS),
ecosystem responses, cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The program
results will be applicable to similar events in many coastal areas. This
comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement an integrated
observational program and numerical modeling effort to identify, quantify, and
develop prediction tools for the winter- spring resuspension event and to assess
the impact of this event on the transport and transform ation of BIMS and on
lake ecology. This component of the study focuses on real time measurements of
key air and water variables necessary for the observational, modeling and
forecasting activities, in particular surface currents, winds and waves that are
pertinent to the overall objectives. Two multifrequency HF radar units will be
deployed along the shore of lower Lake Michigan to provide real time
observations of near surface current and current shear, wind direction and wave
height over an area of about 2500 sq. km. adjacent to the lower Lake Michigan
shoreline. This work will contribute to the overall goals of understanding
episodic events and cross-margin transport in the Great Lakes and developing a
portable data assimilation nowcast/forecast system based on the lower Michigan
results.