* 9726966
* Uncoating of a Helical Virus: Cotranslational and           Coreplicational Disassembly Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Bruce Webb, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 149,500.00

Shaw (University of Kentucky) EPSCOR 9726966 Uncoating of a Helical Virus:
Cotranslational and Coreplicational Disassembly Mechanisms 1. Technical Of all
the stages of the infection process by an animal or plant virus, uncoating of
the viral genome or disassembly of the virus particle is one of the least
understood. This study examines tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), as its positive-
sense RNA genome is enclosed (encapsidated) in rod-shaped particles. TMV
particles undergo bidirectional disassembly after being introduced into plant
protoplasts. The viral RNA is initially uncoated in the 5'-to-3' direction and
the process is completed by the removal of coat protein molecules (subunits) in
the 3'-to-5' direction. Two hypotheses are set forth to account for the
bidirectional disassembly: (1) in vivo uncoating begins by a cotranslational
disassembly mechanism in which the removal of subunits in the 5'-to-3' direction
is coincident with ribosome translocation during translation of the first ORF of
the viral RNA; (2) in vivo uncoating is completed by a coreplicational
disassembly mechanism in which the viral polymerase proteins (encoded by the
first ORF and/or its readthrough sequence) are involved in the removal of
subunits in the 3'-to-5' direction and the synthesis of progeny minus-strand
viral RNA molecules. These hypotheses are tested by determining the behavior of
various TMV mutants. The possibility that regions in the polymerase proteins
that are not involved in replication may be required for 3'-to-5' disassembly
will also be explored. The significance of this study lies in its atttempt to
understand a stage of life in which the ultimate success or failure of a virus
to initiate infection in host cells is determined. 2. Non-technical Particles of
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) disassemble in inoculated plant cells, which allows
the genome to be released so that the production of progeny virus particles can
proceed, inducing the pathogenic state in the host organism. In this process,
about 75% of the subunits is first removed, sequentially, beginning at one end
of the viral genome; the remainder is then removed proceeding from the other
end. The first step may involve concomitant synthesis of viral proteins, and the
other may involve the production of copies of the viral RNA. Experiments are
designed to examine the validity of each of these hypothetical mechanisms.