* 9726504
* The Role of Heritability, Environment, and Mechanism in     Phenotypic Expression of Paracerceis sculpta (Crustacoa:    Isopoda)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Stephen Shuster, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela O'neil
* 06/30/2002
* USD 210,000.00

Shuster 9726504 Two questions are central to research in ecological and
population genetics: (1) what is the genetic basis for complex traits, and (2)
how are genes expressed in different environments? This project will address
these questions in Paracerceis sculpta, a marine isopod in which three distinct
male morphs coexist: alpha-males are largest and defend harems in sponges using
elongated posterior appendages; beta-males invade harems by mimicking female
behavior and adult body form; gamma-males invade harems by being small and
secretive. Females are monomorphic. A single gene (Ams) controls male
differences in P. sculpta. Sex determination in this species is chromosomal.
Another gene (Tfr) interacts with Ams and with sex chromosomes to bias family
sex ratio. Isopods complete up to eight generations per year. The first
objective of this research is to determine whether observed population dynamics
in adult body form and sex ratio can be attributed to the interaction of simple
genetic factors. Field-collected males will be crossed with females from two
specific laboratory lineages. The progeny of these crosses will exhibit
distinctive family signatures in adult body form and sex ratio depending on
their fathers' genotypes at Ams, Tfr and primary sex determination genes. The
second objective is to determine how natural environmental variation may
influence the expression of these genetic factors. Individuals of known genetic
background will be reared under high and low treatments of food, temperature,
day-length and density. Such detailed experiments are seldom possible with
longer-lived species. Paracerceis sculpta provides a precise experimental system
for determining how genetic variation is maintained in nature, and how genes are
expressed in different environments. The significance of these questions to
population genetics and evolutionary biology is profound. Moreover, these
questions can be addressed in a species whose population biology and inheritance
mechanisms are kno wn. This system thus provides fundamental insights for
studies of breeding system dynamics and sex ratio evolution in other animal
species.