* 9726561
* Evolution of Eye Regression in Cavefish
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* William Jeffery, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2001
* USD 335,000.00

9726561 Jeffery The purpose of this project is to study the genetic basis of eye
degeneration in a vertebrate animal. As a model system, we will use the fish
Astyanax mexicanus. The Astyanax system is well suited for studying eye
degeneration for the following reasons. First, during the last ice age, surface
dwelling Astyanax, which have large eyes, were isolated in caves. The
descendants of these cave-dwelling Astyanax subsequently lost their eyes. Both
surface and cave dwelling Astyanax populations have been collected and are
currently available for research in my laboratory. Using these animals we will
compare eye development and degeneration in animals with and without eyes.
Second, eyeless Astyanax are found in at least 29 different caves, and some of
these cave dwelling populations appear to have lost their eyes independently.
Therefore, we can study the genetic basis of eye degeneration under potentially
different environmental and evolutionary conditions. Third, surface and cave
dwelling Astyanax are easily cultured in the laboratory, breed readily, are
inter-fertile, and the eye structure of the surface fish is similar to that
found in humans. Thus, Astyanax can be used as a convenient experimental system
to help understand human eye degeneration. This proposal has three objectives.
First, we want to determine the evolutionary history of eye degeneration in
different populations of cave dwelling Astyanax. This will be done by comparing
DNA sequences of surface and various cave dwelling populations. The results will
answer the question of whether eye degeneration appeared only once or many times
during the evolutionary history of these animals. Second, we want to determine
the mechanisms of eye degeneration at the tissue level, that is which eye
tissues (lens, retina, cornea, etc.) actually degenerate. This will be done by
examining cell proliferation and cell death in degenerating eye tissues. These
results will allow us to focus on specific genes that function in vario us eye
tissues. Third, we want to identify the genes involved in eye degeneration. The
existence and function of previously identified eye genes will be studied in
surface and various cave dwelling Astyanax populations. This objective is
intended to establish the genetic basis of eye degeneration. The significance of
this project spans the areas of evolutionary biology, developmental biology, and
function of the visual system. In evolutionary biology, this project is
significant because it will define the genetic basis of an evolutionary change
which may have occurred multiple times during the last ice age. The open
question of whether parallel changes in evolution are controlled by the same or
different mechanisms and genes will be answered. In developmental biology, this
project is significant because it will investigate the mechanisms underlying
developmental changes during evolution. There is little current understanding of
how development of organ systems is modified during evolution, and we expect to
fill this void. Finally, this project is significant in regard to visual system
function because it addresses the genetic basis of eye degeneration. Some of the
mechanisms and genes underlying eye degeneration in Astyanax may be the same as
those involved in visual system deficiencies in humans.