* 9726370
* Challenges in CISE:  TUNE: System Support for               Memory-Friendly Programming
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Xiaobai Sun, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,547,929.00

9726370 Trivedi, Kishor Board, John A. Duke University Challenges in CISE: TUNE:
System Support for Memory-Friendly Programming The pervasive use of multi-level
memory hierarchies in microprocessor-based machines makes the performance of an
application primarily determined by and extremely sensitive to its memory
mapping, and requires memory-friendly programming: careful layout of data
structures and restructuring of code to improve data locality. Techniques for
improving memory system performance manifest themselves at various levels, from
high-level algorithms and data structures, through compile-time analysis and
restructuring of programs, to special architectural primitives that allow an
application to better manage the memory hierarchy. The lack of automatic tools
for improving data locality currently forces many application programmers to
manually restructure their codes. Unfortunately, the sophisticated algorithms
seen in modern scientific computing require equally sophisticated restructuring
techniques. These techniques require expertise in computer architecture, burden
the programmer with tedious machine-specific details unrelated to program
correctness, and reduce the readability, maintainability, and portability of the
restructured code. For all these reasons, manual restructuring of programs of
any significant size is untenable, and some kind of system support is necessary.
This project targets all aspects of this problem, from developing the relevant
mathematical techniques for representing and manipulating data locality, through
implementing interactive and automatic data locality management tools, to
proposing innovative memory architectures for future-generation systems. The
efficacy of the resulting system will be demonstrated using programs
representative of modern scientific computations including divide-and-conquer
scientific computations such as N-body solvers (e.g., fastmultipole) and many
linear algebra kernels (e.g., Strassens's matrix multiplication algo rithm).