* 9726948
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on Zebrafish       Development and Genetics, 29 April-May 3, 1998, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/1999
* USD 9,000.00

Grodzicker 97-26948 This proposal requests support for the third biannual open-
invitation Conference on Zebrafish Development and Genetics. The meeting will
focus on the cellular, molecular, and genetic regulation of development and
growth in zebrafish, the only vertebrate in which systematic large scale screens
for embryonic lethal mutations have been conducted. The following sessions are
planned: 1) Early development and axis formation I, 2) Axis formation II, 3)
Somitogenesis and muscle formation, 4) Central nervous system, 5) Neural crest
and head development, 6) Sensory systems 7) Organogenesis, 8) Other aspects of
development 9) Genomics, 10) Innovative methodologies, 11) Perspectives from
other fish, and 12) Keynote address. The Perspectives session will expose the
zebrafish community to related work in a few other key fish (Medaka,
Xiphophorus, the pufferfish). The Keynote address will be given by a
developmental geneticist whose primary interest is not zebrafish, but who is
likely to stimulate zebrafish workers to broaden their ways of thinking about
the ways they approach their research topic. The proposed meeting will attract
members from most zebrafish laboratories, and will provide an open arena for the
presentation of the latest research results. It will also provide an opportunity
for the exchange of materials and information about evolving technologies and
methodological approaches. About 360 people attended the previous meeting and
presentations were given by investigators from 17 countries. They anticipate an
increased number of applications for attendance at the proposed meeting.