* 9726267
* Quantum-State-Specific Neutral Time-of Flight: A New Probe of the Correlated Product Energy Distribution in Photodissociation
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,11/30/2000
* Alec Wodtke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/2000
* USD 391,615.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Wodtke will develop his new experimental method, studying
quantum-state specific neutral time-of-flight (QSSnTOF), to measure
simultaneously the internal and translational energy of photochemical reaction
products. Work on ketene will be continued at a number of new photolysis
wavelengths in order to show the validity of Restricted Phase Space Theory
(RPST), which had been developed to fit the previously acquired data. Additional
experiments are proposed on BH3CO, a simple Lewis acid:Lewis base complex that
exhibits many bonding characteristics of metal carbonyls. The QSSnTOF method
will be applied to other species, such as O (singlet D) and NH (X triplet sigma
minus) in order to help unravel channels in ozone and HNCO photolysis. %%%
Photodissociation, the process in which molecules fall apart as a result of
absorbing light, is one of the most basic of chemical processes. These studies
of Prof. Wodtke will examine in a very detailed way what happens to the
fragments of molecules which dissociate after absorbing light. The results will
be analyzed and compared with theoretical models in order to test the ranges of
their validity. Such studies have wide-ranging impact, particularly in
understanding reactions occurring in the earth's atmosphere, but also on such
processes as take place in photochemical reactions anywhere, such as in the
manufacturing or environmental degradation of materials. Á>?¢