* 9726363
* Challenges in CISE: Creating Conversational Agents for      Language Training: Technologies for the Next Generation     of Interactive Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/1997,04/22/1999
* Ronald Cole, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 04/22/1999
* USD 1,210,942.00

9726363 Cole, Ronald Massaro, Dominic Oregon Graduate Institute of Science
Challenges in CISE: Creating Conversational Agents for Language Training
Technologies for the Next Generation of Interactive Systems The challenge
addressed by this research is the creation of a realistic conversational agent
for the domain of language training, and for spoken language training of the
hearing impaired in particular. The conversational agent consists of four key
technologies, two for output and two for input: (1) a 3D model of a talking face
with accurate movement of the articulators (lips, tongue, etc.) and a variety of
facial gestures and expression, (2) natural text-to-speech based on
concatenative synthesis which can quickly learn new voices and is capable of
hyperarticulation of the kind used to provide feedback in language training, (3)
visual speech recognition using an unobtrusive desk-top camera to aid speech
recognition and to provide information about the articulators of the student,
and (4) auditory speech recognition so the system can understand what is said
and also so the system can detect mispronunciations. Research advances are
required in speech recognition and understanding, language generation and speech
synthesis, recognition of facial cues and head movements, and generation of
speech by artificial talking heads to improve the accuracy and to tailor the
technology to conversational agents in general and language training in
particular. Participatory design experiments will be conducted with schools in
the Portland area. The Tucker-Maxon Oral School will use the conversational
agents to teach hearing-impaired students to use and understanding auditory and
visual speech. This realistic testbed will provide the research team with
invaluable feedback on the usefulness of the system.