* 9726403
* MARS:  Mathematics Assessment Resource Service
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2003
* Sandra Wilcox, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 08/31/2003
* USD 3,177,122.00

9726403 Wilcox This proposal will partially support a Mathematics Assessment
Resource Center (MARS) to provide technical assistance and professional
development to states and school districts in implementing new approaches to
mathematics assessment. The proposal builds on a planning grant, designed to
"prove the concept" of such a center. This planning grant permitted MARS to help
districts in: (1) handling performance assessment--designing and selecting
performance tasks, developing instruments for student assessment and system
monitoring, implementing assessment, scoring student work, scoring and analyzing
results; and (2) advancing professional development both for and through
performance assessment--using assessment as a stimulus for the broader capacity
to implement reform, linking assessment with curriculum, helping students
prepare for performance assessments, developing materials to build capacity in
local districts. These materials were implemented in New York City, El Paso,
Texas, and smaller districts in Michigan and Colorado. MARS now proposes to
implement and expand development of assessment design and development services,
investigation of key issues (practical and psychometric); and further
dissemination. MARS expects client school districts to pay for delivery of
services. The budget for this project declines with each year, as the
development work is completed. As a result of the planning grant, over 20
districts or states have requested MARS services The project anticipates working
with 40 districts over four years.