* 9726185
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Cosmogenic Nuclide Chronology of    Bedrock Weathering Zones in Fennoscandia and Implications   for the History of the Fennoscandian Ice Sheet
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Scott Lehman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2001
* USD 50,057.00

9726185 Lehman The goal of the proposed work is to constrain models of the
Fennoscandian ice sheet (FIS) during the last glacial maximum (LGM) and
subsequent deglaciation by applying techniques of surface exposure chronology
using cosmogenic nuclides. A large body of field work in the high mountains of
Norway documents high altitude glacial trimlines and areas of deeply weathered
bedrock that have a regionally consistent configuration, suggesting that they
may demark the vertical limit of the FIS. However, profiles based on the spatial
distribution of these features differ significantly from profiles of ice sheet
elevation derived from various numerical and conceptual ice sheet
reconstructions (for example, ICE-4G and CLIMAP). Although it is clear that one
of the two general approaches to reconstructing the FIS is flawed, it is
difficult to say which one, primarily because the geomorphic features under
debate have not been dated. Our prior work in the mountains of western Norway
demonstrate that such dating is, indeed, feasible. The proposed work will
produce the first numerical chronology for these features, thereby permitting us
to assess the validity of various ice sheet reconstructions for the region, and,
by inference, in North America (e.g. for the Laurentide ice sheet). As the
CLIMAP and ICE-4G reconstructions have been widely adopted as boundary
conditions in simulations of LGM climate using atmospheric general circulation
models, our studies will also bear on the efficacy of those modeling results and
related assessments of climate sensitivity. In addition, the proposed work will
address a fundamental problem in glacial geology that of interpretation of
weathering zones in formerly glaciated regions of the Northern Hemisphere.