* 9726143
* Separation and Recovery of Ions from Aqueous Media with     Redox-Recyclable Metal-Complex Extractions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Steven Strauss, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 04/30/2001
* USD 145,900.00

Author: vjohn at nsf18 Date: 3/17/98 4:16 PM Priority: Normal TO: adthomas
Subject: Abstract ------------------------------- Message Contents
------------------------------- Allison: Here is an abstract for a funding
recommendation. Vijay Abstract Proposal No: 9726143 Proposal Type: Investigator
Initiated Principal Investigator: Steven Strauss Affiliation: Colorado State
University This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification
Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr.
Steven Strauss from Colorado State University. The research will develop a
series of redox-active metal-complex extractants to extract target ions from
aqueous waste streams. The novelty of the research is the fact that the proposed
technology may lead to extractants that are recyclable, with contaminant
recovery in concentrated form, thereby minimizing disposal volumes. The
extractants are ferrocenes and the target ions are typically ionic species. The
closed cycle scheme proposed involves recognition and linking of the contaminant
ions to the ferrocene extractant, removal of the ionic species, and reactivation
of the ferrocene. The extraction selectivity can be modified through chemical
modifications of the ferrocenes, and the PI proposes to study a class of
polydentate ferrocenes where the ligands can be chemically modified by design to
target specific ions. The development of molecular recognition compounds is of
tremendous importance to separation and extraction processes associated with
environmental technologies. The development of rugged, recylable extractants wi
th molecular recognition characteristics can have a major impact on separations
technology and pollution prevention.