* 9726425
* RUI:  Evaluating the Divergence-with-Gene-Flow Model in     Natural Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Robert Wayne, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2002
* USD 372,000.00

Smith 9726425 Tropical rainforests are renowned for their extraordinary
diversity of species. Birds are prominent in this regard, as tropical
rainforests contain a spectacular array of unique species having no parallel
elsewhere. However, the specific evolutionary mechanisms that generate
biodiversity are poorly understood. In this proposal, morphologic and genetic
data will be gathered to test a new hypothesis for rainforest speciation. This
hypothesis postulates that ecotones, small rainforest fragments that exist in
the grasslands outside the central rainforest, are habitats in which new
adaptations and new species appear that can enrich the biodiversity of central
rainforests. Natural selection in ecotone populations of three rainforest bird
species will be quantified and the morphologic divergence between them and
central rainforest populations will be estimated. Although this study addresses
fundamental evolutionary questions, it also has important conservation
implications for sub-Saharan Africa. Centrally located rainforest areas are
presently the main focus of conservation efforts, whereas ecotone regions are
rapidly being lost due to overgrazing, burning and wood harvesting with little
or no effort toward their conservation. Such ecotone regions are assumed to be
less important because they are mosaics of pure habitat types that may contain
fewer species and smaller, more unstable populations. However, it is possible
that these transition areas between forest and savanna are important sources of
evolutionary novelty that contribute to rainforest biodiversity.
\\Clm-06\debpop\POPBIO\ABSTRACT\SMITH425.ABS