* 9726601
* A Diachronic Study of Prepositional Phrases in Latin Noun   Phrases
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1998,09/30/2000
* David Wharton, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 09/30/2000
* USD 31,687.00

One of the notable linguistic features of classical Latin, when compared with
its Indo-European relatives, both ancient and modern, is its relatively
infrequent and selective use of adnominal prepositional phrases; for example,
phrases like, `a bird in the hand` are rarely found. Both traditional
philological studies and linguistically oriented ones have shown that, in
classical Latin, prepositional phrases may assume only a limited number of roles
in the noun phrase (e.g. Theme, but not Agent, and only a restricted set of
Goals). It is commonly said that adnominal prepositional phrases occur both more
frequently and more freely in post-classical Latin, indicating that, as early as
the first century CE, Latin's use of adnominal prepositional phrases began
shifting toward that of its Romance offspring. Evidence for this shift is,
however, rather anecdotal, and to date no controlled frequency studies have been
undertaken, nor has the nature of the increased freedom, ever been precisely
defined, although it is well known that in Medieval Latin, prepositional phrases
representing Agents are well-attested. This study proposes to fill one of the
gaps in our knowledge of the change from Latin to Romance, first by gathering a
corpus of adnominal prepositional phrases from Latin prose texts ranging from
the 2nd century BCE to the sixth century CE, then by measuring, recording, and
analyzing their frequency of occurrence, and finally by analyzing the corpus to
see what it can tell us about changes in the Latin noun phrase. The corpus
itself will be stored both in ASCII format and in a relational database, both of
which will be obtainable on the World Wide Web via FTP. The analysis will
concentrate on the argument structure of noun phrases containing prepositional
phrases, and especially on the expansion of the kinds of thematic roles (e.g.,
Agent, Experiencer, Goal) that prepositional phrases came to encode. The study
will provide new and detailed evidence which will shed light on more generalized
linguistic phenomena, such as the decay of the system of nominal inflection,
involved in the change from Latin to Romance.