* 9726141
* Systematics of the Parasitoid Wasp Subfamily Doryctinae in  Costa Rica (Insecta, Hymenoptera, Braconidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Scott Shaw, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2002
* USD 83,995.00

9726141 Marsh Systematics of the Parasitoid Wasp Subfamily Doryctinae in Costa
Rica (Insecta, Hymenoptera, Braconidae) Wasps of the family Braconidae are
parasites of other insects and are therefore important in the biological control
of agricultural and forest pests. The first step in any successful control
program is knowledge of the parasites and of which pests they are effective in
controlling. Yet our knowledge of these particular parasites is very meager. The
purpose of this project is to study one group of these wasps and to provide a
workable classification, and to produce identification aids for the genera and
species found in Costa Rica. Most of the specimens to be studied are located in
the collection of the Instituto National de Biodiversidad in San Jose, Costa
Pica (INBio). Specimens from this large collection, as well as from collections
from other parts of the world, will provide the basis for this study. These
wasps usually attack bark beetle pests in forests, and knowledge of their
classification and identification will provide new information for potential
forest biological control programs in the United States as well as in Central
America. Furthermore, this study will provide valuable information for
biodiversity studies in endangered habitats in Costa Pica as well as in all of
Central America.