* 9726981
* Phylogeny and Biogeography of the Dichrostachys Group (Mimosideae Leguminosae) in Madagascar: Evidence from Morphological and Molecular Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Melissa Luckow, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/2002
* USD 94,502.00

9726981 Luckow Phylogeny and biogeography of the Dichrostachys group
(Mimosoideae:Leguminosae) in Madagascar: evidence from morphological and
molecular studies. The Madagascan biota qualifies as one of the most diverse on
earth, whether one measures biodiversity using raw numbers of species, unique
features, or phylogenetic position. Estimates of over 10,000 species of
flowering plants have been reported from an area about 1000 miles long and 360
miles wide, and the large number of endemic species often possess extreme
morphological innovations not seen in related taxa native to other regions.
Thus, Madagascar offers an ideal system in which to investigate the factors
influencing both speciation and morphological diversity and elaboration. An
assemblage of three genera of mimosoid legumes, the Dichrostachys group has
radiated widely throughout Madagascar, with all but three of approximately 30
species endemic to the island. The group provides a model system for
investigating the evolution of Malagasy plants both because there are a large
number of species and because they are widely distributed throughout the dry,
seasonally dry, and moist forests of Madagascar. Phylogenetic analyses based on
molecular and morphological data will be used to address questions relevant to
systematics, pollination, and biogeography. Generic boundaries have been
controversial in the Dichrostachys group, and the phylogeny will serve as a
basis to define monophyletic genera. Pollinator shifts and correlations of
pollinators with changes in inflorescence color and other floral traits will be
examined. Of special interest will be the comparison of the pollinators of one
introduced species both in Madagascan and in native South African populations.
In particular this will permit us to explore such questions as: are changes in
inflorescence color accompanied by a shift in pollinators? Are ontogenetic color
changes associated with pollinator shifts? The phylogeny will also be used in
biogeographic stu dies of areas of endemism within Madagascar. Specifically, the
proposed biogeographic study will explore the relationship between speciation
and geological processes, addressing questions such as: Is there a correlation
between soil type and speciation in Madagascar? Is this a general phenomenon
that can be measured across unrelated groups? Is there correspondence of
phylogenies and geologic events indicating a general pattern of speciation
through time? This investigation also will contribute primary descriptive data
in the form of a monograph, an enumeration of pollinators, and the detailed
mapping of species distributions. The detailed mapping of species distributions
can be used to corroborate or refute generalizations about the primary
vegetation types that recently have been classified using satellite imagery. The
Dichrostachys group has never been monographed and there are species new to
science as well as new information on previously described species. The biota of
Madagascar is currently one of the most threatened in the world and the need for
this work is urgent.