* 9726615
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Magnetic Resonance        Imaging of Heat and Mass Transfer in Complex Internal Flow  Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,08/31/2002
* John Georgiadis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2002
* USD 24,934.00

9726615 Georgiadis This award supports a three year collaborative research
project between Professor John Georgiadis of the University of Illinois, Urbana
and Professor Ken Okazaki of the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan. The
researchers will be undertaking studies relating to magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of heat and mass transfer in complex internal flow systems. The research
involves systematic non-invasive measurements with MRI in order to accomplish
the following objectives: (l) the flow field in a class of complex internal
structure (fixed microchannels) will be characterized as a function of
hydrodynamic conditions and degree of structural disorder. Pressure-driven,
laminar, and incompressible flows through fixed solid matrices with complicated
interstitial space will be considered and (2) under conditions of objective 1,
the temperature and the dispersion of miscible fluid will be quantified during
convective transport in the same geometries. MRI measurements will be compared
to the results of direct numerical simulation via Lattice Boltzmann methods, and
will be used to improve existing models of convective transport. This project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The two groups have access to
mutually complementary MRI facilities with the Japanese MRI scanner designed for
higher magnetic field strength, and thus higher resolution. The proposed work
will contribute to fundamental knowledge in the areas of advanced diagnostics
and will also demonstrate the feasibility of combining experimental MRI and
numerical tools to analyze complex thermohydrodynamic systems encountered in the
design of industrial devices. Younger scientists will also be included in the
project. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden
our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation. ***