* 9726555
* Species Turnover, Trophic Coupling and Life History         Tradeoffs: Plankton Food Web Structure Along a Gradient of  Lake Size/Depth
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Alan Tessier, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 05/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

Tessier 9726555 A substantial amount of current ecological work focuses on the
interfaces between population, community and ecosystem ecology. One focus within
this area consider how food-web structure interacts with abiotic features of the
environment. This proposal would explore these features by considering community
structure characteristics systematically along a gradient of lake forms that
exhibit substantial differences in their basin features with consequent
differences in physico-chemical features and the occurrence of fishes, a major
player in lake food webs. In temperate zone lakes with warm-water fisheries,
lake size and depth strongly regulate the types of fishes that are present
within a basin. Environmental stress is more common in smaller water bodies to
the extent that fishes are excluded from shallow or small basins. Fishes have
been shown to have controlling influences over lake food webs and shifts in
suspension-feeding zooplankton and their food sources can be expected with
changes in fishes. This work would involve a systematic comparison of how food-
web structure and trophic coupling change along a gradient of lake size and
depth. Investigation will combine comparative data and experiments along the
lake gradient to evaluate interactions between habitat and food-web
characteristics. It would specifically examine the nature of heterogeneity
within the suspensio-feding zooplankton and their resource assemblages. The
ultimate goal of this project is to integrate considerations of life-history
strategies into food-web, and ultimately ecosystem-process evaluations.