* 9726930
* Collaborative Research:  Impacts of a Strong Regulator Along a Productivity Gradient:  Linking Watersheds with Reservoir Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Roy Stein, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2001
* USD 145,368.00

9726930

Stein

In this multi-investigator collaborative proposal the PIs propose an ambitious
project that will utilize the diverse strengths of the participants in a multi-
faceted investigation of an aquatic food web. Specifically, they will study how
gizzard shad influence the trophic structure and community organization in
reservoirs and tie this to watershed processes. They examine the central
question of whether or not the influence of shad on different groups of
organisms is dependent upon lake productivity. Gizzard shade is an omnivorous
fish that dominates warm-water lake and reservoir food webs and becomes more
important as productivity increases. This research will quantify the watershed
features that lead to gizzard shade dominance and investigate how impacts of
gizzard shade vary across the productivity gradient. The study will test
hypotheses related to the factors causing gizzard shade dominance in
hypereutrophic systems and how gizzard shade impacts vary with productivity.
Specifically, this research will examine the relationships between nutrient
loading, productivity and gizzard shade abundance and effects in 12 Ohio
reservoirs, ranging from mesotrophic to hypereutrophic. These comparative field
studies will be coupled with a modeling effort aimed at relating these patterns
to a broadly applicable theory of aquatic food webs and ecosystem processes.