* 9726567
* The Role of Oceanographic Features and Prey Distribution    on Foraging Energetics and Reproductive Success of the      Antarctic Fur Seal, Arctocephalus Gazella
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2002
* USD 282,000.00

9726567 COSTA Marine coastal and pelagic environments of the Southern Ocean are
characterized by seasonal high productivity. Over the last several decades it
has become clear that these environments, while generally productive, also
undergo considerable inter- and intra-annual variability. Consequently,
available prey resources for vertebrate predators can be highly variable
spatially and temporally. This spatial and temporal variability of prey
resources has been measured empirically for the northern South Shetland Islands
region of the Antarctic Peninsula since the late 1980's. The Antarctic fur seal,
a sub-polar migratory otariid with a short lactation period, is an increasingly
dominant marine predator of the South Shetlands region. Its life history is
pattern is characterized by foraging trips alternating with short visits to
provision a single offspring; this allows scientists to measure maternal
investment on the same temporal and spatial scale as measurements of
distribution and abundance of prey. This project will quantify the foraging
costs and maternal investment associated with changes in strategies observed in
populations of South Shetland Ataractic fur seals. Energetic costs and benefits
of different foraging patterns with simultaneous measurement of energy
expenditure, food intake, dive depth, dive duration, time of day, and dive
frequency, swim speed and foraging location will be accomplished using state of
the art techniques. These measurements will coincide with small and large scale
oceanographic surveys to be conducted by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Antarctic Marine Living Resources program, which is also
contributing to the support of this project. The research will allow scientists
to link biological characteristics (prey composition, distribution and
abundance) and physical characteristics of the foraging environment with
foraging success, maternal investment and reproductive success for a free-
ranging marine ve rtebrate predator.