* 9726626
* US-Japan Joint Seminar:  Abnormal Flow Phenomena in         Turbomachines-From Avoidance to Suppression and Control
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 22,000.00

9726626 Katz This award supports the participation of American scientists and
engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Abnormal Flow Phenomena in Turbomachines --
From Avoidance to Suppression and Control, to be held in Osaka, Japan from
October 26-29, l998. The co-organizers are Professors Joseph Katz of Johns
Hopkins University and Oshinobu Tsujimoto of Osaka University in Japan. The
seminar will focus on the underlying flow mechanisms, available means to detect,
compute and measure them, as well as existing and potential future effective
countermeasures for them. Turbomachines are being used in increasingly more
severe and demanding conditions in order to meet higher performance requirements
and a wider range of applications. Under such conditions, various kinds of
"abnormal" flow phenomena, such as rotating cavitation, rotating stall, surge,
and massive flow separation occur. Besides having adverse effects on the
performance and causing increased levels of vibrations and noise, these abnormal
phenomena can and do regularly lead to component and system failures. Thus, in
addition to meeting conventional design targets, such as improvements in the
performance and efficiency, it is becoming increasingly important to understand
the underlying mechanisms causing these abnormal phenomena and develop effective
counter-measures against them. The participants will develop clear
identification of the dominating flow phenomena and recommended strategies for
avoidance, suppression and control. The U.S. researchers are experienced in
theoretical, computational and experimental research tools while the Japanese
have expertise in the fundamental and practical aspects of flows. The seminar
brings together researchers from academia, industry and government. In addition,
postdoctoral researchers will be included. The exchange of ideas and data with
Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their
own work, and will set the stage for fu ture collaborative projects. ***