* 9726597
* The Fabrication and Physical Properties of Integrated Metal and Semiconductor Nanocrystal Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* A Alivisatos, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/2001
* USD 944,510.00

9726597 Alivisatos This FRG/GOALI project is multidisciplinary, involving
elements of Chemistry, Physics, Engineering and Materials Science. Professors A.
Paul Alivisatos and James R. Heath at UCB and UCLA, respectively, are
collaborating with R. Stanley Williams at Hewlett-Packard Laboratories. The aim
of the project is to lay the groundwork for the demonstration and the
development of nanocrystal(NC) and nanocrystal array(NCA) based devices by first
developing techniques for synthesis of NC-based thin films appropriate for
device applications, and by understanding and optimizing the properties of NC/x
interfaces. A variety of potential applications, ranging from phosphors to
photovoltaics to electronic switching and storage devices, are envisioned for
these materials. The approach involves two aspects. The first is the development
of techniques for integrating nanocrystals and nanocrystal assemblies into
technologically relevant environments. The second is the development of a
physical picture of how the integrated systems operate. Chemical techniques for
fabricating nanocrystal integrated systems and examining their structural
characteristics will be developed. Their optical properties will be interrogated
with time and frequency resolved spectroscopies. Temperature dependent electron
transport, photovoltaic, and capacitance measurements through integrated NC and
NCA systems will be carried out using contacts produced by electron-beam
lithography. Particular effort will be spent on controlling and characterizing
the interfaces in these various systems. The project is co-supported by four NSF
programs, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). %%% This
project addresses forefront research issues in an interdisciplinary area of
science and engineering having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
materials and devices, and will provide improved understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials and structures for devices of the
future. An important feature of the program is the integration of research and
education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***