* 9726423
* Reactions and Stereochemistry of Organometallic Compounds   Related to Asymmetric Synthesis and Catalytic Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* John Faller, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2001
* USD 432,000.00

Dr. John W. Faller, Chemistry Department, Yale University, is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies
related to asymmetric and regioselective synthesis and catalysis using metal
complexes. New strategies will be developed for asymmetric synthesis based on
the use of readily available racemic ligands followed by treatment with an
inexpensive chiral poison to selectively deactivate one enantiomer of the
racemic mixture. The remaining ligand enantiomer will be employed to prepare
chiral metal catalysts. This general strategy has been demonstrated for
asymmetric hydrogenations and will be extended to a number of other systems
including a series of titanium-alkoxide catalyzed reactions. More effective
poisons will be developed and will be applied to the preparation of chiral
catalyst for a broad range of asymmetric reactions that have conventionally used
noble metal catalysts prepared from enantiomerically pure phosphine ligands. In
reactions where dimers are active species, the conventional approach has
involved the dimerization of enantiomeric monomers. The possibility of enhancing
enantioselectivity through the use of pseudo-enantiomeric complexes, which are
composed of bimetallics containing different chiral ligands, will be explored.
Hemilabile ligands will be used to control the stereochemistry in catalytic
intermediates and to provide stoichiometeric reagents for preparation of
homoallylic alcohols by allyl addition to aldehydes. An object which is not the
same as its mirror image (e.g. a left compared to a right handed glove) is said
to be chiral. Many pharmaceutical and agricultural chemicals are chiral and
often only one of the two mirror image molecules is desired. Since it is
difficult to obtain a single mirror image, the production of such molecules is
an important goal in contemporary chemistry. In this project new strategies
toward solving the problem of `asymmetric synthesis` will be applied to a broad
range of reactions and new, more economic preparations of important molecules
will be developed. In addition to the chemical research, this project has the
important objective of training young scientist in the areas of metal catalysis
and asymmetric synthesis.