* 9726236
* tRNA Abundance and Codon Usage Bias in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Jeffrey Powell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2002
* USD 261,000.00

Powell 9726236 Understanding the forces that have shaped the basic genetic
material, DNA, has important implications not only for understanding how
evolution has occurred, but also in understanding how organisms function. Many
genes code for the amino acids that are assembled into long chains, which then
form functioning proteins, including enzymes. The DNA-based code for amino acids
is redundant; i.e., there is more than one "word" (called a codon) for a single
amino acid. Thus, it is possible to have mutations that do not change in any way
the protein product; these are called "silent" mutations. It was long thought
silent mutations would be invisible to detection by natural selection.
Increasing evidence is accumulating that selection can and does detect such
mutations. One piece of evidence is that certain "words" for an amino acid are
used more frequently than others; this is called codon usage bias. In
unicellular organisms (bacteria and yeast), it is known that this uneven usage
of codons happens because the molecules that decode codons, tRNAs, are not in
equal abundance in the cell. Especially for genes that are expressed at a very
high level, there is selection to use the codons for which there is the greatest
abundance of decoding tRNA. This hypothesis has never been tested in a
multicellular eukaryote. This proposal is the first such test employing the
model organism, Drosophila. In particular, Dr. Powell has documented that
different species of Drosophila have very different codon usage bias patterns,
i.e., they are biased toward different codons. If the tRNA explanation holds for
these organisms, then the tRNA pools should differ between species. Dr. Powell
will test this prediction by studying tRNA pools in different species.