* 9726407
* Evolution of Resistance and Tolerance in Wild Sunflower     Helianthus annuus
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Diana Pilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2003
* USD 245,865.00

9726407 Pilson The goal of this work is to examine constraints on the joint
evolution of resistance to, and tolerance of, insect damage in the wild
sunflower, Helianthus annuus. A plant is resistant if it experiences little
insect damage relative to other plants in the population. In contrast, a plant
is tolerant if it experiences damage, but that damage has little effect on plant
fitness. Although most studies of the evolution of plant response to herbivory
have only considered resistance, a theoretical model suggests that resistance
and tolerance do not evolve independently. This work will test several specific
assumptions and predictions of that model. These predictions include the cost to
plants of being either resistant to, or tolerant of, damage, the genetic
structure of populations experiencing herbivory, and the type of natural
selection imposed on populations by insect herbivores. Testing these predictions
will involve the use of quantitative genetic methods to quantify genetic
variation for resistance and tolerance to several common insect herbivores,
including the stem and head-boring lepidopteran, Suleima helianthana, the head-
clipping weevil, Haplorhynchites aeneus, the seed-feeding weevils Smichronyx
fulvus and S. sordidus, and the head-feeding lepidopteran Homeosoma electellum.
These data will also be used to measure natural selection on resistance and
tolerance, the pattern of correlations between resistances and tolerances to
different herbivores, and the costs of these characters. In addition, mechanisms
of tolerance will be examined. Previous work suggests that tolerance may
typically be considerably more costly than resistance. However, little is known
about characters conferring tolerance, and thus, little is known about why
tolerance may be costly. The hypothesis that variation in plant life history
leads to variation in tolerance will be tested.. Additional experiments will
quantify resource allocatio n patterns and floral phenology, and will determine
if these characters are correlated with the ability of plants to tolerate insect
damage. Herbivory by insects is generally detrimental to plant fitness. In
addition, genetic variation for resistance to herbivory is nearly ubiquitous in
natural plant populations. These data suggest that insects should frequently
impose natural selection on plant resistance, and further, that such selection
should proceed until either plant populations are maximally resistant or genetic
variation is exhausted. That selection has apparently not acted in this way has
stimulated considerable interest. One explanation for this anomalous result is
that resistance is costly to plants. If this is the case, then resistant plants
should have high fitness in the presence of insects, but low fitness, relative
to susceptible plants, in the absence of herbivores. This is because when
herbivores are absent resistant plants bear the cost of resistance but receive
no benefit. However, many attempts to quantify costs of resistance have failed.
This work will determine whether simultaneously considering resistance and
tolerance allows costs of these characters to be detected, and may provide one
explanation for the abundance of genetic variation for resistance in natural
plant populations.