* 9726319
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Function and Dynamics            of Plant Vacuoles
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Russell Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

9726319 Jones This award supports the participation of American scientists in a
U.S.-Japan seminar on Function and Dynamics of Plant Vacuoles, to be held in
Hawaii from January 11-14, l999. The co-organizers are Professors Russell Jones
of the University of California at Berkeley and Kenzo Nakamura of Nagoya
University in Japan. The seminar will focus on the biogenesis, structure and
function of vacuoles. It will bring together biochemists, and cell and molecular
biologists who work with vacuoles. The emphasis will be on vacuoles in higher
plants but vacuoles in baker's yeast will also be discussed. Research on
biochemistry, and cell and molecular biology of vacuoles is presently very
dynamic. Researchers are beginning to understand the complexities surrounding
the biogenesis of vacuoles in plants and yeast and the mechanisms of targeting
macromolecules to this compartment. Rapid progress is also being made in
identifying and characterizing tonoplast transporters. New pumps and channels on
the tonoplast are being described, and the role of these transport molecules in
cellular homeostasis is beginning to be understood. It is anticipated that the
researchers will be able to discuss and resolve current controversy and
disagreement about many aspects of vacuole structure and function. Seminar
organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. ***