* 9726621
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Non-Smooth Feedback      Control of Nonholonomic Mechanical Systems with Applicationsto Mobile Robots
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1998,01/04/1999
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/04/1999
* USD 15,960.00

This three-year award supports US-France cooperative research aimed at the
design of control laws for nonholonomic robot systems. Nonholonomic systems are
mechanical systems with motion constraints. The collaboration involves
Panagiotis Tsiotras of the University of Virginia and the research group led by
Carlos A. Canudas de Wit at the Automation Laboratory of the Ecole Nationale
Superieure d'Ingenieurs Electriciens in Grenoble, France. The investigators will
develop a methodology for constructing non- smooth, time-invariant, feedback
control laws for special classes of nonholonomic systems, which include the case
of mobile robots. Implementation of the control laws via force or torque
actuators and robustness to external disturbances will be examined. The controls
will then be experimentally tested and compared to other methods using mobile
robots at the University of Virginia and at the Automation Laboratory in
Grenoble. The US investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in
stabilization and control of rigid bodies. This is complemented by the French
investigator's expertise in nonlinear control theory and control of nonholonomic
systems. The project will advance knowledge of new nonlinear algorithms for
nonholonomic systems with fast convergence rates and could be applied to
autonomous or semi-autonomous mobile robots and underactuated mechanical
systems.