* 9726064
* Historical Inference of Biogeography Through Phylogenetic   Reconstruction of Arid Asian Faunal Elements
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 206,000.00

9726064 Larson Endemic species are those that are found only in very small
areas. They may be of conservation concern especially if their small habitat
areas are altered or come under threat. It is thought that endemic species may
form in one of several ways. In one of these mechanisms, a population of a
species becomes separated from other populations by geological changes (e.g.
formation of new mountain ranges, land bridges across open water), and this
isolated population becomes a new species. This species-forming process can be
traced, in theory, by examining the history (phylogeny) of the species and the
earth history of the region in which the species occur. In this project, Allan
Larson, J. Robert Macey and Theodore Papenfuss will examine the phylogenetic
relationships of selected groups of fish, lizards and snakes that have endemic
species in one or more of the Central Asian deserts. These deserts have arisen
through relatively recent and dramatic earth history events. The researchers
will reconstruct the phylogeny of the species in these groups by analyzing DNA
sequences. The phylogenies will then be interpreted in the context of the
geographic history of the desert regions, to determine whether there is a direct
relationship between the geological events forming a region and the appearance
of an endemic species in that region. The research, which involves several
scientists and students in countries encompassing the desert regions, should
lead to a broader understanding of how endemic species are formed and persist.