* 9726465
* Role of Acid Sites in Selective Reduction of NO by          Methane over PD-Based Catalysts in Presence of Excess       Oxygen
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Daniel Resasco, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/2000
* USD 265,022.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Title: Role of Acid Sites in the Selective Reduction of NO by
Methane over Pd-Based Catalysts in the Presence of Excess Oxygen Proposal
Number: CTS-9726465 Principal Investigator Daniel E. Resasco Institution:
University of Oklahoma Professor Daniel E. Resasco, from the University of
Oklahoma, will investigate various aspects of the selective catalytic reduction
of NO with methane in the presence of oxygen, over Pd on acidic supports. This
work is of relevance to various environmental concerns: it provides new
scientific insights into the catalytic removal of NOx from gases of combustion,
it leads to the utilization of methane, it leads to the possibility of burning
fuels under leaner (oxygen-rich) conditions, and as a consequence, it allows
higher energy efficiency and less generation of CO2 per unit of energy
production. Three objectives will be pursued: to determine the role of acidic
sites in providing SCR selectivity to Pd supported or exchanged in zeolites or
supported on sulfated zirconia; to determine the possible reaction mechanisms
kinetically, by infrared spectroscopy of reactants or possible intermediates,
and by transient kinetics of isotopically labeled compounds; and to investigate
the tolerance of the Pd catalysts during reaction in the presence of water and
SO2. The state of Pd will be characterized by x-ray absorption, temperature
programmed reduction, electron microscopy, and chemisorption of probe molecules.
The acidic sites will be characterized by microcalorimetry and by chemisorption
and temperature programmed desorption of weak bases.