* 9726190
* The Eyes of Nye
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2005
* Burnill Clark, KCTS Television
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 01/31/2005
* USD 1,195,718.00

9726190 Brock KCTS, Seattle's PBS affiliate, is producing a series of three one-
hour prime-time science education television specials starring Bill Nye. The
specials will be aimed at a family audience and will be designed to promote
informal science learning through an entertaining presentation of science in
everyday life. Topics currently being considered for the specials are The
Science of Sports, The Science of Learning, and The Science of the Future,
thought other topics, such as Pseudo Science, also are being considered. Each
program will maintain the entertainment values of enthusiasm for science so
prominent in the Bill Nye the Science Guy series but will have a strong
narrative element and air of suspense as Bill embarks on a journey of discovery,
greater depth of content and presentation, and longer uninterrupted segments.
The programs will be supported by a multi-pronged outreach program to reach
parents and children through local PBS stations and science museums, community
organizations serving disadvantaged populations and, possibly, a tie-in with a
national chain of quick family restaurants. Many of the same team that created
Bill Nye the Science Guy will work on this project including Bill Nye; Elizabeth
Brock, Executive Producer; and Erren Gottlieb and James McKenna, producers. The
production team will work with fourteen scientists and science educators who
will advise the project on presentation and outreach. This group also will
review and comment on all scripts and drafts of outreach material.