* 9726980
* Testing the Role of Reproductive Assurance Selfing in the   Maintenance of Mixed Mating
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Susan Kalisz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2002
* USD 245,000.00

Kalisz 9726980 A plant's mating system (the degree to which it outcrosses rather
than self pollinates) is a vital determinant of genetic variability at the
population level. While theoretical studies have demonstrated that either
complete outcrossing or complete selfing are stable evolutionary states, mixed
mating (whereby progeny are sired by a mixture of self and outcross pollen) is
not as easily explained. Yet in nearly half of the animal pollinated plants
studied, intermediate outcrossing rates (those between 20-80%) are observed. The
current study utilizes the winter annual, Collinsia verna, the Blue-eyed Mary,
as a model organism to examine the consequences of variability of pollinator
activity over the flowering season and its influence on the evolution of self
pollination as a back-up strategy (i.e., reproductive assurance selfing). Using
clonal replicates of individual plants in a series of integrated field and
controlled environment experiments, the correlations between specific floral
attributes conferring delayed selfing, fruiting success via self pollination,
and the degree of inbreeding depression expressed by those individuals will be
quantified. These measurements will be interpreted in the light of a novel field
bioassay which allows us to quantify the frequency of pollinator failure from
the perspective of paired flowers which are experiencing common resource
conditions. Field estimates of pollinator failure and selfing ability will be
compared with estimates of the natural outcrossing rates derived for three
populations across the flowering season and across two years. The proposed
research addresses the links between selective pressures on delayed selfing via
pollinator mediated pollen limitation, the expression of mixed mating, and
inbreeding depression expressed in natural populations of Collinsia verna. The
actual, physical process of reproductive assurance selfing has been
characterized for very few species. Q uantifying the timing of self-pollination
within a flower, and the associated morphological traits will address an
important issue in evolutionary ecology: how developmental processes (like the
timing of anther and pistil elongation) contribute to selfing rates and how they
evolve. Moreover, this research will be the first to test the mixed mating model
of Schoen and Brown (1991) which indicates that when environmental variation in
pollinator availability exists, reproductive assurance is more important in
driving the evolution of a mixed mating system than is inbreeding depression. As
a result, this work will be of interest to plant geneticists, crop breeders and
conservationists who work with species which may become pollen-limited due to
unusual weather patterns or regional epidemics in key pollinators (e.g. as has
happened recently to honeybee populations).