* 9726771
* Humoral Immunity of Long-lived Invertebrates
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,04/30/2003
* James Quigley, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth E. Hood
* 04/30/2003
* USD 306,320.00

MCB9726771 Armstrong, Peter Quigley, James Humoral Immunity of Long-lived
Invertebrates Lay Abstract Survival of any animal requires efficient means to
thwart the invasion of a myriad of different potential pathogens. As a result,
most animals have evolved a variety of different defense strategies for their
protection. These include the very complex adaptive immune system of mammals as
well as less complex, innate defense mechanisms represented frequently in lower
animals. The present research focuses on a particular defense system of
invertebrates and utilizes the American horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus) as a
model system. This animal, which lacks the antibodies and lymphocytes that are
the core elements of adaptive immune systems, nevertheless has within its blood
system components that provide resistance to pathogens. One system involves the
plasma protein, (2-macroglobulin, which is able to bind to microbial proteases
in the blood stream. Not only does the bound (2-macroglobulin inhibit the
proteases, but also blood cells recognize, remove and degrade the complexes thus
formed. A second system involves a second plasma protein, limulin, which has the
ability to bind to and lyse foreign cells that enter the blood stream. The two
systems are functionally interrelated since protease-reacted (2-macroglobulin
can enhance the lytic activity of limulin. The present studies include three
objectives to define basic features of these systems. (1) The receptors on the
blood cells that bind the protease-(2-macroglobulin complexes will be isolated
and characterized. (2) Factors that effect the binding and pathway of uptake of
the complexes by the cells will be described. (3) The molecular mechanism by
which protease-(2-macroglobulin complexes and other factors regulate the lytic
activity of limulin will be defined. These studies will not only allow us to
understand these systems in Limulus but may also lead to predictions of similar
functions for related proteins found in the b lood of more complex, higher
organisms.