* 9726308
* Regional Problems and Local Solutions in the Post-Soviet    Transition: An Ethnographic Study of Reindeer Herding       Communities in the Chuckota Autonomous Okrug
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Patty Gray, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda E. Duguay
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,001.00

Abstract 9726308 Schweitzer This pilot project investigates the social,
economic, political and cultural aspects of reindeer herding during the post-
Soviet period of transition ill the Chukotka Autonomous 0krug. Reindeer herding
in the Russian has perhaps never been faced with such rapid and sweeping changes
as in this unstable time. With the abrupt withdrawal of the large government
subsidies that kept reindeer state farms operational, they must now adapt to the
changing political and economic conditions or risk failure -- not merely
economic failure, but failure in their ability to provide the basic social
service that rural Northern communities have come to depend on for their very
survival. A variety of restructuring options have been put into effect at
different reindeer herding operations, but they have experienced dramatically
varying outcomes. Why are some thriving while others are struggling to survive,
or even dissolving? Reindeer herding is treated by administrators as just one of
the many branches of the former Soviet economy that must now become privatized;
but is reindeer herding as practiced today an enterprise that can deliver a
product to market and a profit to its owner? And is that the most important
reason for its existence, from the point of view of those who practice it? This
research examines why reindeer herders and administrators choose the options
they do, and evaluates the consequences of those choices. The Chukotakan case
provides valuable comparative data on the ways in which privatization and
agricultural reform are implemented in the regions of the Russian Federation and
the kinds of responses that are emerging to the rapid social change resulting
from the post-Soviet transition.