* 9726362
* Challenges in CISE:  Virtual Environments for Telesurgery   and Surgical Training:  Efficient Computation, Visualization and Interaction
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,004,922.00

9726362 Barsky, Brian Sastry, S. Shankar University of California, Berkeley
Challenges in CISE: Virtual Environments for Telesurgery and Surgical Training:
Efficient Computation, Visualization and Interaction This research is focused on
virtual environments for telesurgery and will result in software testbeds for
eye and abdominal surgery. The development of these testbeds depends on the
integration of the following research activities: Tissue modeling and rendering.
For effective surgical training in virtual environments, deformable models of
tissue are needed with sufficient accuracy, yet fast enough for real time
interaction. Beginning with continuum models of solid behavior, suitable
approximations will be developed that account for the compliance of tissue and
the deformation of organs in the presence of a surgical tool. Methods for
representing and rendering tissue shape, especially aspects that affect lighting
models that provide important visual cues, will be compared. Haptic interaction
with simulated models. There has been little work done or kinesthetic perception
and display of compliant surfaces. Subjects' perception of compliance will be
measured under a variety of conditions to provide requirements for object
modeling algorithms, and for teleoperation and haptic display schemes with high
fidelity. Real time data fusion and 3-D visualization. Although surgeons have a
variety of data sources available, they are not integrated into a useful 3-D
model. A major difficulty in integrating real time data during surgery is
compensating for shape changes due to deformability. Vessels and ducts will be
used to provide road-maps to locate important features. Training and interaction
with simulation. Modeling, rendering, and display factors that contribute to an
environment that will be effective for training, yet efficient enough to run in
real time will be determined. Using a set of fundamental skills, the
contribution of these factors to training transfer in students and experienced
surgeons will be experimentally studied.