* 9726632
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Concentration Flux       Measurements and Modeling of Scalar Transport in Bounded    Turbulent Shear Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Peter Bernard, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/2002
* USD 18,000.00

This three-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research on
studies of the dispersion of passive scalar contaminants from line and point
sources at the wall of turbulent boundary layers. The investigators will conduct
theoretical and experimental studies into the behavior and prediction of scalar
fields as it relates to urban air quality. The collaboration involves research
groups led by James M. Wallace of the University of Maryland and Michel Ayrault
of the Fluid Mechanics and Acoustics Laboratory of the Ecole Centrale in Lyon,
France. The experiments will combine optical measurement methods: Particle Image
Velocimetry and Mie scattering concentration measurements in order to obtain
scalar fluxes in the flows. In addition, the investigators will examine the
predictive capabilities of a new non-local scalar flux model for the same flow
conditions considered in the experimental work. The combined theoretical
modeling and experiments will advance understanding of the behavior and
prediction of scalar fields, thus reducing a principal source of uncertainty in
urban air quality modeling. The US investigators bring to this collaboration
expertise in studies of turbulent boundary layers and scalar dispersion. This is
complemented by French expertise in PIV/Mie scattering techniques and a special
windtunnel adapted to accommodate the requirements of the PIV/Mie scattering
measurement techniques.