* 9726635
* US-Japan Joint Seminar:  Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/1999
* Gerald Babcock, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

9726635 Babcock This award supports the participation of American scientists and
engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on proton-coupled electron transfer, to be
held in Kona, Hawaii, November 11- 15, 1998. The co-organizers are Professor
Gerald Babcock of Michigan State University and Professor Teizo Kitagawa of the
Okazaki National Research Institute in Japan. Recent rapid advances have been
made in this area. The x-ray crystal structures of the bacterial reaction
center, the cytochrome oxidase and the cytochrome bc1 complex have been solved.
Important structural work has come from studies using resonance raman infrared
and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. In addition models for proton
coupling to electron transfer and pathways for proton transfer into the electron
transfer site have been presented and tested by kinetic measurements, site
directed mutagenesis, theoretical calculations and other methods. Discussions
will focus on these models. This area of research has important applications in
photosynthesis and respiration; oxygen evolution in photosystem II and oxygen
reduction in cytochrome c oxidase, quinone reduction in bacterial reaction
centers and quinone reactions in the cytochrome bc1 complex. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve a mix of
researchers, including postdoctoral researchers and graduate students.
Proceedings of the meeting are expected to be made available by the organizers.
***