* 9726253
* Variable Bit-Rate Control of Distributed Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Kamal Premaratne, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mari Maeda
* 08/31/2002
* USD 269,643.00

An accurate model of an ATM communication network must take into account the
buffer delays which are time-variant, and nonlinearities arising from buffer and
source rate saturation and quantization. The time-variant buffer delays in
particular play a crucial role in the dynamic behavior of high-speed networks.
The ensuing nonlinear time-variant model however is extremely difficult to
analyze. All existing work therefore rely on simplified linear piecewise time-
invariant models. At simulation stage, network flow controller designs based on
such models may appear satisfactory; however, when applied to a high-speed
system, the true network often exhibits undesirable behavior in contrast to what
is predicted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, a more realistic model for
high-speed networks that includes time-variant delays and nonlinearities will be
developed. A distributed sensor network (DSN) that operates in a highly dynamic
environment is a particularly demanding application where the network time-
variance cannot be ignored. Indeed, treating such a network by conventional
piecewise time-invariant methods can lead to unacceptable oscillatory
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication and processing of signals from a
DSN that utilizes a variety of sensors which may be distributed logically,
spatially, and geographically, is an essential problem encountered in several
areas, such as, robotics, automation, aerospace, medical imaging, etc. In such a
DSN, decisions are made at each node in a particular hierarchical level by
fusing data communicated from the lower levels. In a highly dynamic environment
where the observed scene can change frequently and dramatically, it is essential
that importance measures or weights are attached to nodes in the network. This
allows allocation of `importance proportional rates' to each node. Such a
paradigm, when implemented via an ATM network with the available bit-rate (ABR)
option, is shown to allow effective utilization of bandwidth, possibility of
capturing transient network dynamics with minimal data loss, and adaptability to
fast changes and faults. To accommodate `bursty' traffic, buffer set points are
allowed to be varied according to importance of corresponding nodes.
Furthermore, network configuration guidelines that allow maximum utilization of
the proposed variable bit-rate scheme are provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
ensure fault tolerance, each node is provided with a local controller whose
parameters are chosen to guarantee the node rate to conform to the allocated
weight within a specified settling time. The fundamental requirement of
stability of such a time-variant network is achieved via recent results on
robust stability. The same methods will be used to provide bounds on maximum
delays involved and buffer lengths. This allows effective utilization of the
proposed strategy of variable buffer set points. For the assignment of
importance measures and weights to each node, Dempster-Shafer evidential
reasoning techniques are invoked. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;