* 9726183
* Analytical Chemical Approaches to the Elucidation of the    Structure of Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 12/31/2000
* USD 371,000.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
focusses on the development and characterization of new method for probing the
mechanisms and energetics of large ion dissociation in electrospray ionization
and matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry. Professor
Williams and his students at the University of California at Berkeley will
experimentally and theoretically study this new method, blackbody infrared
radiative dissociation, with smaller biomolecules initially. A long-term goal of
this work is to understand the role of salt bridges involving acidic residues in
peptides in the gas phase. The unique feature of this new method is ions ranging
in size from small to large can be trapped in a Fourier-transform mass
spectrometer cell and exposed to blackbody photons that activate dissociative
processes under controlled conditions. This experiment permits study of the
kinetics and mechanisms of these processes which also occur in other ion
dissociation methods, but under uncontrolled conditions. A new method for
inducing chemical reactions for ions ranging in size from small to large is
being developed and characterized in conjunction with mass spectrometry
experiments. Professor Williams and his students at the University of California
at Berkeley will use blackbody infrared photons to initiate these reaction under
controlled conditions in a mass spectrometer cell. The experimental and
theoretical characterization of this new method, developed in Professor
Williams' laboratories, will permit the study of the conformation of large
biological molecules, such as DNA, in the gas phase. This information is
important for understanding the chemistry of these biological molecules and
their structures.