* 9726146
* A Systematic Study of Overcoat-Lubricant Interfaces Used in Magnetic Recording Media
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2004
* Curtis Frank, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2004
* USD 462,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. It focusses on collaboration between Stanford
University and IBM Almaden Research Center on an extremely important problem,
increasing the durability and areal density of magnetic recording media.
Professor Klug and his students at Stanford University will work in close
collaboration with Drs. Wade and Sherwood at IBM Almaden to systematically study
the overcoat-lubricant interface of hard disks using surface spectroscopy and
solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. Overcoats on sol-gel
silicon dioxide and on amorphous carbon composed of perfluoro-polyethers will be
the focus of this study. The technology of magnetic recording devices will be
improved by this project and this high risk-high return project will enhance the
educational experience of students. The students will gain broad experience in
an industrial setting ranging from basic laboratory work to implementation in a
manufacturing facility. The mentoring of these students by many industrial
scientists will be invaluable to them as they make career decisions. Professor
Klug and his students at Stanford University will collaborate with Drs. Wade and
Sherwood at IBM Almaden Research Center in the Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry project to study the surfaces of magnetic recording
materials. Through a systematic study of the lubrication properties of these
surfaces computer hard disks will be developed that have increased data storage
capacities and improved durability. Solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy will be the central method used to study these surfaces and special
attention to handling of these thin film materials will be required in this work
in order to obtain useful information. Professor Klug and his students will gain
valuable experience through collaboration with their IBM industrial partners
during this project. Mentoring of these students by industrial scientists will
be invaluable as they make future career decisions.