* 9726389
* Challenges in CISE:  Planning and Control for Massively     Parallel Manipulation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* John Canny, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,366,236.00

9726389 Goldberg, Kenneth University of California-Berkeley Challenges in CISE:
Planning and Control for Massively Parallel Manipulation Increased
miniaturization of mass-produced products such as disk drives, displays, and
sensors requires fundamental innovations in design and parts handling. Many of
the components in these products will be integrated circuits and MEMS (Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems) fabricated with massively parallel wafer etching
technology. Conventional pick and place robotic techniques are inadequate for
the efficient assembly of these micron-scale components. This proposal addresses
an entirely new methodology founded on recent insights from sensorless and
minimalist robotics: massively parallel manipulation. The idea is to move parts
using planar forces and moments that require a minimum of sensing and servoing.
The shape of the field, as defined by the magnitude and direction of the force
at each point, can be designed to position, align, sort, and assemble arrays of
small parts in parallel. Planar force fields have enormous potential for precise
parallel assembly of small parts. The goal of the research is to develop an
entirely new methodology for precision part manipulation and to demonstrate it
with new theory, algorithms, and high-performance devices. This research has the
potential to parallelize the manufacture of a new generation of consumer and
industrial products.