* 9726077
* Development of Upper-Ocean Aggregation Models Useful for    Interpreting and Predicting Carbon Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* George Jackson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2001
* USD 341,315.00

ABSTRACT Understanding the mechanisms and rates of carbon removal from surface
waters remains an important goal of the Joint Global Oceanographic Flux Study
(JGOFS). Particle formation and sinking is an important process for such
removal. Much of the particulate fraction in surface waters is in the form of
small cells having slow sinking rates. For these cells to sink more rapidly,
they need to be packaged into larger particles. Fecal pellet production by
animals provides one way of doing this; aggregate formation another. Because
aggregates are the dominant form of sedimenting particles, understanding the
processes that form and destroy aggregates is crucial for JGOS to achieve its
goal. This proposal will develop models to increase our understanding of the
processes affecting organic matter export from the surface mixed layer. To this
end, the models will combine particle aggregation models with plankton food web
models. Data sets from the JGOFS process and time-series studies will be used to
determine and refine the ability of the models to predict carbon export. Data
collected during the JGOFS field programs will be used to refine the models.
Combining the simulation results with JGOFS field data will increase our
understanding of the processes affecting vertical export fluxes and improve the
accuracy of flux predictions made using the models. The results of this work
will increase significantly our ability to accurately describe the movement of
organic material from the surface to the deeper parts of the ocean.