* 9726535
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Influence of Natural       Processes and Human Modifications of River Channels on      Stream-Groundwater Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Frederick Swanson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/2002
* USD 23,000.00

9726535 Wondzell This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Steven Wondzell of Oregon State University and Professor
Futoshi Nakamura of Hokkaido University in Japan. The researchers will be
exploring the influence of natural processes and human modifications of river
channels on stream-groundwater interactions in the hyporheic zone of mountain
streams. The overall objective is to learn about controls on the extent of the
hyporheic zone and associated biological and geochemical processes in mountain
watersheds. The researchers are interested in constraints on vertical and
lateral exchange flows of surface and groundwater and how exchange flows may be
limited by controls on flow path direction and flow rate. Their general approach
is to combine: (1) field studies of existing natural and managed sites; (2)
before/after observations at sites altered by natural processes or experimental
manipulations of flood control structures; and (3) modeling to draw general
conclusions about types and magnitudes of effects of various constraining
factors. This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
complimentary expertise, research capabilities and equipment. Streams at the
Andrews Experimental Forest in Oregon range from relatively pristine to
moderately impacted. They offer the opportunity to study the natural dynamics of
forest-stream interactions and their influence on surface-and subsurface
exchange flows. Stream networks in Japan are highly modified relative to streams
in the Pacific Northwest. Thus, the Japanese streams provide an important
contrast to the pristine streams in Oregon. Research results will include
further refinements of the conceptual framework for riparian ecosystems as well
as specific findings relevant to the mountain streams under study. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understand ing and cooperation. ***