* 9726830
* Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the Aralia-Panax    Complex of the Ginseng Family (Araliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Jun Wen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 129,979.00

9726830 Wen Project Title: Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the Aralia -
Panax Complex of the Ginseng Family (Araliaceae) The disjunct distribution of
many morphologically similar plants in eastern Asia and eastern North America
represents a well-known biogeographical pattern. However, Liquidambar, a
biogeographic model in the North Temperate zone, recently was shown to have
given rise to the subtropical genera, Altingia and Semiliquidambar, despite high
levels of morphological cohesion in Liquidambar. These studies from Dr. Wen's
laboratory strongly suggest the need for examining the evolution of other
eastern Asian and eastern North American disjuncts in a broader biogeographical
context, including temperate, subtropical, and tropical regions. The Aralia -
Panax complex, which includes the medicinally important ginseng species,
American ginseng and sanchi, is an ideal candidate for such a study. The genera
consist of approximately 75 species that have a wide distribution in the
temperate and tropical regions in Asia and the Americas; Dr. Wen will collect
specimens for the study in Argentina, Peru, Indonesia, China, Nepal, and
Vietnam. Three major groups (Panax, Aralia sect. Aralia, and Aralia sect.
Dimorphanthus) have disjunct distributions in eastern Asia and North America.
Previous studies by the PI documented phylogenetic patterns in each of the three
lineages and suggested that the close relationship between the eastern Asian and
eastern North American disjuncts has been over emphasized. The goals of this
study are to 1) construct a robust phylogeny of the Aralia - Panax complex with
evidence from morphology, nuclear ribosomal DNA and chloroplast DNA, 2) examine
the eastern Asian and eastern North American disjunct pattern in the broader
context of temperate and tropical Asia and the Americas, 3) evaluate the
previous classification of the complex and examine the evolution of several
frequently used taxonomic characters, 4) provide taxonomic treatments for Panax
and Aralia sect. Aralia, and 5) develop a World Wide Web page on the systematics
of the economically important ginseng genus, posting information on morphology
and nomenclature, taxonomic keys, species descriptions, distribution maps,
conservation status, ethnobotany, common names, color photographs showing
diagnostic characters, and updated references. The taxonomic treatment of the
ginseng genus will be valuable for future pharmacological and ecological
research and for efforts to balance the conservation and the human use of these
resources. This study will also provide important insights into the relative
utility of different types of data for phylogenetic comparisons in plants.