* 9726713
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Probing Hadron Structure with    Polarized Photons
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Andrew Sandorfi, Brookhaven Science Associates, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

9726713 Sandorfi This award supports the participation of American scientists in
a U.S.-Japan seminar on Probing Hadron Structure with Polarized Photons, to be
held in Hawaii, from February 22-25, l999. The co-organizers are Dr. Andrew
Sandorfi of Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York and Professor
Takashi Nakano of Osaka University in Japan. The seminar will focus on a study
of nonperturbative QCD dynamics of hadron structure and how these can be
effectively proved with spin observables at polarized photon facilities in the
U.S. and Japan. The objective is to focus on the development of collaborations
between U.S. and Japanese physicists in order to optimize the capabilities of
new facilities in the two countries, both for performing future experiments as
well as theoretical investigations. The session will focus on four theme topics:
(l) identify the most important problems in baryon structure that can be
addressed with Y ray beams; (2) identify the facilities in the U.S. and Japan
whose capabilities are best matched to the problems; (3) identify the key
theoretical areas requiring work in order to interpret data from new
experiments; and (4) form collaborative teams to fully address these new
challenging goals. Results of the seminar should stimulate the cost effective
use of large investments in manpower and equipment. The exchange of ideas and
data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to
advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve postdoctoral
researchers. The proceedings of the meeting will be reproduced as a Brookhaven
Internal Report and will be distributed to the participants, as well a to
relevant research groups in the U.S. and Japan. ***