* 9726433
* Evolution of Genetic Architecture
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* James Cheverud, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Cheverud 9726433 The effects of genes may differ depending on which genes are
present at other loci. This phenomenon is known as epistasis. The collective
effect of epistatic interactions on gene effects is referred to as the effect of
genetic background. An important problem in microevolution and speciation
revolves around whether this genetic background itself evolves, thereby changing
the effects of the genes placed in them. Whether a particular genetic variant is
favored or not depends on which genetic background it is expressed in. In
previous studies, we have found substantial epistasis among genes affecting
adult body size in the cross between Large (LG/J) and Small (SM/J) mouse
strains. Thus, whether a gene makes an individual larger than average depends on
which other genes are present (the genetic background). We have also found
differential effects for jaw characters, meaning that whether a specific gene
affects both overall jaw size and local jaw traits depends on either the genetic
or environmental background. The presence of epistatic interactions facilitates
the evolution of the genetic background. In the proposed work, we will examine
the opportunity for genetic background evolution in two experiments. First, we
will test for genetic interactions between specific loci affecting the size and
shape of the jaw and their varying genetic backgrounds, represented by 200
independent full-sib families. This will allow us to determine whether
differential effects on sets of jaw characters are due to genetic or
environmental backgrounds. If the differential effects are due to genetic
background, then it is possible for the multiple effects of single gene loci
(pleiotropy) to evolve. Second, we will prepare a series of replicate
recombinant inbred lines from the cross of Large and Small mouse strains. With
epistasis, it is expected that these recombinant inbred lines will evolve
different genetic backgrounds. This will be tested by mating males from sever al
inbred strains into each of the Large x Small recombinant inbred lines. If the
effect of these "migrant" males differs depending on which recombinant inbred
strain it is mated to, the genetic background of the recombinant inbred strains
has evolved. The effect of mutations, or migrants, entering each strain will
vary, depending on the genetic background. The evolution of genetic background
during population divergence and/or speciation can result in the same gene
(introduced by migration or mutation) having a different effect in different
subpopulations resulting in the evolutionary divergence and even reproductive
isolation of the populations, even under similar selection pressures.