* 9726435
* Late Transition Metal Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* David McMillin, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 02/28/2002
* USD 329,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research in inorganic photochemistry by Dr. David R. McMillin,
Chemistry Department, Purdue University. A major objective is to use luminescent
probes to gain insight into the requirements for intercalation of transition
metal complexes into DNA. Various subsituents will be added to Cu(II) porphyrins
in order to tailor the excited state lifetimes and oxidizing abilities of these
luminescent, charge transfer compounds. The interaction of the copper compounds
with hairpin-forming oligonucleotides will provide information on base and
sequence dependence of DNA-binding interactions. Pt(II) terpyridines that are
very sensitive to electronic changes will be used to identify factors affecting
excited-state decay processes and to distinguish two types of adduct formation--
intercalation and covalent bonding--with form-B DNA. The charge-transfer excited
state of the intercalated complex is quenched by guanine, so the experiments
will also provide indications of possible nuclease activity. Transition metal
complexes can insert into a helical DNA strand disrupting its structure and
reactivity and can break the strand itself. Controlling the binding of these
complexs so that disruption or cleavage occurs at particular sites on the DNA
chain has important pharmaceutical implications. In this research, luminescent
probes will be developed to identify the type and location of metal complex
binding to DNA or DNA-like proteins. This research also has some relevance to
the development of temperature-sensitive luminescent paints.