* 9726617
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Novel Characterization of  Humic Substances and Their Role in the Behavior of Environmental Toxic Substances Using HPLC/MS/MS
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Roger Minear, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/2001
* USD 37,000.00

9726617 Minear This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Roger Minear of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
and Professor Saburo Matsui of Kyoto University in Japan. The researchers will
undertake a study of novel characterization of humic substances and their role
in the behavior of environmental toxic substances. The underlying hypothesis of
the overall research effort is that natural organic matter, and humic substances
as a subset, affect the environmental toxicology of anthropogenic compounds
through complex interactions that can affect membrane transport and mechanisms
of toxicological reactions. Following separation by membrane fractionation and
employing size exclusion columns and other partitioning principles, samples will
be analyzed using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) interfaced with
tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). This work should advance knowledge about humic
substances and their combination with selected environmental contaminants. It is
anticipated that characterization of molecular weight and fragmentation patterns
will be obtained at a level leading to information regarding actual molecular
weights not previously available. The goal is to develop new processes to
enhance the identification of the specific molecular structure of humic
materials. This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that
have complementary expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The
University of Illinois brings expertise in the isolation and concentration of
natural organic matter and humic substances plus new approaches to the
cooperative research endeavor. The Japanese researchers have an ongoing research
effort on the study of micropollutant effects in Lake Biwa, the largest fresh
water body in Japan that isof great economic importance to several major cities
including Osaka and Kyoto. Recent acquisition of major equipment, along with the
state-of the-art analytic al capabilities of researchers at Kyoto University,
will offer opportunities for advanced studies of drinking water research and
advanced toxicological techniques. Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***