* 9726277
* Investigation of Composite Facilitated Transport Membranes  for Separations of Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: CTS-9726277 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated
Principal Investigator: Richard D. Noble Affiliation: University of Colorado,
Boulder This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program
sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr.
Richard Noble at the University of Colorado, Boulder. The investigators propose
to develop an understanding of the separation mechanisms involved in facilitated
transport membranes. The novel aspect of the research is the development of
composite membranes where a fluorinated ion-exchange component is present within
the pores of a porous hydrophobic component. Sodium and/or silver are ion-
exchanged onto these composite membrane and the separation of olefins from
paraffin's will be tested. The investigators characterize the interfacial
transport along the ion exchange region of the polymer composite and determine
its role in overall membrane flux and selectivity characteristics. The
separation of very similar chemical species that differ very slightly in
molecular weight, is of tremendous importance to the chemical, petroleum
processing and fine chemicals industries. Traditional chemical processes such as
distillation are not very effective. Membranes hold promise for such separations
but to be commercially feasible, significant advances in membrane design have to
be made. This research addresses composite membrane design for the separation of
these species. If successful, implementation would lead to significant cost
savings to the chemicals and petoleum processing industries.