* 9726078
* High Precision Borehole Temperature Measurements at Siple   Dome, Antarctica, for Paleoclimate Reconstruction and Ice   Dynamics Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Gary Clow, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2003
* USD 136,460.00

9726078 Waddington This award supports a project to obtain a number of high-
precision borehole temperature profiles at Siple Dome for paleoclimate
reconstruction and ice dynamics studies. Continuous temperature logs will be
obtained in the 1 km deep fluid-filled Siple Dome borehole and in several 160 m
deep holes along a 20 km north-south transect across Siple Dome. The borehole
temperature data will be used to: a) establish the conductive heat flux across
the basal interface of the ice sheet, b) reconstruct the surface temperature
history at Siple Dome using geophysical inverse methods ("borehole
paleothermometry"), c) constrain how thick the ice sheet was during the late
Wisconsin, the magnitude of the Wisconsin/Holocene deglacial warming, and the
background geothermal heat flux, d) determine the calibration constants for the
oxygen-isotope paleothermometer at Siple Dome in the past, and e) establish the
spatial variability of surface temperature on the 20 km scale near the main
drill site during the last 100 years. The results at Siple Dome are expected to
provide data needed to assess the short-term stability of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet, improve our understanding of the magnitude of past temperature changes at
this southern hemisphere site, and lead to improved estimates of the pore close-
off ages in the past which should lead to an improved age scale for the Siple
Dome ice core.