* 9726186
* POC Production and Export in the Indian Ocean Sector of the Southern Ocean: A US-China Collaborative Research Program
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1998,10/31/2001
* Cynthia Pilskaln, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 10/31/2001
* USD 513,926.00

*** 9726186 Pilskaln This proposed work is a study of the biological production
and export flux of biogenic matter in response to ventilation of intermediate
and deep water masses within the Polar Front zone. It is a collaborative work
between the University of Maine and the Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition
(CHINARE). The shipboard work is proposed for the Chinese antarctic resupply
vessel off Prydz Bay in the Indian Ocean sector. In the austral Spring, this
region experiences phytoplankton blooms that are thought to be the result of
nutrient transport by the ventilation of intermediate and deep water masses. On
an annual basis, it is believed that such blooms are the primary source of
particulate organic carbon and biogenic silica flux to the ocean bottom. At this
time however no data exists on the amount of particulate organic matter that
sinks through the water column, leaving the quantitative relationships between
production and export largely undefined in this region. The initial phase of the
work consists of setting out a time-series sediment trap mooring at
approximately 64 deg S latitude and 73 deg E longitude to take advantage of the
historical data set that CHINARE has obtained in this area over the past decade.
The biweekly to monthly trap samples will be analyzed for their organic
constituents, and in conjunction with primary productivity observations will
provide the basic data from which export values can be derived. This work will
be carried out in collaboration with the State Oceanic Administration of the
People's Republic of China, and the Chinese Antarctic Research Expedition. In
addition to providing time on the antarctic resupply vessel, the SOA will
sponsor the shipboard primary productivity experiments and the supporting
hydrographic measurements. The collaborating American scientists will provide
guidance in making these observations to standards developed for the Joint
Global Ocean Flux Study, and provide the hardware for the moored sediment trap.
There will be a mutual sharing between the U.S. and Chinese investigators of all
samples and data sets, and the data analysis will be carried out jointly. ***