* 9726667
* CRB:  Experimental Tests of Captive Breeding Strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Lisa Meffert, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2001
* USD 245,000.00

Meffert 9726667 The research will use a model experimental system to simulate
the captive management of an endangered species and its subsequent
reintroduction into the wild. Standard captive breeding programs for endangered
species focus on maximizing genetic diversity with the intention to safeguard
the ability to adapt to the unpredictable conditions of the wild. However, some
studies suggest that alternative schemes to select against deleterious genes
might be more prudent. Anecdotal evidence from actual captive breeding projects
supports both sides of this debate, but a comprehensive evaluation is not
feasible on a true endangered species. Specifically, controlled comparisons of
the contrasting breeding schemes cannot be performed on remnant populations, and
long generation lengths obviate long-term studies. Consequently, irreversible
decisions are being made in efforts to restore endangered species even though
critical examinations of how populations recover from near-extinctions are
lacking. This research will take advantage of the amenability of the housefly
experimental system for large-scale tests of the long-term effects of reduced
population size. Through a collaboration with the conservation biology program
at the Houston Zoological Gardens, the experiment will incorporate fertility
constraints and captive breeding designs that are realistic for real-life
efforts to save endangered species. The experiment has three phases: (1) over
the course of ten generations, replicate housefly populations will undergo
continual reductions in population size to the point of imminent extinction, (2)
each resultant population will then be subjected to eight generations of one of
the two contrasting captive breeding designs (maximizing genetic diversity
versus selecting against deleterious genes), and (3) over the course of the next
eight generations, the populations will be exposed to the environmental stress
of unpredictable temperature. Reproductive health and genetic diversity will be
asses sed throughout the experiment. This three-year project, spanning 26
generations, will thus obtain data that would take decades or even centuries to
glean from actual captive breeding projects. Research in conservation biology
applies broadly to understanding the consequences of reduced population size.
Many natural populations often undergo cycles of population-crash and rebound,
independent of human influences. Rampant invasions by agricultural pests also
attest to the ability to spontaneously recover from low population size.
Experiments on model systems have proven to be a fertile methodology for
detailing the genetic complexities of near-extinctions. However, these same
studies have implied that the conventional restoration strategies for present-
day endangered species are too simplistic and possibly even counter-productive.
This research has unique potential to explain how populations in captivity,
agriculture, and nature escape near-extinctions.