* 9726642
* LTREB: Multi-species Herbivore Exclusion Experiment in a    Semi-arid Landscape in Laikipia, Kenya
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2003
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 06/30/2003
* USD 249,872.00

9726642 Young This project will support a long-term, large-scale factorial
experiment on the effects of native and domestic herbivores on each other and on
the land they share in East Africa. Eighteen 4-ha plots have already been
established that exclude six replicated combinations of (1) cattle, (2) wild
large mammals, and (3) mega-herbivores (elephants and giraffes). This is the
first controlled exclusion experiment that factors out the separate and combined
effects of livestock and large wild herbivores, providing a unique opportunity
to answer a series of basic and applied questions about the ecology of semi-arid
ecosystems. This research is being conducted at Mpala Research Centre in north
central Kenya. It is home to a largely intact fauna that is characteristic of
East African savanna woodlands, including elephants, two species of zebras, cape
buffaloes, elands, gazelles, giraffes, hertebeests, oryxes, lions, leopards,
cheetahs, and many other species of large and small mammals. This proposal will
document compensatory responses of the vegetation and of non-excluded
herbivores, underlying vegetation changes associated with exclusion, the mode
and rate of encroachment by woody plants, and the maintenance of the nutrient-
rich glades that appear to me major organizing features of this landscape
mosaic. This research will elucidate several fundamental issues in ecology,
including the maintenance of resource hot-spots by endogenous ecosystem
processes in a landscape mosaic.