* 9726607
* Collaborative Research: Morphological and Molecular         Systematics of the Polypodiaceae and Grammitidaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Thomas Ranker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 81,563.00

9726607 Ranker This study is a three-way collaboration between Dr. Thomas Ranker
of the University of Colorado, and colleagues, Dr. Alan R. Smith at the
University of California, Berkeley, and Dr. Christopher H. Haufler at the
University of Kansas, that builds upon the previous successful collaborative
efforts of fern researchers. This major research initiative will increase our
understanding of the evolution and diversification of seedless vascular land
plants. The goals of the proposed research are to explore groupings of related
species of two advanced fern families (Polypodiaceae and Grammitidaceae), their
evolutionary relationships and geographical histories, and morphological changes
through time. The 1000 species of ferns are well represented in the tropical
regions around the world and have relatively few temperate members, except for
the genus Polypodium itself. Although ferns in general are ancient plants,
recent analyses of the relationships of fern families suggest that species in
these two families originated more recently than any other ferns. Such a recent
origin suggests that a greater proportion of species in these two families
should be extant than in other more ancient groups where extinction may have
eliminated some groups; efforts to reconstruct the genealogical history of this
group may be more successful than those of more ancient, derived groups. This
research will consider a large number of species, and will attempt to sample all
of about 50 recognized genera and subgenera from both the New World and Old
World. Morphological characters and DNA sequences from at least three
chloroplast genes will be used in analyses designed to construct hypotheses of
the evolutionary history of these families. Quantitative techniques will be used
for inferring the historical biogeography of the ferns.