* 9726772
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Development of Multiple- Collector SIMS Techniques for High Precision Isotopic       Analyses
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Kevin McKeegan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/2002
* USD 21,440.00

This two-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research aimed
at developing new techniques for measuring isotopic abundance in geologic
samples using the CAMECA ims 1270 ion microprobe, a new generation high
sensitivity - high resolution secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS). The
collaboration involves the research groups of Kevin McKeegan at the University
of California, Los Angeles and Marc Chaussidon at the Center for Geochemical
Research and Petrography in Nancy, France. The first ims 1270 is operating at
UCLA as a National Science Foundation national facility. The US and French
instruments are equipped with a unique multiple ion beam collector assembly.
This multiple collector should allow improvements in precision and accuracy of
isotopic analyses using SIMS. The US investigators bring to this collaboration
expertise and experience in measuring oxygen and carbon isotopes with the new
ims 1270. This is complemented by French experience with the multicollector
SIMS. The groups will collaborate by cross- calibrating samples in each
laboratory and sharing analytical techniques, software developments, and
hardware improvements. The project will advance the use of isotope measurements
of terrestrial and extraterrestrial samples and open new research areas in
isotope geochemistry.