* 9726153
* Geochemical Tracers in the Northwater Polynya
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2002
* USD 468,442.00

This proposal seeks support for the principal investigators' participation in
the multi-investigator, international North Water Polynya Program organized by
Canada. The larger project will test hypotheses for the formation of the
polynya, and this proposal will supply Geochemical tracer measurements that are
important in gaining an understanding of the present-day ecosystem dynamics and
their relations to polynya size and formation processes. Specifically, the
Geochemical tracer work addresses two classes of processes operating with the
North Water polynya: 1) the sinking flux of particulate organic carbon (POC),
and 2) net community production and carbon cycling. The sinking flux of POC will
be quantified based on the water column distributions of the natural U-238
series radionuclide Th-237. The distribution of nutrients, oxygen and dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC) in the water column will be used to deduce the net
biological production of the North Water ecosystem. Dissolved organic carbon
will be measured to examine the partitioning between the DOC and POC pools. The
principal investigators have been invited to participate in the 1998 Canadian-
sponsored cruise to the polynya. Both spatial and temporal variability in the
Geochemical tracers will be addressed in the proposed sampling scheme.