* 9726027
* MOTI: Decision Making with Incomplete Information in an     Integrated Product and Process Development Enterprise -- A  Management Decision Tool for Cost Modeling &amp; Affordabili
* ENG,IIP
* 05/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 01/31/2001
* USD 124,756.00

9726027 Kohout A systematic accounting of incomplete or conflicting information,
constraints, and consequences has not been adequately addressed in the
propulsion industry during engineering design and planning. This impacts any
affordable aeronautics propulsion system incorporating new technology or product
development, the analysis of cost, and realistic and reliable cost /benefit
analyses in the design phase, which for advanced jet propulsion systems involve
determining the affordability of a design that has never before been
manufactured, and making technical/business decisions based on incomplete,
uncertain data. In the case of incomplete information, commonly used parametric
techniques provide limited assessment capabilities. The use of probabilistic
evaluations has improved the handling of certain types of uncertainty and has
been applied recently in the aeronautics industry for the handling of
likelihood. However, its use is limited to cases where an adequate historical
base exists upon which to base probabilistic studies A new methodology is needed
to provide an effective assessment of advanced technology, as well as the
uncertainty, i.e., confidence, in the solution, to enable the identification and
prioritization of high payoff and high risk research and product development
areas. The link between advanced concepts and accrued benefit to the aeronautics
propulsion industry is forged by the capability to perform realistic and
appropriate cost/benefits assessments, at the component level, and up through
the system level. This new approach to supplement the parametric and
probabilistic tools has focused on the application of fuzzy logic theory to the
decision-making process. The use of fuzzy attributes for cost models and
affordability applications addresses the problem of the limited (or unavailable)
data in the situation of materials with limited characterization data, processes
with limited empirical data, and manufacturing processes with little or no
manufacturing base. T he use of verbal descriptors parallels the knowledge-
gathering exercise and will provide the ability to assign different levels of
accuracy, precision, or certainty to each element, such as cost, material input,
or processing condition.