* 9726044
* Wilderness Policies and Cultural Values in Finland and the  United States
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1998,12/31/1999
* James Gladden, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 12/31/1999
* USD 20,430.00

WILDERNESS POLICIES AND CULTURAL VALUES IN FINLAND AND THE UNITED STATES As part
of a comprehensive, multi-year study of comparative wilderness polices in the
circumpolar north, this study is designed to analyze the types of human uses
permitted in wilderness areas in terms of the cultural values they represent.
Finland in its northern region and the United States in Alaska are well suited
for a comparison of Arctic Circle that policies. Both countries have large
amounts of land near and above the Arctic Circle that remain in a relatively
undeveloped and natural condition. Each also has established legislative
mechanisms to designate lands under its sovereign control as de jure wilderness.
Finland and the United States have indigenous populations in their Arctic
regions; northern Finland is the homeland of the Saami, while Inuit and
Athabascans inhabit northern Alaska. Although Finland and the United States
share the above traits as Arctic countries, they differ in several respects. The
northern geography of Finland is linked directly to its southern, more populated
and urban regions, while Alaska is detached from the contiguous United States.
Finland also has a younger policy history of establishing and managing de jure
wilderness. In 1964 the US Congress passed the Wilderness Act, and in 1980 it
approved the Alaska Lands Acts. The Finnish Parliament passed its Wilderness Act
in 1991, establishing 12 areas in its Arctic region as de jure Wilderness. The
study, an initial comparison of circumpolar wilderness policies, seeks to
increase understanding in three areas of concern. First, the study describes the
specific types and levels of human uses permitted by government policies in
Finland's northern wilderness areas. Second, it analyzes these human uses in
terms of what they suggest about the underlying cultural values held toward
nature by Finland. Third, the study analyzes uses permitted by public policies
in Alaska's wilderness areas with Finland's, comparing and contrast ing their
cultural approaches to the place of humans in nature.