* 9726688
* Water as Solvent for Metal-Mediated Carbon-Carbon Bond      Formations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Chao-Jun Li, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

This award is made to Dr. Chao-Jun Li of the Chemistry Department, Tulane
University, for investigation of carbon-carbon bond formation in water. The
award is in the Technology for Sustainable Environment component of the EPA/NSF
Parnership for Environmental Research, and support is provided by the Organic
Synthesis Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. Carbon-carbon
bond forming reactions are typically carried out using metal catalysts in
anhydrous organic solvents. In this study, the synthesis of various biologically
important compounds and fine chemicals will be carried out in aqueous medium.
The new method will be more efficient since the number of synthetic steps will
be reduced. Additional research to attempt to make the reaction catalytic is
also planned. Metal recovery and recycling from the aqueous stream will be used
to ensure that the new process is environmentally beneficial. The specific
reactions to be investigated include indium-promoted allylations,
propargylation-allenylations, and aldol reactions. Large volumes of organic
solvents are used in fine chemical and pharmaceutical industries for both
reactions and product isolation. These solvents must be recycled or treated by
costly methods rather than being expelled into the environment. By developing
alternative synthetic methods using water as a solvent, the disposal problem for
organic solvents can be reduced.