* 9726404
* RUI:  Effects of Litter Manipulation and Defoliation on     EM Community Structure and Specificity Patterns in          Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* V. Thomas Parker, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2002
* USD 350,000.00

9726404 Parker This study will use a combination of field and molecular genetic
techniques to directly measure effects of artificial defoliation and litter
manipulation on ectomycorrhizal (EM) community structure and specificity
patterns in a successional context. EM specificity is thought to be an important
factor controlling plant community dynamics, however, because it is often
impossible to definitively identify fungal species forming EM on given roots, EM
community structure and factors controlling specificity patterns are poorly
understood. Recent molecular developments have largely solved this problem, and
in previous work, these methods were used to perform the first field test of
conflicting hypotheses regarding specificity in a field setting in Yellowstone
National Park. This project will extend these results to study factors that
change during forest succession and are thought to influence EM community
dynamics. Specifically, these investigators will determine the roles of soil
surface litter and chemistry, and carbon allocation to roots in controlling EM
specificity. This project will be the first test of litter and chemistry effects
on specificity using molecular methods, and the first assessment of species-
specific responses by EM fungi in mutualistic relationships with plants to
above-ground manipulations. Furthermore, results from this study will provide
information critical to understanding connections between EM and plant community
succession in a geographically dominant mixed conifer ecosystem.