* 9726573
* Evolutionary Analysis of the Generation and Loss of         Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1998,07/31/2000
* George Roderick, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2000
* USD 85,000.00

Gillespie 9726573 We are undertaking part of a large study examining the dynamic
nature of ecological and geographic range occupation by species. The ultimate
goal is to determine whether, and how, evolutionary history dictates the size of
a species range, and hence its vulnerability to extinction. The focus of the
research is a large and diverse species radiation of spiders endemic to the
Hawaiian Islands. The current objectives are: (1) to resolve the evolutionary
relationships among 4 groups of the spiders, two of which differentiate
extensively within islands, while the others differentiate primarily between
islands or mountains; and (2) for a single group, to generate estimates of
effective population size and gene flow (using molecular markers) between
populations of each species. If it were possible to determine the natural
evolutionary changes in distribution among species through their evolutionary
history, then it may be possible to distinguish species that are naturally
restricted in their range from those that have been confined due to human
impact. The objective of the proposed study is to understand relationships among
populations and species, so that we will be able to go on to test whether the
natural evolutionary future of a species can be predicted. We have argued that,
for species characterized by extensive migration, local subdivision of
populations will be impossible. Therefore, species divergence can only occur
when a population becomes isolated, for example when it reaches a new land mass,
at which time the new species is also likely to expand in abundance and range.
In such a scenario, the most recently formed representative of a species group
will be the most widespread, while the older species in that lineage will be
more restricted and vulnerable to extinction. For species exhibiting reduced
migration, local population subdivision should be possible, with subdivided
species becoming more restricted in abundance and range. In this second scenario
the more recently derived species should be the most restricted and vulnerable
to natural extinction. The data generated in this study will indicate how
information on phylogenetic relationships among clades can be most effectively
coupled with data on effective population size and gene flow between populations
in order to statistically test for significant patterns of distributional
change.