* 9726951
* RUI:  Mutational Analysis of 16S and 23S Ribosomal RNA      Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Kathleen Triman, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2002
* USD 121,174.00

Triman 9726951 A detailed understanding of the roles of specific nucleotides in
the structure, assembly and processing of the bacterium Escherichia coli's
16SrRNA and 23S rRNA ribosomal RNAs is the ultimate goal of these studies. The
general approach outlined here involves the study of seven specific base pairs
in 165 rRNA and one specific base pair in 23S rRNA. These base pairs represent
sites in which conditional mutations have been identified that confer loss of
expression of a selectable marker (spectinomycin-resistance or erythromycin-
resistance) Each of the mutations disrupt a G-C base pair in or near a region of
rRNA involved in interaction with a ribosomal protein. Genetic studies of these
mutations will involve (1) introduction of compensatory second-site alterations
by site-directed mutagenesis, (2) determination of the phenotype conferred by
A-U replacement of each specific G-C base pair disrupted by the primary
mutation, and (3) determination of the phenotype conferred by the compensatory
alteration in the absence of the primary mutation. Restoration of base pairing
at a given position is predicted to confer full drug resistance if the mutant
phenotype is due to disruption of pairing. Failure to restore drug resistance is
taken as evidence that the primary mutation has disrupted some other structural
interaction in which the site is involved. Thus, the genetic approach can be
used to either confirm the importance of specific base paired nucleotides in the
secondary structure of rRNA or to identify unanticipated structural roles for
those nucleotides. These genetic studies are designed to determine the
importance of specific nucleotides by assessment of the structural and
functional impairments of rRNA molecules resulting from expression of base
substitutions at these positions. Databases of ribosomal RNA mutations
identified to date are also maintained. On-line access to these database is
being improved by implementing a query form and a data submission form and by
provid ing a Webserver. In addition, undergraduate students will be involved in
all aspects of this project. This research and database is important because the
ribosome is responsible for the translation of messenger RNA, the initial
product of genes, into proteins in all living organisms.