* 9726753
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research:  Ceramic Thin Films on   Self-Assembled Organic Monolayers
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Mark De Guire, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 16,444.00

This award supports Dr. Mark R. De Guire, one postdoc, and a graduate student
from Case Western Reserve in a collaboration with Fritz Aldinger of the Max
Planck Institute for Metals Research in Stuttgart. The collaboration between the
two groups will investigate the synthesis of uniform crystalline ceramic thin
films using aqueous solution precursors and organic self-assembled monolayers
(SAMS). The research tools include study of nucleation and growth of the ceramic
films using small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS); force measurements using atomic
force microscopy (AFM); modeling of interactions using Derjaguin, Landau,
Verwey, and Overbeek theory; and identification of key species responsible for
film formation and prediction of optimum deposition conditions using
thermodynamic modeling of the source solutions. The two groups bring unique and
complementary capabilities to the work. The U.S. group was among the first to
study and develop the deposition of ceramic thin films on SAMS. Researchers at
the Max Planck Institute have extensive experience in the study of
crystallization using SAXS and AFM. The work will advance the fundamental
understanding of mechanisms whereby films are formed, which will enable greater
control of the films' microstructures, higher growth rates, and easier
deposition of multi-component films.