* 9726676
* Collaborative Research: Longwave Radiation Processes on the Antarctic Plateau
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Thomas Grenfell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/2003
* USD 698,468.00

*** 9726676 Warren This project is an experimental study of long-wave radiation
processes near the surface at South Pole station. Instrumentation capable of
high resolution measurements of the infrared radiation fluxes at the snow
surface -- a so-called Fourier Transform Interferometer -- will be developed and
put in place in late 1999 and operated through the following austral winter.
Supporting observations of the temperature and moisture profiles in the lower
atmosphere, and of ice crystals in the atmospheric boundary layer will be made.
Long-wave radiation (also called infrared or thermal radiation) is an important
component in the energy balance of the atmosphere. On the antarctic continent
radiation processes dominate the surface energy budget. In summer the balance is
made up of four terms (incoming and reflected short-wave or solar radiation, and
emitted and reflected long-wave radiation); in winter after sunset the short-
wave terms are zero. The emitted long-wave radiation varies with temperature so
that the condition of radiation balance at the surface will determine a
particular value of the surface temperature. This study includes several
experiments concerning the emission characteristics of snow, of ice crystals in
the atmosphere, and of greenhouse gases near the surface. The concurrent
environmental conditions such as cloud base altitude, temperature and humidity
structure, ice crystal sizes and concentrations will allow the development of a
climatology of cloud properties, and substantially improved representations of
radiation processes in general circulation models. ***