* 9726707
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Origin and Evolution       of Amitochondriate Protists
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Miklos Muller, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2002
* USD 39,500.00

9726707 Muller This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Miklos Muller of Rockefeller University and Dr. Masami
Hasegawa of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics in Japan. The researchers
will be undertaking studies relating to the origin and evolution of
amitochondriate protists. The main goal of the collaboration is an in-depth
study of the nature and phylogenesis of single celled eukaryotes that harbor no
mitochondria, functioning as energy conservation systems. Although mitochondria
provide a significant energenetic advantage to eukaryotic organisms, they are
absent from a number of independent lineages. According to phylogenetic
reconstructions some but not all amitochondriate protists represent early
branches of the eukaryotic tree. Recent research suggests that most if not all
amitochondriates descended from mitochondria containing ancestors. The research
aims to contribute data and concepts in an effort to resolve this central issue
of the evolution of eukaryotic cells. This project brings together the efforts
of two laboratories that have complementary expertise, research capabilities and
equipment. The collaboration will unite the Tokyo group to functional molecular
facilities fully equipped for cultivation of the protists, enzyme studies and
molecular cloning. The Rockefeller group will have access, in Tokyo, to
extensive computing facilities with high-powered, novel methods of sequence
comparison and phylogenetic reconstruction. Results of the research should
significantly advance understanding of the evolutionary history of an unusual
but widely distributed group of eukaryotes. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. ***