* 9726213
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Identification by Scattered Sound of an Object in a Shallow Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Robert Gilbert, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/2001
* USD 16,905.00

This three-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research on
the identification of underwater objects using scattered sound. The project
involves the underwater acoustic group at the University of Delaware, led by
Robert P. Gilbert, and the Laboratory for Mechanics and Acoustics of the French
National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS), led by Armand Wirgin. They will
study a class of acoustic inverse problems in a shallow sea. These problems are
concerned with the identification of passive, undetermined objects. The unknown
parameters of these objects are its location and with respect to some reference
frame, its shape. The investigators will use an incident acoustic wave, which is
scattered off an object and emits a signal. The detected signal will be
analyzed, with the help of a computer, by means of a suitable inversion
algorithm. The US research group has investigated successfully a case of a
homogenous two-dimensional object in a reflective seabed. In this collaboration,
their goal is to identify in real time a three-dimensional object in a non-
homogenous sea. This collaboration takes advantage of complementary expertise of
US and French investigators. The results may eventually be applied to searches
for mines, navigational obstacles, wrecks, polluting waste deposits, and
submarines.