* 9726658
* Dissertation Research: Changing Socio-Political Dynamics    of Race in Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Conrad Kottak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/2001
* USD 11,465.00

Brazil has long been known for the diversity of its social and racial identity,
with lots of ways for people to identify along racial and ethnic dimensions, in
contrast to the US where the social identity of race was forced into a binary
black-white contrast. More recently a US style black-white oppositional style of
political identity has been growing in Brazil. This project involves the
dissertation research of an anthropology student from the University of
Michigan, studying race, class and collective political action in Brazil. The
student will study political activities and social implications of membership in
three neighborhood carnival and political associations in Salvador, a focal
point for Afro-Brazilian political mobilization. One group represents the while
elite, another traditional black culture, and the third represents contemporary
a black power movement. The project will test three hypotheses, that the
salience of a new `black` Brazilian identity is growing at the expense of
intermediate racial-ethnic-cultural categories with which a majority of local
people have traditionally identified; that the common racial identity will be
more salient as a ground for common interest than the diverse class,
educational, residential, gender or age identities; and that the newer `black
identity` organizations will weaken the older vertical, patron-client relations
that have structured local politics in the past. The student will conduct
participant observation in the groups as well as administer questionnaires to a
sample survey of 60 members of each. In addition formal life histories will be
elicited from a smaller number of members. This research will expand our
knowledge of this important region of the world, advance the training of a young
social scientist, and provide new knowledge about changes in race as an
organizing principle in Brazilian society.