* 9726539
* US-Japan Joint Seminar:  Intelligent Distributed            Autonomous Power Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Hugh VanLandingham, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2000
* USD 22,000.00

9726539 VanLandingham This award supports the participation of American
scientists and engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Intelligent Distributed
Autonomous Power Systems, to be held in Hakone, Japan from July 12-18, l998. The
co-organizers are Professors Hugh VanLandingham of Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and Osami Tsukamoto of Yokohama National University in Japan. The
seminar will focus on: (a) distributed intelligence which includes sensing,
forecasting, telecommunications, computers and control; (b) DC and dual-
frequency AC bus technology; (c) demand side management, time of use pricing;
(d) renewable energy, photovoltaics; (e) electric vehicles, battery and other
storage devices; (f) load forecasting; (g) fuel cells, microturbines; (h)
building energy efficiency; and environmental impact assessment. Power systems
of the future will have different requirements due to customer choice and
concerns about environmental degradation resulting from the generation and
consumption of electricity. Their choice may be based on a demand for high
quality delivered with a high degree of reliability, environmental concerns and
costs. In order to study the feasibility and functioning of such distributed
utilities of the future, the concept of Intelligent Distributed Autonomous Power
System is proposed. It will be composed of several autonomous power systems that
are loosely connected. These units will be responsible for their own load and
supply of electricity, but can and will depend on outside sources for their
normal operations. These systems will typically be small and will serve small
towns or parts of large cities. The topics identified need to be explored to
understand the set-up and performance of these Intelligent Systems. The exchange
of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Seminar organizers have made a special effor t to
involve postdoctoral researchers. The proceedings of the meeting are expected to
be made available on both universities' Web pages. ***