* 9726311
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Studies on Cluster        Structure, Motion and Reaction Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1998,12/31/2001
* James Lisy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/2001
* USD 19,500.00

9726311 Lisy This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Professor James Lisy of the University of Illinois in Chicago and
Professor Tamotsu Kondow of the Toyota Technological Institute in Chiba, Japan.
The researchers will undertake a study on cluster structure, motion and reaction
dynamics. They plan to characterize the physical and chemical properties of a
variety of small molecular aggregates, or clusters, of known size and
composition. The project capitalizes on the spectroscopic techniques developed
at Illinois, with the chemical reaction dynamics methods from Japan, and would
be extremely useful in a systematic study of structure-reactivity correlations.
An important area of investigation involves the study of molecules adsorbed on
transition metal cluster ions, a model for fundamentally and technologically
significant catalytic processes. The project brings together the efforts of two
major laboratories that have constituted different parts of the process. The
Americans have expertise in infrared studies of a wide variety of gas-phase,
mass-selected, solvated metal ions, and are interested in extending the
spectroscopic studies of solvated cluster ions to include more complex metal
ions such as transition metals. Japanese expertise is in the area of metal
cluster ion production and they plan to develop a continuous source of
transition metal ion and cluster ions over the next two years. Techniques
developed between the two groups should enhance the likelihood of obtaining
significant new results, over isolated investigations by either group. Through
the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. ***