* 9726262
* Population Genetics of Brown Tide Blooms
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Issac Wirgin, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2000
* USD 230,861.00

During the past decade blooms of the brown tide microalga, Aureococcus
anophagefferens, have devastated the ecology of Peconic Bay and Gardeners Bay in
eastern Long Island, New York and Great South Bay along the south shore of Long
Island. Blooms of this organism have also been reported in Rhode Island and New
Jersey. Economic ramifications of this bloom have included the destruction of
the 2 million dollar a year scallop fishery in Peconic Bay. Although studies
have elucidated some of the environmental conditions that favor blooms of A.
anophagefferens, clear understanding of its biology and comprehensive policy for
its control cannot be achieved without understanding the dynamics of its
population genetic structure. The goal is to develop Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) based molecular techniques which can be used to rapidly characterize the
temporal and spatial genetic variation among inter-bloom and bloom populations
of A. anophagefferens. The hypothesis that spatially and temporally disjunct
Long Island blooms, represent genetically variable populations of A.
anophagefferens in which different genotypes are the dominant members of spring
and summer blooms will be tested using molecular techniques to assay for genetic
variability in A. anophagefferens. These techniques will be used to evaluate the
spatial and temporal genetic variability of brown tide bloom populations in Long
Island samples. Comparrisons of the genetic relatedness of the Long Island, N.Y.
bloom populations to those in Rhode Island, New Jersey, and Texas will also
performed.