* 9726592
* The Effects of Climate Change and Plant Community           Composition on Methane Cycling in Peatlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Jeffrey White, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/2002
* USD 275,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DEB-9726592 White&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetlands are a
major global source of two important greenhouse gases: methane (CH4) and carbon
dioxide (CO2). In northern peatlands, plant community composition affects the
rates at which carbon cycles through the ecosystem and thus the rates at which
these gases are produced. The responses of peatland plant communities to altered
temperature and hydrologic regimes are poorly understood. Consequently, it is
difficult to predict how changes in plant community composition will be affected
by climate change and will affect carbon cycling and greenhouse gas generation.
This project will focus on changes in plant community composition as well as
carbon and nutrient balances in response to soil warming and water level
fluctuations. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs have transplanted blocks of peat to a
University of Minnesota lab facility, making miniature peat ecosystems, or
'mesocosms'. In several different treatment combinations, the PIs will use
infrared lamps to adjust soil warmth and will fix the water level to either 0,
10, or 20 cm below the peat surface. Subsequent monitoring of methane
production, destruction, and emission in the mesocosms will help the researchers
determine how peat ecosystem functioning responds to the temperature and water
treatments. The PIs will also measure root productivity and above ground growth
to assess how different plant species react to the changes. Major benefits of
this work will include a better understanding of the overall functioning of peat
ecosystems, their contributions to global biogeochemical cycles, and their
response to changes in climate.&lt;br/&gt;