* 9726086
* New and Export Productivity Regulation by Si and Fe in the  Equatorial Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Richard Barber, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2000
* USD 147,217.00

To identify and quantify the principal processes that control the partitioning
of carbon among oceanic reservoirs and between the ocean and atmosphere on focal
and regional scales, with a view towards synthesis and prediction on a global
scale, is a specific goal of the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project. As a
contribution towards achieving this goal, Drs. Barber, Peng, Chai and Dugdale
will develop an ecosystem model for the equatorial Pacific Ocean, with a focus
on how silicate and iron affect new and export productivity and the partitioning
of carbon between the atmosphere, surface ocean and deep ocean. The study will
use an ecosystem model embedded in a state-of-the-art general circulation model
for the equatorial Pacific Ocean to investigate how new and export productivity
responds to changing physical and chemical forcing. The domain of the model is
between 30ÝS and 30ÝN, 120ÝE and 70ÝW, with real geometry and topography, but
analysis will focus on the equatorial region from 5ÝN to 5ÝS. The recent upgrade
of supercomputers at North Carolina Supercomputing Center (NCSC) (CrayT90) and
Arctic Region Supercomputing Center (ARSC) (Cray-YMP) and the award of several
hundred hours of CPU time to Peng, Chai and Barber make it possible to embed an
ecosystem model with modest complexity in a high resolution, three dimensional
prognostic ocean model, and to conduct numerous experiments on the ecosystem
model structure and parameters in a timely and efficient manner. Phase 1 of the
project will modify an existing five-compartment ecosystem model by adding three
more compartments (silicate, diatoms and mesozooplanktonic grazers) following
the approach of Dugdale et al. The preliminary objective of this three-
dimensional Si/N/light model is to reproduce High Nitrate-Low Silicate-Low
Chlorophyll (HNLSLC) conditions. With size-dependent growth rate responses in
small phytoplankton and diatoms and varying grazing vulnerability, the role of
new diatom production regulating on Si and Fe can be thoroughly investigated.
Also in Phase 1, 2:CO2 and total alkalinity () ALK) will be added in order to
calculate pCO2. The pre-industrial atmospheric CO2 (280 1latm) will be used to
hindcast air-sea flux of CO2 in the equatorial Pacific. New production
regulating on silicate should provide a more accurate calculation of CO2
compared to using nitrate as a regulating nutrient. In Phase 2 the effect of
iron is added to the model making a, the initial slope of the photosynthesis vs.
irradiance curve, a function of iron. The values of a are based on equatorial
observations of natural and experimental iron additions. Independently, Ks for
Si(OH4) is made a function of iron, an effect that involves only diatoms. The
`balance to bloom` transition will be simulated with the two iron effects to
reproduce the IronEx 1 and 2 phytoplankton responses to a transient iron
addition. This modeling study will provide estimates of new and export
productivity, and a formal description of Si and Fe as regulating mechanisms in
the equatorial Pacific Ocean. When new and export productivity is modeled
accurately and validated with JGOFS studies, it will possible to predict with
increased confidence how climate change may alter, via biogenic export,
maintenance of the air-sea ApCO2 and hence the ocean's uptake and release of
CO2.