* 9726024
* Collaborative Research:  GPS Measurement of Crustal         Deformation at Pinatubo and Taal Volcanoes, Philippines
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Michael Hamburger, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2001
* USD 139,706.00

9726024 Hamburger This collaborative proposal (Indiana University and UCAR)
seeks funds to support a study of crustal deformation associated with magmatic
activity on two active volcanoes in the Philippines, Pinatubo and Taal. The two
volcanoes offer an opportunity to examine magma dynamics associated with two
neighboring, but very distinct volcanic systems - an explosive, subduction-
related, dacitic stratovolcano (Pinatubo) and an extensional basaltic-andesitic
volcano complex (TAAL). The PIs will use precise measurements of vertical and
horizontal movements of the Earth's crust using state-of-the-art Global
Positioning System (GPS) measurements, including a newly developed, low-cost,
single-frequency volcanic monitoring system currently in development by C0-PI
Meertens. This proposal requests funds for data collection and analysis; funds
for the GPS instrumentation are requested in a second, companion proposal to the
NSF instrumentation &amp; Facilities program. Among the principal scientific
objectives of the project are: (1) improved understanding of the magmatic
systems associated with active volcanic processes at the two volcanoes; (2)
analysis of long-term post-eruptive processes in the aftermath of Pinatubo's
cataclysmic volcanic eruption of 1991; (3) refined spatial control on magma
movement (at Taal) via development of a real-time volcanic monitoring system;
(4) identification of spatial and temporal interactions between tectonic
structures and volcanic systems - the Philippine Fault in the case of Pinatubo,
and the Marikina Fault for Taal; and (5) development and testing of new, state-
of-the-art crustal deformation measurement systems for volcanic monitoring.
These include use of real-time kinematic (RTK) measurements along dense profiles
on the volcanoes flanks, and a first field test of newly developed, single-
frequency GPS volcanic monitoring system. Specifically, the PIs research plan
includes the following experiments: (1) high-precision (sub-cm accuracy) static
GPS meas urements at Pinatubo, Taal, and fault-monitoring networks around the
Philippines and Marikina faults (Year 1); (2) lower-precision (1-2 cm accuracy)
RTK measurements along dense profiles on the two volcanoes (Year 1); (3)
development of a continuous, three-station, real-time telemetered, high-
precision (dual-frequency) GPS network around Taal Volcano (Year 1); (4)
analysis of data from static and real-time networks using Bernese software; (5)
installation and field testing of a 10-station array of single-frequency, cm-
level-precision GPS stations around Taal (Year 2); and (6) analysis of data from
the dual and single-frequency networks, and comparison with a parallel system in
development by colleagues at the University of Savoie (Years 2-3).