* 9726633
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Protein Folding at         Subzero Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Anthony Fink, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/2001
* USD 14,064.00

9726633 Fink This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Anthony Fink of the University of California at Santa Cruz and
Professor Hiroshi Kihara of the Kansai Medical University in Japan. The
researchers will be exploring protein folding at subzero temperatures. The
objective of the research is to use subzero temperatures to slow the rate of
protein folding down so that early events in folding may be monitored. In
particular, they are interested in using small-angle X-ray scattering to measure
the rate at which an unfolded protein becomes compact. Information about
concurrent secondary and tertiary structure formation will be obtained from
parallel investigations using circular dichroism and fluorescence. This project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The U.S. researchers' primary
expertise is in subzero temperature protein folding and the Japanese expertise
in the use of small-angle X-ray scattering to follow conformational changes in
proteins. Current stopped-flow technology is limited to processes with lifetimes
of about a millisecond or longer. the initial collapse of proteins is believed
to occur on a faster timescale. By using subzero temperatures, in conjunction
with suitable cryosolvents, they can significantly slow the protein folding
process, effectively extending the window of observation to shorter timescales.
Knowledge of the rate at which the protein collapses is very important and will
help distinguish competing models for folding. This should significantly
increase our understanding of the process of protein folding. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. ***