* 9726402
* Eighth U.S./Japan Workshop on High Tc Superconductivity,    hosted by the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory,      Tallahassee, FL, December 8-9, 1997
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* David Shaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 13,672.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9726402 Shaw This grant supports a US/Japan Workshop
on High Temperature Superconductivity, a two day meeting which allows sharing of
information among leading academic and industrial researchers with an interest
in promoting applications of high temperature superconductivity. A central
interest of the researchers participating in this workshop is the
commercialization of new technology based on superconductivity. %%% This grant
supports a US/Japan Workshop on High Temperature Superconductivity, which is a
two day meeting of leading academic and industrial researchers with an interest
in applications of high temperature superconductivity. Technical knowledge is
shared, along with information on the status of projects in those firms in the
US and Japan which will lead to commercial technological products based on
superconductivity. Some of the product areas are filters and related components
for communications and particularly cellular telephones; wires for use in
magnets, for power transmission, for energy storage, and for motors and
generators; medical applications including magnetocardiography and
magnetoencephalograpy based on sensitive magnetic field sensors of the
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) category; and digital
devices such as fast switches for communication systems. ***