* 9726550
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: High-Resolution Angle-Resolved Photoemission Study of High Tc Superconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Juan Carlos Campuzano, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/2001
* USD 13,200.00

9726550 Campuzano This award supports a three year collaborative research
project between Professor Juan Carlos Campuzano of the University of Illinois in
Chicago and Professor Takashi Takahashi of Tohoku University in Japan. The
researchers will undertake a high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission study
of high Tc superconductors. They will research an area of high temperature
superconductivity as well as fundamental questions related to dimensionality in
certain superconducting ladder compounds. The main objective of the research is
to extend their current experiments with new materials being developed in Japan,
and currently not available in the U.S. The Japanese have state- of-the-art
equipment that will allow for investigation of problems of current interest in
condensed matter physics, such as the connection between dimensionality and non-
Fermi liquid behavior, and the connection between spin gap behavior and the
presence of a pseudogap. Detailed momentum dependence and photon energy
dependence of the photoemission features will be investigated in the U.S. and
extreme energy resolution experiments will be carried out in Japan. This project
brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The U. S. researchers have
ultra-high resolution capabilities but no frequency tuning, while the Japanese
have the highest resolution spectrometer available, coupled with the highest
intensity source available. Young investigators, from both countries, will be
significantly involved in the research. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. ***