* 9726824
* Turonian (Upper Cretaceous) Angiosperm Flowers:             Structure, Systematics and Phylogenetic/Evolutionary        Significance
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* William Crepet, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/2001
* USD 190,000.00

9726824 Crepet Turonian (Upper Cretaceous) angiosperm flowers: structure,
systematics and phylogenetic/evolutionary significance The flowering plants
(angiosperms) are the most economically important, ecologically diverse, and
species rich plants on Earth today. However, our understanding of the origins
and early history of diversification of this important group has been hampered
by a relatively poor fossil record and, especially, few fossilized flowers, the
source of the best characters for identification. Previous studies by Drs.
Crepet and Nixon uncovered an extraordinarily rich assemblage of angiosperm
reproductive structures from early Upper Cretaceous (Turonian) localities in
northern New Jersey, which may be the richest deposits of angiosperm floral
remains. Over 100 taxa have been discovered to date. The age of the sites (90
MYBP) places them in the early history of major angiosperm radiations, and
offers the potential to discover additional unusual and phylogenetically
significant extinct forms. Already these fossils provide a stunning array of
floral innovations and are the oldest documented examples of numerous features
such as sympetaly, magnoliid receptacular cups, apparent nectar-producing
staminodia, various forms of stamen and anther modifications, and viscin
threads. The fact that these highly adaptive characters are represented in the
same deposits as a rich insect fauna presents an unusual opportunity to infer
modes pollination biology at a time when such relationships might have been
significant in flowering plant success. Because of the quality and detail of
preservation, these fossils can be placed into phylogenetic perspective with the
use cladistic analyses to select among hypotheses of relationships to modern
flowering plant groups. Analysis also will be used to test fossil
reconstructions of disparate, unattached organs. In addition, these studies will
provide test cases for various aspects of cladistic theory such as the effect of
missing data on an alyses and the significance of fossil mosaics (so-called
missing links). The techniques of scanning and transmission electron microscopy
will be used, and the work will include and a significant amount of curation and
databasing effort. The project will provide a large amount of unique data that
will be relevant to many other scientists including, particularly, angiosperm
systematists and pollination biologists. The analyses should move us one step
closer to understanding angiosperm relationships, early diversification, and
success.