* 9726577
* Advanced Optimization and Cost Estimation for Utilities and Interruptible Customers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gwendolyn Owens
* 05/31/2001
* USD 116,482.00

ECS-9726577 Luh Scheduling power systems and performing inter-utility power
transactions are important activities to supply reliable, economic, and clean
power. The economics of scheduling and transaction decisions, however, are
significantly affected by uncertainties, including inaccurate forecasted demand,
uncertain unit availability, and the random occurrences of bilateral power
transaction opportunities. The impact of uncertainties propagates to utilities'
industrial customers with interruptible load, as their prices or consumption
limits may be changed forcing them to alter their resource allocation and
personnel commitment. To reduce the cost of electricity through effective
managing uncertainties and to provide reliable price estimates for industrial
customers with interruptible load, a coalition of University of Connecticut
(UConn), Northeast Utilities (NU), Taylor &amp; Fenn, and Praxair is formed. The
specific objectives of the proposed research are: 1 . To develop an effective
stochastic-fuzzy optimization method for the short-term scheduling and
transaction problem to minimize cost, reduce solution variance, and manage
risks. 2. To further improve the above results by developing a new generation of
optimization approaches based on a synergistic combination of "Lagrangian
relaxation" and neural networks for better and faster resolution of larger and
more complicated problems - problems covering a larger number of units, with
three levels of reserve, or with a longer planning horizon. 3. To develop
methods to accurately and robustly estimate the costs for providing bundled or
unbundled electricity products and services, and to explore other means for a
utility to better serve its industrial customers with interruptible load. The
optimization of large-scale, mixed-integer uncertain systems such as the
scheduling and transaction problem considered here for near-optimal cost with
low variance is theoretically important and practically challenging. The
foundations needed t o be laid for and the potential benefits of neural networks
for such applications are intriguing and fascinating. Based on our excellent
results obtained thus far, we believe that the proposed research shall not only
help utilities cut costs, reduce variance, and provide better products and
services for interruptible customers, but also open up a new generation of
neural optimization approaches for other applications in power systems and
beyond.