* 9726222
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of Prey Species & Prey Scarcity on Predatory Wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Nancy Stamp, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/2002
* USD 120,500.00

9726222 Stamp Earlier questions in tri-trophic theory focused on whether plants
and insect predators function as mutualists or whether they have an antagonistic
relationship as a result of negative effects of plant allelochemicals. However,
it remains uncertain as to when these situations prevail. This research will
determine when plant allelochemicals have a negative effect on insect predators
by focusing on two of the major factors or conditions that affect insect
predators: prey quality and prey quantity. No study has simultaneously addressed
the effects of these factors on predator population growth and demography. The
model system to be used in this research includes predatory wasps, caterpillars,
and leaves that contain iridoid glycosides. The results of a series of
experiments will determine when plant allelochemicals affect an insect predator,
thus addressing the issue of mutualism vs. antagonism between plants and
predators. Because current foraging theory and predator-prey population theory
do not take into account the effects of plant allelochemicals on invertebrate
predators, these reults will broaden understanding of a major constraint that
most invertebrate predators must face. Furthermore, the results will indicate
how prey species fare relative to others that differ in plant allelochemical
concentrations.