* 9726178
* An Electronic Forum for Design and Manufacturing Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Jens Jorgensen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2001
* USD 159,980.00

This grant provides funding for the development of an internet-based electronic
forum and workshop for design and manufacturing education. The electronic forum
and workshop will provide organization and focus for the growing body of
research data, information and materials created by educators and industry
professionals. A network-centric approach will help ensure that those materials
are more widely accessible, and interactive aspects of the forum and workshop
system will foster opportunities for expanded dialogue and interaction among
faculty, students and organizations interested in design and manufacturing
education. The forum will also be a place where faculty, students and industry
can organize and coordinate a wide variety of collaborative activities, develop
and exchange course materials, and share resources and information that will
enrich the engineering educational experience. The electronically publishable
results of the many Technology Reinvestment Projects manufacturing engineering
education partnerships will provide initial content and motivation for
organizing electronic workshops; these resources will be expanded and encompass
a broad spectrum of resources from those involved and interested in
manufacturing education. The design, development and conduct of an electronic
community provides a unique research opportunity for faculty and students, and a
major objective is to ensure that knowledge about development and conduct of
electronic forums is broadly available to individuals or groups wishing to
establish similar kinds of communications infrastructures. Although electronic
forum and workshop will be developed for initial use by the engineering
community concerned with design and manufacturing education issues, the
software, data structures, tools and operational guidelines for operation of the
system will be designed in a content-neutral manner. By changing appropriate
configuration parameters, other disciplines and groups will be able to deploy an
instance of the electronic forum and workshop framework to support their unique
network-mediated dialogue and seminars and create specialized databases and rich
subject-specific resources for sharing and exchange within their community of
interest.