* 9726170
* Molecular and Morphological Studies of Evolution in the     Gelidiales (Rhodophyta)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* D. Wilson Freshwater, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/2002
* USD 103,440.00

9726170 Freshwater The red algal order Gelidiales contains many economically
important species; gelidialean algae are a principal source of agar, widely used
in the food and cosmetics industry and in microbiological, biochemical and
genetics research. However, the group as a whole, and species within it, have
been difficult to identify and classify. Traditional classifications of red
algae, including the Gelidiales, have been based on particular life history
types, and characteristics of the developmental morphology of the female
reproductive system. Developmental characteristics of the female reproductive
system and related stages in the life history are thought to be useful in
classifications of red algae, because changes in these characters would prevent
cross-breeding between changed and unchanged algal populations (reproductive
isolation), leading to the formation of species and, ultimately, lineages of
species (clades). Independent data are needed to test the idea that these
reproductive characters are useful in classification, and also are needed to
provide a means of classifying algae for which, as in many Gelidiales,
information from reproductive systems is hard to obtain or interpret. In this
study, D. Wilson Freshwater will document the vegetative morphology and
reproductive strategies of key gelidialean taxa, and will reconstruct the
phylogenetic history of these taxa on the basis of both these characters and DNA
sequence data from several nuclear and plastid genes. The work is expected to
result in a robust reconstruction of the phylogenetic history of the Gelidiales
and evaluate the utility of life history and reproductive characters in
reconstructing this history, in Gelidiales and in other red algae.