* 9726260
* ECOHAB: Algicidal Bacteria and the Regulation of Gymnodiniumbreve Blooms in the Gulf of Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gregory Doucette, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 163,929.00

Blooms of the toxic dinoflagellate Gymnodinium breve occur in coastal waters
throughout much of the Gulf of Mexico, but are especially problematic along the
Florida coast where these annual events last at least 3 months and exact a large
toll on the regional economy with losses estimated at about $20 million per
episode. The current project is aimed at beginning to elucidate the role of
algicidal bacteria in promoting the decline and dissipation of G. breve red
tides along the Florida Gulf coast. The hypothesis that algicidal bacteria
specific for G. breve are present in microbial assemblages indigenous to the
Florida Gulf coast is tested using a straightforward, previously successful,
approach which involves isolating bacteria that prohibit or interfere with the
growth of G. breve. Isolation media used select for bacteria requiring G. breve
derived organics, a characteristic of several previously described algicidal
bacteria. A formulation supporting growth of bacterial strain 5N 3, a strain
lethal to G. breve is also tested. Bacterial isolates with algicidal activity
specific for G. breve are characterized with classical and molecular techniques.
The latter will provide small subunit (ssu) rRNA sequence data, which will be
used during a follow up study to design and develop oligonucleotide probes for
these bacterial strains. The work proposed herein represents the first attempt
to investigate the association between algicidal bacteria and HABs in U.S.
waters. This project is anticipated to result in the isolation and
identification of a bacterial strain(s) which inhibits specifically the growth
of the Florida red tide dinoflagellate, G. breve. Sequencing of the ssu rRNA
gene and the subsequent development of rRNA probes will provide a means by which
to track populations of these bacteria in controlled (e.g., mesocosms) as well
as natural systems, and thus to better assess their involvement in promoting
bloom decline. Finally, the knowledge gained from this study is an essential
first step in critically evaluating the potential use of algicidal bacteria as a
means of controlling or regulating HABs, a process currently underway in other
countries severely impacted by algal blooms (e.g., Japan)