* 9726199
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Interior Point   Methods for Optimal Control and Shape Optimization
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Richard Byrd, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/2002
* USD 15,000.00

9726199&lt;br/&gt;Byrd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports US-
France cooperative research on methods for optimal control and shape
optimization. The researchers are Richard Byrd from the University of Colorado,
Jorge Nocedal of Northwestern University, Jean Charles Gilbert and Patrick Le
Tallec of the French National Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied
Mathematics (INRIA) in Rocquencourt, France. The objective of their research is
to develop new algorithms and software for solving large optimal control and
shape optimization problems. These problems arise in many areas of application
where realistic models often involve thousands of variables and constraints.
They propose to develop new interior point methods that are tailored to large,
nonlinear models, and provide high quality implementation of them. Their methods
will be guided by two important application areas: (1) control of an immersed
vehicle in the ocean; and (2) optimal design of nonlinear
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US and French researchers have
complementary expertise in optimal control problems with constraints and in
algorithm design tailored to optimal control problems and shape optimization
problems. Their collaboration will advance the development of effective software
for solving application problems.&lt;br/&gt;