* 9726766
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Structure, Seismicity and  Tectonics of the Japanese Island Arc from New Deep Seismic  Exploration
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Larry Brown, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 33,000.00

9726766 Brown This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Larry Brown of Cornell University and Professor Naoshi Hirata
of the University of Tokyo in Japan. The researchers will be undertaking a study
of the structure, seismicity and tectonics of the Japanese island arc from new
deep seismic exploration. Japanese scientists are developing a program for the
systematic exploration of the Japanese islands by deep seismic surveys on land
to be combined with comparable efforts by marine groups offshore. They are
developing a new deep seismic reflection/refraction transect. The transect will
attempt to delineate the deep geometry of major active, intra-arc faults at
depth in an area where the current tectonic boundary conditions are relatively
simple. These geometries are a critical missing element in understanding strain
partitioning within the crust and the dependent dynamic models of earthquake
tectonics. The researchers will focus on optimal design and execution of deep
seismic surveys, coupled with an integrated, global approach to interpreting the
results of those surveys. This project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
Cornell group will provide expertise in the application of reflection seismic
methods to a wide variety of lithospheric imaging problems while the Japanese
researchers will provide expertise in fault tectonics and earthquake mechanisms.
The geologic targets of deep seismic profiling in Japan are of scientific
interest in their own area. However, these results are also likely to have much
broader implications for researchers in other areas, both in terms of technique
development and geological models of continental evolution and active tectonics.
Younger scientists will also be participating in this project. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promo te international understanding and cooperation. ***