* 9726704
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Computer-Aided Study of the Rapid Shrinkage of Glaciers in the Himalaya
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Howard Conway, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 03/31/2003
* USD 21,150.00

9726704 Raymond This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Charles Raymond of the University of Washington and Professor
Masayoshi Nakawo of the University of Nagoya in Japan. The researchers will
undertake a computer-aided study of the rapid shrinkage of glaciers in the
Himalaya. Glaciers are retreating especially rapidly in many tropical and sub-
tropical mountain regions. Over the last two decades, glaciers in the Himalaya
show mass balance rates that are amongst the most negative of any region of the
world. The losses of glacier mass are indicative of climate warming over the
last half century. However, quantitative interpretation of the retreats in terms
of past climate changes requires elucidation of the processes that relate the
masses and lengths of glaciers to climate. The researchers will use a
combination of models that predict the mass balance of a glacier from climate
input and the redistribution of ice mass by glacier flow. The mass balance
models will be based on field observation, by the Japanese, of environmental
characteristics peculiar to the Himalaya. These include accumulation
predominantly in the summer and retardation of melting by extensive thick covers
of rock debris. The glacier geophysics group at Washington will aid in the
adaptation of ice flow models to the Himalayan glaciers under study. *** This
project brings together the efforts of two groups that have complimentary
expertise and research capabilities. Results of the research should quantify the
significance of the disappearance of glaciers as an important indicator of
global climate change. The results should also help indicate the degree to which
the shrinkage of debris covered glaciers can pose flood hazards for down-stream
areas. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden
our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation.