* 9726321
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Joint Electromagnetic      Experiment on Miyaka-Jima Volcano in Japan and in           Long Valley Caldera in California
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2000
* Malcolm Johnston, Geological Survey-Menlo Park
* Interagency Agreement
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2000
* USD 21,925.00

9726321 Johnston This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Dr. Malcolm Johnston of the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park,
California and Professor Yoichi Sasai of the University of Tokyo in Japan. The
researchers will be undertaking a joint electromagnetic experiment on Miyake-
Jima volcano in Japan and in Long Valley caldera in California. Electric and
magnetic signals have long been reported to be associated with volcanic
activity, but a rigorous connection between the observations and the precise
underground physical phenomena remains elusive. This research focuses on the
measurement known as "self- potential" (SP) in which the volcanic process is an
underground battery driving continuous electric currents. It will involve
careful SP measurements at volcanic environments in Japan and California, with
particular emphasis on separating non-volcanic sources of signal from volcanic
sources and comparison with laboratory and theoretical studies. The researchers
will attempt to quantify the volcanic hazard associated with magmatic dikes that
have been injected at depths that are inaccessible to direct sampling. The
objectives of the research are to determine: (1) the relative importance of
fluid flow and charge generation processes within active volcanoes, (2) the
relative contributions to self-potential observations from elevation and fluid
flow, (3) whether deep intrusions can be detected on active volcanoes such as
Miyake-Jima and Mammoth Mountain and (4) The stability of SP anomalies as dikes
cool and become more resistive yet retain sufficient heat to drive fluid and gas
flow. This project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
complementary expertise, research capabilities and equipment. Results of the
research should define the usefulness of this method for determining the
location of new and existing dikes and sills for volcanic hazard identification.
Through the exchange of ideas and technolo gy, this project will broaden our
base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.
***