* 9726270
* Collaborative Research:  Fundamental Investigation of       Modeling for LES of Atmospheric Boundary Layer Flow Near the Land-Atmosphere Interface
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Charles Meneveau, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 08/31/2001
* USD 291,482.00

The main objective of this research is to study air motion and transport in the
Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) at spatial scales smaller than the smallest
spacing of the grids used in Large-eddy Simulations (LES), and to use the
knowledge gained to improve parameterizations in LES. Large-eddy simulation is
playing an increasingly important role in improving our understanding of land-
atmosphere interaction at scales that are relevant in the ABL. Understanding of
this interaction is important for both climate and mesoscale models.

The studies will be based on field measurements using arrays of sonic
anemometers and a lidar velocimeter currently being developed. There will be two
field campaigns. One will take place near Iowa City, IA. It will include an
array of three-dimensional sonic anemometers and fast-response hot-film sensors.
The site consists primarily of a grass field. Data will be collected over a six-
week period. The second field campaign will take place near Davis, CA over a
one-month period and will use the wind lidar and elastic lidar to study the
depth of the ABL, arrays of sonic anemometers and standard flux-energy balance
instrumentation.

The main result of this project will be that LES will be able to simulate
turbulence in the atmospheric boundary layer more realistically.