* 9726721
* Advanced IMAC Methodology
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Victor Hruby, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

F97 Abstract - Molecular Biochemistry Jerker Porath/Roberto Guzman MCB 9726721
1. Technical This study is intended to explore and improve adsorption/desorption
methods which are based on phase distributions as they are governed by the
interactions between proteins and metal ions immobilized in gels such as cross-
linked agarose. The Immobilized Metal ion Affinity (IMA) principle is presently
underdeveloped in comparison to Ion Exchange. Only two simple chelating ligands
(imino diacetate (IDA) and nitrilo triacetate (NTA)) are presently in common
use. They meet only modest demands. Immobilized hard and soft metal ions used in
this study offer distinct advantages, since they can serve as nuclei for
affinity adsorbents of higher order of complexity with carbohydrate specificity,
phosphate selectivity and more. Displacement and carrier displacement
chromatography will be attempted later with a new kind of affinity displacers
obtained by enzymatic degradation of dextran gel derivatives. Present studies
are focused on protein chromatography on gels substituted with ligands that form
chelates with iron, manganese, calcium and lanthanides. Adsorbents based on
cross-linked agarose are synthesized to meet requirements for chromatography of
proteins on hard immobilized metal ions of this kind. The interactive ligands
should contain metal coordinating oxygen atoms. Carboxymethylated amines,
condensed amino derivatives of 8-hydroxyquinoline and salicyl-aldehyde are
selected as typical examples of such ligands. Mannich and Michael condensation
reactions are used to introduce the aromatic functions into the gel-bound amino
ligands. Synthetic hybrid gels containing agarose and polyethylene imide are
used in cross-links, in the presence and absence of metal ions, in attempts to
increase metal ion selectivity. The quality of the absorbents is assessed by the
determination of selectivity, capacity and the hydrodynamic properties of
chromatographic beds (flow-rate pressure relationships). Affinity displacement
chromatography are developed with chelators as displacers. Soluble chelators of
different strength are used as competitors to the substances to be purified for
the metal interaction sites (the affinity centers of the absorbent), and
chelators bound to carrier polymers of various molecular size as spacer
displacers. The studies are aimed at determining the capacity for isolation of
various metal binding proteins and phosphoproteins, with priority set to test
the separation of iron and manganese binding proteins present in bovine choroid
plexus - an organ believed to prevent toxic metal ions from entering the brain.
2. Non-Technical IMAC (Immobilized Metal Ion Affinity Chromatography) is a
chromatographic method that utilizes strong affinity between solutes in the
sample medium and metal ions fixed to a solid, granular support. Only a few
metal ions such as zinc, copper and nickel that have specific affinity for
histidine side chains in the proteins that have so far been used. This study is
aimed to broaden the field of IMAC to include other metals and other affinity
groups in proteins. Preliminary studies have shown that phosphate and
carboxylate groups are affinity targets for immobilized "hard" metal ions such
as tripositive iron and calcium. Phosphoproteins and calcium binding proteins
are substance categories of profound biological importance. Group selective IMAC
methods for these kinds of proteins are developed in this study with the aid of
specifically synthesized adsorbents for affinity elution, maximizing the
resolving power. Soluble chelators of different molecular size and structure are
used as competitors for binding. Manganese is a metal likely to show
chromatographic protein affinity behavior between calcium and iron. The
isolation of manganese bound proteins from bovine choroid plexus is being
tested, using adsorbents containing fixed iron and/or lanthanides such as
europium. These metal- bindi ng proteins are presumably the vehicles for
protecting the brain from heavy metal ion damage, and the understanding of their
properties is physiologically important.