* 9726938
* Research on Blue and Near Ultraviolet Diode Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Arto Nurmikko, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9726938 Nurmikko The PI proposes a research program whose objective is to focus
on specific areas of basic and applied semiconductor science to aid in the the
continued development of the group III-nitride based semiconductor blue lasers
and extension of such devices to the near ultraviolet. Further progress in this
field of vast technological potential requires systematic scientific efforts.
The PI identifies and addresses two critical areas in the proposed program: (a)
the study of optical gain and related radiative processes in the nitride quantum
wells for optimizing the active region of the laser and implementing a low
threshold device design, and (b) development of understanding at a microscopic
level of the p-type ohmic contact problem. In addition to the overall
idiosyncracies of a widegap semiconductor, both of these problem areas are
impacted by the complex and rich microstructure of the nitride heterostructures.
In the planned work we thus also look for key links between the crystal
microstructure and optoelectronic properties which are presently poorly
understood. Apart from our early results on nitride-based diode light emitters,
the PI takes advantage of our experience with bluegreen II-VI semiconductor
lasers where the issues of gain, device design, and contacts were successfully
pursued by the PIs for advancing these quantum well diode devices. Significant
differences and distinct challenges do, of course, exist in the nitrides;
however, given the common features that are shared by wide bandgap
semiconductors at a fundamental level provides a very useful base of comparison
for quantitatively and scientifically meaningful comparisons, The proposed
research takes advantage of special capabilities and techniques adapted to the
study of both nitride-based heterostructures and diode laser devices. For
example, advanced laser-based spectroscopic techniques, including ultrafast
real-time spectroscopy will be applied to study the optical gain and dynamics of
a high density lo w dimensional electron-hole pair in a disordered system such
as the InGaN QW where electronic localization effects are important. The
techniques include high spatial resolution probes such as near-field optical
microscopy. For the p-type contact studies, in-situ deposition of metallization
and InN heterostructures in UHV environment is proposed as a means to study the
microscopic properties of the metal-nitride interface in order to optimize a low
resistance contact for diode laser application. ***