* 9726921
* LTER: Plum Island Sound Comparative Ecosystem Study (Pisces)Effects of Changing land Cover, Climate and Sea Level on    Estuarine Trophic Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2005
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2005
* USD 4,859,262.00

Human activities in rivers and watersheds have altered enormously the timing,
magnitude and nature of inputs of materials such as water, sediments, nutrients
and organic matter to estuaries. An important but neglected linkage between land
and coastal waters is the input of dissolved and particulate organic carbon and
organic nitrogen. This long term ecological research (LTER) in land/ocean margin
ecosystems will focuses on the question-How will trophic structure and primary
and secondary productivity in estuaries be affected by changes in organic
matter, nutrient and water fluxes caused by changing land cover, climate and sea
level? The project examines this question through 1) short and long term
measurements of the fluxes of dissolved and particulate organic carbon and
organic nitrogen entering estuaries from land, marshes and the ocean, 2) short
and long term manipulative experiments to determine the effects of nutrient and
organic matter interactions on the flow of C and N through pelagic and benthic
food webs, and 3) modeling the effects of land use changes on food web
transformations. The proposed research integrates estuarine biogeochernistry
with studies of food webs and population biology of higher trophic levels. The
research program will create a legacy of well designed and documented ecological
experiments and observations. A data base of research results will be accessible
(WWW) to the scientific community. The study builds on the existing long term
research record at Plum Island Sound, MA, and at the North Inlet, SC and Wells,
ME National Estuarine Research Reserves. Intensive work will take place at Plum
Island Sound, and specific comparative studies at North Inlet and Wells. The
research is designed to take advantage of natural differences between these
systems to determine the importance of inorganic and organic matter interactions
in controlling trophic structure, production and efficiency. The project will
make a unique contribution to our understanding of land margin ecosystems by
determining how changing nutrient supply interacts with the quality and quantity
of organic matter to affect estuarine trophic structure. It will also develop
modeling methods to link highly variable physical drivers, here tides, long term
sea level rise, river inflow, and water circulation, with the understanding of
ecological processes. The dynamic models developed will be useful in a variety
of ways for predicting effects of various coastal management options. For
example, the spatially explicit models to be developed can be used to predict
the effects of changing land use on eutrophication and fish production.