* 9726789
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Experimental and Theoretical Studies on Stucture and Catalytic Activity of di- and     Polynuclear Metal Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Keiji Morokuma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2001
* USD 50,148.00

9726789 Ojima This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor Iwao Ojima of SUNY, Stony Brook, Professor Keiji Morokuma of
Emory University and Professor Eiichi Nakamura of the University of Tokyo in
Japan. The researchers will be undertaking experimental and theoretical studies
on structure and catalytic activity of di- and polynuclear metal complexes.
Professor Ojima has been designing and developing new and efficient homogeneous
catalytic reactions promoted by heterobimetallic catalyst systems, that provide
useful synthetic methods for organic synthesis. He has discovered
silylformylation and various silylcarbocyclizations and has been trying to
elucidate the most plausible mechanisms for these catalytic processes. His
collaborations with theoretical chemists, who have experience in analyzing the
problems in homogeneous catalysis and di-/polynuclear metal complex systems,
will provide insight into the theoretically predicted pathways. This project
brings together the efforts of three laboratories that have complementary
expertise, research capabilities and equipment. Professor Ojima's expertise is
in organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis. Professor Morokuma is a
theoretical chemist who can uniquely deal with the catalytic cycles of
transition metal catalyzed processes. Professor Nakamura has a wide range of
expertise in experimental as well as theoretical research. It is anticipated
that this trilateral collaborative research will disclose novel mechanistic
aspects of the catalysis of di- and polynuclear metal complexes, which are very
likely to imply new organometallic species in the catalytic cycle. This
information will stimulate the exploration of new and significant organometallic
transformations and help in the design of highly regio-, stereo- and
enantioselective catalyst systems with applications in industrial processes.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden o ur
base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.
***