* 9726137
* Ferrar Large Igneous Province Study (FLIPS)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/2002
* USD 185,000.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science
Foundation, supports an international collaborative research project involving
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, USA, and the British Antarctic
Survey (BAS). The objective is to understand the origin, emplacement, and
evolution of Jurassic (180 million year old) basaltic rocks in Antarctica which
formed when the Gondwana supercontinent started to disintegrate. The research
team will test a new unified model for this 180 million year magmatic activity
in which the magmatism is caused by a single mantle superplume and is a major
factor in continental rifting. Within Antarctica, the Jurassic basaltic rocks
are divided into two provinces: Ferrar Large Igneous Province (FLIP) and the
Dronning Maud Igneous Province (DMIP) (the official US name for Dronning Maud
Land is Queen Maud Land - the foreign term will be used for purposes here
because the project is collaborative with BAS). The origin of the FLIP is
problematical and a plume origin has generally been discounted because of its
lateral distribution over 3000 km along the Transantarctic Mountains and also in
southern Australia. The FLIP is characterized by unusual geochemical
compositions, which has been attributed to their origin from an enriched mantle
source. In the model being investigated by this research team, the FLIP magma
would have been significantly contaminated in an upper continental crustal magma
chamber (probably the Dufek Intrusion) whereas the DMIP has distinctly mantle-
like chemical characteristics but still shows some evidence of modification by
crustal material. In this research, the team will examine and sample the rocks
of the DMIP and rocks of the FLIP in the Theron and Pensacola Mountains and
Dronning Maud Land. The team will conduct an integrated study of the age,
geochemistry, and structural relationships of the FLIP and DMIP. Radiometric age
determinations will examine the age relationship between the FLIP and DMIP.
Models for upper crustal contamination of the FLIP magmas will be tested using
isotopic studies and geochemical modeling. Other studies, conducted by BAS
collaborators, include a regional aerogeophysical survey to determine the size
and shape of the Dufek Intrusion and a detailed survey will search for a feeder
dike system from the body.