* 9726537
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Effects of Percolation on the Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Nanocomposite  Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Eric Baer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/2001
* USD 15,000.00

This two-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research on the
development of new composite materials with novel interactive electrical and
mechanical properties. The collaboration involves Eric Baer and Anne Hiltner at
the Center for Applied Polymer Research, Case Western Reserve University, and
Jean-Yves Cavaille at the Center for Research of Macromolecules, Joseph Fourier
University, Grenoble, France. The investigators will explore the development of
new materials using nano-scale conductive cellulose whiskers, which will be
dispersed in a thermoplastic matrix and coextruded with an elastomeric polymer.
Using microlayer multiplying technology, the investigators will try to produce
nano-scale layered composite materials. Parallel studies will be conducted on
the electrical characteristics of the microlayered composites and the
viscoelastic mechanical properties of these systems. The mechanical properties
of the microlayers will be measured in the US laboratory. French investigators
will determine the electrical and coupled mechanical-electrical properties. The
US investigators bring to this collaboration expertise in microlayer multiplying
technology and materials processing. This is complemented by the French
investigators' experience in nano-scale materials. The French group developed
the nano-scale conductive cellulose whiskers to be used in this project.