* 9726838
* Reconstructing Hybrid Speciation in Paeonia Section Paeonia by Phylogenetic Analyses of Adh Gene Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Tao Sang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2002
* USD 190,000.00

9726838 Sang Reconstructing hybrid speciation in Paeonia section Paeonia by
phylogenetic analyses of Adh gene sequences This research will explore a new
approach, phylogenetic analysis of single or low copy nuclear genes, to
reconstruct hybridization events in speciation in the section of peonies. Large
numbers of plant species are suggested to be of hybrid origin, and currently
there is difficulty in detecting and analyzing results of reticulate evolution.
For these reasons Dr. Sang's study should have broad applications for the study
of other organismal groups. Peonies (Paeonia, Paeoniaceae), known as "queen of
herbs" in Greece and "king of flowers" in China for over a thousand years, are
ornamentally and medicinally valuable plants. The largest section of the genus,
section Paeonia, consisting of approximately 27 herbaceous species distributed
widely from eastern Asia to the Mediterranean region, has been taxonomically
problematic due primarily to complex hybridization within the section. Dr. Sang
has chosen to use single or low copy number alcohol dehydrogenase gene
sequences(Adh1A and Adh2) identified in putative non-hybrid species of section
Paeonia as molecular markers. For the putative hybrid species, the alleles of
each locus will be amplified by locus specific PCR primers, cloned, and
sequenced. The sequences will be aligned with those of the non-hybrid species
for phylogenetic analyses. If the parental alleles are maintained and cloned at
each locus from a hybrid, phylogenetic analyses should provide a precise
reconstruction of relationships of the parental lineages, and changes in
chromosome numbers (ploidy levels) and taxonomically important characters such
as degree of dissection of leaflets, length of staminodial disks, number and
shapes of sepals, corolla shapes, number of flowers per stem, and root shapes
can be traced. Field work to collect new plant material is planned in France,
Italy, Spain, Turkey, and the Caucasus Mountains. An accurate phylogenetic re
construction and a better understanding of morphological evolution of section
Paeonia will permit a better classification of peonies.