* 9726777
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Nuclear Magnetic    Resonance Study of Antarctic Sea Ice Morphology
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1997,10/31/1998
* Joseph Seymour, Lovelace Institutes
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 10/31/1998
* USD 6,900.00

9726777 Seymour This award supports collaborative work between Dr. Joseph D.
Seymour, Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of
California at Davis, and Professor Paul T. Callaghan, Department of Physics,
Massey University, New Zealand. This project will take a Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectrometer which operates in the Earth's magnetic field, to
Antarctica to measure brine content and brine diffusion within first year sea
ice of McMurdo sound. The objective is to obtain a second season (1st season,
NZAP Event K131, Oct.-Nov. 1995) of NMR data to validate prior results, provide
sampling of seasonal ice variation and establish a correlation between NMR
measurements, ice structures and traditional optical microscopy data. In
addition, a system in which a magnet is placed in a bore hole in the ice will be
tested, a technique new to the principal investigator. Time in New Zealand will
be used to complete data analysis on extensive laboratory NMR microscopy
measurements made during the PI's NSF postdoctoral tenure (1995-1996, Massey
University) and prepare a manuscript on the laboratory and field studies. The
laboratory data includes three dimensional images of brine channel structure and
spatially resolved measurements of the diffusion tensor. The diffusion data
provide the direction and magnitude of brine mobility, of use in understanding
convective heat transport in sea ice. This is the first use of NMR microscopy to
quantitatively characterize NaCI/sea ice structure. The project is the only
application of field NMR methods to polar research being pursued and represents
validation of NMR as a field instrument for environmental measurements.