* 9726957
* Structure and Function of the Insect Mushroom Body in       Sensory and Motor Integration
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Nicholas Strausfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 04/30/2001
* USD 290,000.00

The brain of insects contains a prominent pair of centers known as the mushroom
bodies. These structures have been implicated in discrimination of odors
important for feeding and mating behavior, and the anatomical organization has
been suggested to be a repeated arrangement of an essentially simple wiring
pattern. More recent studies now suggest that the mushroom bodies play a central
role in a much wider variety of functions, including integration of vision and
smell, memory of place, and motor control. Along with these disparate functions,
the structure of the mushroom bodies may have far more internal partitioning
into locally functioning regions. This project uses a combination of anatomy,
physiology, and behavior to examine the sensory signals in uniquely identified
nerve cells, and the connections of these neurons to further processing
pathways. A novel marking method will allow recording from single neurons in
behaving insects, and later recovering the location and form of those active
individual cells. Using a comparative approach among species representing key
evolutionary lineages, these studies will clarify the organizational ground
rules of a brain center that has ancient origins. The demonstration of important
roles for the mushroom bodies in integrating sensory information leading to
behavioral action may suggest some bases for the extraordinary evolutionary and
ecological success of the insects. The impact will extend beyond neuroscience
into areas of ecology and evolution, and perhaps also to pest control in
agriculture.