* 9726885
* Collaborative Research:  Dehydration Embrittlement of       Serpentine at High Pressures:  Implications for Intermediate and Deep Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Linda Reinen, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2001
* USD 149,800.00

9726885 Reinen It has been known for 30 years that hydrous phases subjected to
stress during dehydration at low pressures can develop a mechanical instability
leading to faulting. This phenomenon is considered to be the leading candidate
to explain earthquakes at depths between 30 and 300km in Earth and a possible
mechanism at all depths at which earthquakes exist. The accepted explanation of
this phenomenon rests on the assumption that the volume of fluid produced in
such dehydration reactions is greater than the volume of the dehydrating phase.
It is now known that at very high pressure, the total volume produced by such
reactions is actually smaller than that of the parent phase, raising the
question as to whether this phenomenon can operate as an earthquake mechanism at
depth. This project will utilize unique high pressure instrumentation to conduct
deformation experiments on antigorite serpentine under pressures greater than
2.2 GPa, physical conditions such that the total volume of the product
assemblage is smaller than that of the dehydrating phase, in order to test
whether a mechanical instability can exist under these conditions. It is
hypothesized that under these conditions, the primary failure unit will switch
from formation of fluid-generated tensile microcracks to formation of fluid-
generated compressive microanticracks and that the instability will be
preserved. ***