* 9726856
* Reconciling Molecular and Fossil Evidence on the Age of     Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* James Doyle, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

9726856 Sanderson The age of the angiosperms has long been a topic of
controversy in plant evolution. Traditionally, the problem was addressed
primarily from a paleobotanical point of view. However, molecular studies
relying on the hypothesis of a constant rate of evolution ("molecular clock")
have added a new dimension to the problem, often suggesting a much older age
than does fossil evidence. Many of these analyses conflict with each other, and
therefore they call into question not only paleobotanical assumptions but also
the validity of the molecular clock, a major issue in molecular evolution. Drs.
Sanderson and Doyle will undertake a critical evaluation of the implications of
molecular evidence for the age of angiosperms, especially its agreement or
disagreement with fossil evidence, using both new data and new methods of
analysis. They propose to combine existing and new sequence data from rbcL,
atpB, and 18S rDNA genes with new data to be obtained from four slowly evolving
chloroplast genes. Sampling of taxa will emphasize angiosperms with a good
Cretaceous fossil record or which represent early branches in the angiosperm
tree in addition to other relevant seed plants. Using new methodologies that
allow hypothetical rates of evolution to vary, we hope to obtain a better
assessment of (1) the error in molecular estimates of the age of angiosperms and
the sources of those errors, and (2) the level of disagreement between fossil
evidence for the age of angiosperms and molecular estimates when the error in
divergence times is taken into account. Methods and insights derived from this
study may be useful in dating other groups where there are apparent conflicts
between molecular and fossil data.