* 9726484
* Polymer-Polymer Interactions, Phase Behavior, and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2004
* Donald Paul, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2004
* USD 541,000.00

9726484 Paul The rational development of multicomponent polymer blends (or
alloys) requires an understanding of the polymer-polymer interactions involved
and how to control them in order to generate materials with useful mechanical
properties, obtain optically clear mixtures. (miscibility), disperse impact
modifiers in a brittle matrix, reactively compatibilize immiscible mixtures,
etc. This proposal outlines a program for obtaining quantitative information on
the interactions between pairs of a number of important polymer repeat units.
The methodology involves experimental observations of the phase behavior of
blend systems that are analyzed in terms of appropriate theories of mixing
combined with a mean field binary interaction model. The experimental methods
involve copolymer composition mapping, the critical molecular weight method,
quantitative analysis of phase diagrams, light scattering, and neutron
reflectivity. Specific objectives involve (a) comparison of interactions of
acrylate and methaclylate monomer units having various pendant groups with other
polymers, (b) effect of bromine atoms in the repeat unit on interactions with
other polymers, (c) development of reactive copolymers that are miscible with
styrene/acrylonitrile copolymers (SAN) for use in reactive compatibilization of
engineering thermoplastics with ABS materials, and (d) comparison of polymer-
polymer interfacial thicknesses measured by neutron reflectivity with those
predicted from theory using interaction energies determined in this program. The
neutron reflectivity studies will be performed on pairs of commercially
important polymers like polycarbonate, poly(phenylene ether), etc. with
copolymers, e.g., styrene with acrylonitrile, maleic anhydride, etc. The
experiments will be done in collaboration with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology and industry. In addition, the research will make a
systematic study of the kinetics of phase separation of selected blends using a
recently constructed light scattering apparatus. This will provide accurate
assessment of spinodal temperature-composition curves for use in evaluation of
interaction energies as well as information about polymer-polymer diffusion
coefficients. %%% The results of this fundamental research will be quantitative
information about interactions between polymer repeat unit pairs for use in
designing homogeneous or phase separated polymer blends (or alloys) that either
are or may be of technological importance. This research will provide a valuable
educational experience for students at all levels including postgraduate, PhD,
undergraduate, and high school. ***