* 9726412
* Collaborative Research:  Experimental and Theoretical Study of Crack Dynamics in Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Mark Kachanov, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/2000
* USD 127,487.00

Experimental studies of the physical processes that govern the dynamic fracture
of ice will be conducted. The study is motivated by the need to understand the
striking difference between velocities of cracks in freshwater ice and in saline
ice (one-to-three orders of magnitude). Besides its importance for the ice
physics, the study is essential for engineering problems involving ice-structure
interactions and ice-breaking operations. Several groups of researchers recently
discovered that maximal speeds of fracture propagation in the saline ice are
one-to-three orders of magnitude lower than the ones in the freshwater ice. Low
crack speeds in the saline ice may significantly increase the ice forces (due to
low rates of ice fragmentation). They should also be taken into account in
dynamics of very large masses of ice (motion of glaciers, drift of sea ice). The
experimental results recently obtained at Ice Research Laboratory of Dartmouth
College clearly indicate that the liquid inclusions of unfrozen saline water in
saline ice strongly retard crack propagation. Yet, the physical mechanisms of
this retardation are not understood. The data and its preliminary analysis point
to several possible mechanisms of crack deceleration: elastic interactions
between cracks and liquid inclusions; dissipation of energy due to diffusive
motion of liquid in the network of pores and cracks; sonic wave attenuation in
liquid inclusions; inertia effects due to movements of water in pores; negative
capillary pressure of liquid "patches' left behind the crack tip. These
mechanisms will be examined in carefully designed experiments and, in parallel,
by a theoretical analysis. The experiments to be conducted at Dartmouth ( Ice
Research Laboratory), will include measurements of crack velocity in and the
dynamic fracture toughness of ice samples with artificial pores of various sizes
and shapes that are filled with liquids of different density, viscosity and
surface tension. A parallel theoretical investiga tion, to be done at Tufts
University, will include thorough analyses of the physical mechanisms listed
above. Close collaboration between the theoretical work at Tufts and the
experimental program at Dartmouth is planned. Theoretical ideas will be tested
in experiments designed to identify the relative importance of several
micromechanisms. The acquired data will then feed and correct the theoretical
modeling. The combined experimental-theoretical approach is necessary due to the
difficulty of the problem of dynamic interaction between cracks and fluids in
pores, and due to the multiplicity of possible micro mechanisms. When
accomplished, the study will explain and quantitatively model very slow crack
speeds in sea ice. This will have important engineering applications. High
resistance of sea water ice to dynamic fracture and very slow crack speeds (as
compared to the ones in fresh water ice) determine dynamic forces in ice during
its crushing and fragmentation (ice-structure interactions; ice breaking
operations and their limitations due to very slow crack speed, etc.). The
results will also be relevant for the dynamic fracture of materials other than
ice that are either fluid-saturated or contain fine liquid droplets. The
examples are rocks and, possibly, concrete. Another possible application is the
dynamic fracture of geomaterials containing inclusions of oil or kerosene.