* 9726767
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Optical Pumping of High    Density, Low Temperature Gases:  Exploring New Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Albert Young, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 42,900.00

9726767 Happer This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor William Happer of Princeton University and Professor Tsutomu
Yabuzaki of Kyoto University in Japan. The researchers will be undertaking
studies relating to new applications for laser optical pumping of high density,
low temperature gases. The objectives of the research are: (1) to undertake a
complete detailed characterization of optical pumping in low temperature cells,
coated with superfluid He. and (2) to develop an experiment to measure the
electric dipole moment (EDM) of atomic Cs in a superfluid He coated cell. This
project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
expertise, research capabilities and equipment. The collaboration will unite the
experimental and theoretical expertise in laser optical pumping and spin
exchange at Princeton with the cryogenic techniques developed at Kyoto
University. The Japanese collaborator is a world leader in the manipulation of
alkali metal vapors in cryogenic cells. The research should provide insight into
the validity of current theoretical models of optical pumping and possibly help
ameliorate some of the disagreements between theory and experiments that
currently exist. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
cooperation.