* 9726958
* The Role of Eukaryotic Initiation Factor (eIF) 4G in Initiation of Translation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Christopher Hellen, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2002
* USD 240,000.00

Hellen MCB 9726958 1. Technical Eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4G
coordinates the rate-limiting step in protein synthesis by interacting with
other factors in the recruitment of mRNA to ribosomes. eIF4G associates with the
cap-binding protein eIF4E and the ATPase/RNA helicase eIF4A to form the eIF4F
complex. eIF4G also binds to eIF3, a component of the 43S ribosomal
preinitiation complex. This study applies biochemical and molecular genetic
approaches to characterize the role of eIF4G' in initiation of translation. This
is achieved through reconstitution experiments in vitro using purified
components, which include recombinant eIFs 4A, 4B, 4E and 4G, on a variety of
clone mRNAs. Sensitive toe-printing and footprinting methods to map the position
of ribosomal and preinitiation complexes on mRNAs are developed for this
purpose. The significance of this study lies in its advancing our knowledge of
protein synthesis at the molecular level. 2. Non Technical This study is to
elucidate fundamental aspects of the mechanism and regulation of protein
synthesis, particularly the role of the initiation factor, 4G (eIF4G), in
coordinating the activities of various cellular components that together recruit
individual mRNAs for the onset of translation. Experimentally, purified
components on different mRNAs are reconstituted in vitro at the beginning stage
of translation. Various protein or mRNA components are systematically
substituted with a series of variants, and their effects compared under specific
conditions such as growth arrest and mitosis. The importance of determinants in
eIF4G that enable it to bind to all mRNAs nonspecifically, and to a few with
high specificity, are identified and characterized. Viral and cellular mRNAs
that bind eIF4G with high affinity are chosen in this study, since they may be
models for translation when eIF4E is inactive. Also being studied are
determinants of eIF4A's which interact with eIF4G, another initiation factor.
This interaction directs the unwinding of eIF4A to a specific site on the mRNA
to permit the attachment of ribosomes, the anchorage machinery for protein
synthesis.