* 9726225
* Gynoecial Diversification in Saxifragales: Clarifying the   Evolution of Epigyny
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 214,760.00

9726225 Soltis GYNOECIAL DIVERSIFICATION IN SAXIFRAGALES: CLARIFYING THE
EVOLUTION OF EPIGYNY A key manner in which the architecture of flowers varies is
by shifting the position at which the ovary is inserted relative to the perianth
and stamens. A superior ovary is inserted above the perianth and stamens, and an
inferior ovary is inserted such that the perianth and stamens are positioned
along its length. Inferior ovaries vary depending upon the point at which the
perianth and stamens are inserted along the ovary. Ovary insertion is highly
labile in the Saxifragales, a monophyletic order of flowering plants. In the
Saxifragales, these variations in ovary insertion impact pollinator interactions
with flowers; hence, they are significant in reproductive ecology and the origin
of species. Species of Saxifragales display a range of ovary insertions, ranging
from superior ovaries through various forms of inferior ovaries. Traditional
dogma indicates that ovary evolution proceeds from superior to inferior, but our
preliminary data show that this is not possible among Saxifragales. Indeed our
preliminary data show that some Saxifragales reported to have superior ovaries
actually have a developmental ground plan associated with inferior ovaries. We
describe these as superior mimics and our research aims to show how
developmental patterns have evolved to create not only these superior mimics,
but also a diverse array of ovary insertions among Saxifragales. We are
particularly interested in how shifts in proportioned growth between different
regions of flowers are a factor in creating an array of ovary insertions. To
understand how developmental patterns evolve to create these architectural
variations, we will map developmental information on phylogenetic
reconstructions based on DNA sequences.