* 9726779
* GABA-B Receptor Antagonism and the Chemistry of Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,09/14/1999
* Ursula Staubli, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Emmeline Edwards
* 09/14/1999
* USD 170,000.00

LAY ABSTRACT Principal Investigator: Staubli, Ursula Proposal Number:
IBN-9726779 This proposal is directed at neuronal mechanisms underlying memory
processes, with the eventual aim of understanding and addressing memory
disorders such as those associated with aging and disease. The target of the
research is GABAB, a receptor of y- aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main
inhibitory neurotransmitter known to exert a powerful influence on the
occurrence of long-lasting synaptic plasticity changes that subserve learning.
Our interest in the GABAB receptor emerged from the earlier findings that
selective antagonism of the 5-HT3 (serotonin) receptor subtype in awake behaving
rats causes a reduction in the firing rate of a subset of hippocampal
interneurons, thereby facilitating the induction of synaptic plasticity and
causing a robust memory enhancement (Staubli & Xu, 1995; Reznic & Staubli,
1997). Our hypothesis is that the final mediator in the above cascade of effects
appeared to be the GABAB receptor. The proposed experiments will use a selective
GABAB receptor antagonist with a significantly higher affinity for post- vs.
presynaptic receptors. The immediate goals are four-fold: 1) to characterize the
different roles of pre- vs. postsynaptic GABAB receptors in modulating synaptic
plasticity, thereby reconciling the apparently contradictory findings mentioned
above; 2) to establish the concentration range over which GABAB antagonism
promotes the formation of different forms of memory; 3) to assess whether GABA8
antagonist administered systemically to freely moving rats facilitates the
induction of long-term potentiation (an intensively studied form of synaptic
plasticity suspected to be the substrate for certain forms of memory) in
hippocampal area CA1; 4) to examine whether bil ateral intrahippocampal infusion
of GABAB antagonist facilitates both long-term potentiation and memory in the
same animal, at the same time. The knowledge obtained from this work will be
invaluable for extracting key neurobiological principles towards a rationale
design of compounds directed at memory disorders associated with aging and
disease.