* 9726100
* Various Properties of Natural and Triggered                 Lightning Discharges
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Martin Uman, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 02/28/2001
* USD 554,870.00

9726100 Rakov While the phenomenon of lightning has been observed for some time,
many aspects are unknown. The overall objective of this research is further
improvement in the existing knowledge of the physical processes comprising the
lightning discharge. Both experimental and theoretical studies are planed. The
experimental studies will be conducted at the International Center for Lightning
Research and Testing at Camp Blanding, Florida, and at the Lightning Observatory
on the University of Florida campus in Gainesville. Camp Blanding contains
unique facilities for artificial lightning initiation (triggering) from overhead
thunderclouds. For both triggered and natural lightning discharges, electric and
magnetic fields will be measured. Channel-base currents will be additionally
measured for triggered lightning. Optical images of lightning channels will be
obtained with a variety of video, still, and streak cameras, and with a digital
optical system. GPS timing will allow the correlation of these measurements with
the National Lightning Detection Network reports and to the occurrence of
Schumann resonance transients. Attempts to initiate and characterize more
energetic and potentially sprite-producing positive lightning will be made.
Detailed mechanisms of lightning initiation from an ungrounded object and of
lightning attachment to ground will be studied. Measurements of electric and
magnetic fields at eight stations, seven of them between 5 and 500 meters of the
triggered-lightning channel, will be used to infer the distribution of charge
density and current on the lightning channel and to validate or refute existing
lightning models. The first attempt to study experimentally the lightning energy
in order to resolve the long-standing controversy on its magnitude will be made.
Overall, the results of the proposed research will provide new insights into the
physics of various lighting processes with implications for other areas of
Atmosp heric Sciences, including atmospheric chemistry (energy available for
trace gas production by lightning) and the interaction of lightning with the
upper atmosphere (in particular, the production of sprites by positive
lightning). ***