* 9726342
* Dissertation Research:  Decoupling Complexity:  An          Archaeological Investigation of Three Chacoan Great House   Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, MS Nancy Mahoney will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to understand how
prehistoric Native Americans in the Chaco region of the US achieved the high
degree of social complexity which is manifest in the archaeological record. At
its height in the early second millennium AD, the Chaco culture covered an area
of over 120,000 square kilometers of the Colorado Plateau. Archaeologically the
system is defined by a distinctive architectural style which ostensibly forms a
three-tier settlement hierarchy. At its core in Chaco Canyon, several monumental
`great houses` were four stories tall and contained over 600 rooms. The
geometric ground plans and distinct masonry techniques suggest they required
considerable planning, labor and skill to construct. Surprisingly, despite
decades of study it is still not possible to determine the functions they
served. At a second level smaller great houses are distributed across the wider
Chaco region and associated with each are a series of small pueblo dwellings.
Similarity of architectural styles, material remains and as well as traces of
ancient roads which connected great houses indicates a complex culture which
integrated large numbers of people in some form of hierarchical social
structure. Archaeologists however do not understand the degree to which
centralized power existed, how it was maintained or what practical purpose it
served. Some have argued that the `Chaco Phenomenon` was primarily ritual in
nature, that individual small great houses were essentially independent and that
the largest great houses in Chaco Canyon itself were occupied only sporadically
for religious functions. Others have postulated a much greater degree of
centralized control and believe that the system worked to store and distribute
subsistence resources across a desert area in which rainfall varied markedly and
unpredictably from year to year and place to place. MS Mahoney has noted that
very little research has been conducted at secondary great houses. She argues
that through analysis of behavior at individual great houses and associated
pueblos, and then comparison among great house-pueblo systems, it will be
possible to reconstruct the essential aspects of the broader social
organization. With NSF support she will study data from two great house-pueblo
complexes and continue excavation at a third to collect comparable material.
This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest
to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the impressive achievements of
prehistoric Native Americans and will assist in training a promising young
scientist.