* 9727000
* A Phylogenetic Analysis of the Monocots Based on Molecular and Morphological Character Sets
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Jerrold Davis, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/2002
* USD 195,000.00

9727000 Davis A PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF THE MONOCOTS BASED ON MOLECULAR AND
MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTER SETS The monocotyledons are one of the major groups of
flowering plants (angiosperms). This is a diverse group of about 60,000 species
that includes the grasses (wheat, maise, rice, and their many wild relatives),
palms, and orchids. Although the monocot group is widely recognized as a natural
(monophyletic) lineage within the flowering plants, many aspects of the history
of divergence of the principal lineages within this group remain obscure.
Support for several major lineagess is well established (e.g., the order Poales,
which includes grasses and their relatives, and the order Zingiberales, which
includes the gingers, the bananas, and their relatives), but there are major
differences in the other higher-level groupings recognized by various
comprehensive accounts of the monocots. Phylogenetic analyses based on variation
in morphology and a variety of molecular characteristics, have yielded
conflicting results which Dr. Davis' study will investigate using "total
evidence" in which multiple character sets will be collected for exemplar
species; these will be combined within a single data set and analyzed as a unit.
Data sets to be analyzed include 1) morphology with features of anatomy, pollen
structure, and seed development included, 2) DNA sequence variation from genes
of the chloroplasts (rbcL) and mitochondria (atpA), and 3) additional character
sets being generated by other cooperating investigators.