* 9727796
* Quantification of Carbon Sources & Sinks for North Plains & Mountain Landscapes Using Simultaneous Aircraft, Tower, &   Leaf Measurements of CO2 & H2O Vapor Flux, & Stable Isotope
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* William Reiners, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 720,000.00

Smith 9727796 Quantitative evaluation of the global carbon budget, including
identification of sources and sinks, will be crucial to our understanding of
future climatic and anthropogenic impacts on the global biosphere. To date,
models of the global carbon budget have been unable to balance the amount of CO2
released by fossil fuels and modification in land-use with the amount of CO2
remaining in the atmosphere. Of particular concern is the lack of information
regarding the spatial and temporal dynamics of the carbon exchange properties of
the terrestrial versus oceanic portions of the biosphere, although it has been
suggested that the terrestrial biosphere has acted as a net sink for the uptake
of CO2 because of imbalances in photosynthesis and respiration due to annual
variations in climate. The principle objective of the research will be to
identify the annual source/sink dynamics in globally-important ecosystems that
are represented in the Rocky Mountains and northern Plains. Identification and
quantification of potential terrestrial sinks for CO2 is necessary for
predicting future changes that may occur in the global environment. The
estimation of net CO2 exchange from vegetative surfaces using remote sensing
techniques provides a fundamental data-set for computing the global carbon
budget and the existence of carbon sinks that may ameliorate the impact of
continued, anthropogenic release of carbon compounds into the atmosphere.
However, this approach may also become valuable as a method for establishing
physiological status (e.g. photosynthesis) and, thus, the health and vigor of
both native and agricultural ecosystems on a global scale. The PI proposes a
research plan that characterizes principal ecosystem types of the northern Rocky
Mountains and Great Plains. These selected ecosystem types (conifer forest,
shrublands, mixed grass prairie and several agricultural types) are excellent
representatives of large parts of Earth representing 16%, 18%,11% a nd 16%,
respectively, or a total of 61% of the total usable land area of the globe. For
some time now, carbon budgets of different ecosystems have been evaluated using
measurements of the exchange of CO2 within or above the representative
vegetation. These studies require expensive and labor intensive measurements
that are affordable when only a small number of geographical locations are
monitored. Thus, a substantial sampling problem is inherent in the current
leafand canopy-level process submodels, which precludes an accurate coupling
with atmospheric circulation models and ultimate extrapolation to broader
geographic scales. In the current proposal, aircraft measurements of eddy
transport of water vapor and C02 exchange will be combined with isotopic data to
estimate CO2 fluxes on an annual and seasonal basis. Results will be scaled
directly up to the northern Rocky Mountains and northern Great Plains with
regional, digital coverage's together with GIS methods and ecosystem modeling
techniques in order to produce a regional estimate of carbon fluxes for a
significant portion of North America. Incident sunlight, precipitation, soil and
plant moisture, air temperature and humidity will be monitored concurrently with
CO2 flux measurements. In addition, the capability for measuring natural
isotopes of carbon and water provides an accurate and reliable method for
estimating the component sources of CO2 that comprise measured values of net CO2
flux . Net fluxes will be partitioned into a balance of particular sources (i.e.
atmosphere, plant photosynthesis and respiration, soil respiration, etc.),
according to differences in discrimination between stable isotopes contained in
each environmental component (e.g. leaf and soil organics; leaf, stem, and soil
water, etc.). Overall, these results will will provide the groundwork for
testing process models that extrapolate globally. Both "topdown" and "bottom-up"
approacheswill be compared by using measurements taken sim ultaneously at the
plant level, above the canopy (eddy correlation tower), and with aircraft
sampling. Although we will be focusing on the more difficult problems of spatial
heterogeneity within this region, the applicability of our results from this
region should be important for extrapolating to similar ecosystems across the
globe (e.g. Asian continent).