* 9727739
* A New Thermodynamic Formalism for Neuronal Ensemble         Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Steven Schiff, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/2002
* USD 259,431.00

IBN 97-27739 SO, SCHIFF, GLUCKMANN. An understanding of synchronous activities
within an ensemble of neurons is essential in the study of neuroscience. It is
important to understand and characterize both the computation within an
ensemble, as well as the information flow between different ensembles within the
brain. In the so called "binding problem", when spatially disparate neurons must
coordinate to compute aspects of sensory perception, synchrony is essential.
Traditionally, these issues have been addressed using the concept of identical
synchrony (IS) which assumes that two or more ensembles of the brain are
performing the same activities in locked time step with each other. However, in
ensembles with generic nonlinear components, of which neuronal ensembles are
most certainly included, more complex coherent behaviors should arise.
Consequently, our concept of dynamical coherence beyond identical synchrony must
be broadened. Chaos theory broadly encompasses the study of such nonlinear
dynamical systems. A major theoretical advance in this field was the recognition
that seeming erratic behaviors from these nonlinear systems could be effectively
characterized by a set of special unstable equilibrium states. In a cartoonist
view, these so called unstable periodic orbits (UPOs) are hills and valleys of
an abstract dynamical landscape. As the system progresses in time, the state of
the systems can be described by a trajectory within this dynamical landscape
constructed with the UPOs. For coupled systems (neurons), the arrangement and
symmetry of these hills and valleys reflect the varying degree of dynamical
coherence exhibited within the system. Most importantly, analogous to
statistical mechanics in physics, these UPOs form a framework of microscopic
states for the system and their structural changes afford a description for the
topographical changes within this dynamical landscape. A thermodynamical
description based on these UPOs for the various possible dynamical coherent
states might then be constructed. Theoretical tools developed will be applied to
quintessential examples of neuronal coupling from our archived biological data:
two coupled neurons and two ensembles of neurons. Results from this project will
both theoretically broaden our understanding of coupled nonlinear oscillators,
including neurons, coupled mechanical and electronic devices, etc., and will
serve as the initial attempt to experimentally characterize the grammatical code
used between ensembles of neurons.

