* 9727334
* LT:  Nonflowing Chemical Processing for Thin Film           Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Carol McConica, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 09/30/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9727334 McConica The research addresses the development of an approach to
eliminate the unnecessary flow of chemicals during the chemical processing of
thin films as applied to the manufacturing of integrated circuits. The goal is
to enable thin film manufacturing facilities to implement principles of
industrial ecology by utilizing chemical reactors that are 100% efficient with
respect to all process fluids. The strategy for achieving this goal is to
demonstrate that nonflowing processes can be optimized to minimize the
consumption/creation of high purity fluids while still meeting film property
goals. In the limit, 1 00% of the fluid used in the process will be converted to
solid film in the case of deposition, or to fluid products in the case of film
etching. The intent is not to change one film or one chemistry, but to create a
paradigm shift in manufacturing technology based upon a current need to embrace
industrial ecology. The way to realize the vision is to design a new type of
reactor that can be used in many different chemical processes. The objectives of
the project are to develop a list of flowing chemical processes used in IC
manufacturing that could be replaced by nonflowing processes; to demonstrate a
nonflowing chemical process that reduces the use of toxic chemicals and the
creation of waste, both by the process and associated facilities, by a factor of
1000 for films comparable to those grown commercially; and to demonstrate film
properties within manufacturing specifications for tungsten deposition on full
wafers by nonflowing chemical vapor deposition. An environmental impact paredo
of chemically-driven processes used in integrated circuit manufacturing will be
created. Those processes will then be evaluated in order of impact in terms of
fundamental kinetic and thermodynamic principles for amenability to nonflowing
process conditions. A paredo of impact of converting commercial thin film
processes to nonflowing conditions wil l result. A system approach to thin film
processing will result in an algorithm for quantification of waste creation as a
function of processing parameters. The algorithm will contain information with
respect to the thin film process and its associated facility demands, such as
pump oil contamination rate and waste from reactor cleaning. Experiments
relating thin film properties to near-surface gas composition during nonflowing
processing will create a window of process conditions that meet film
manufacturing specifications for a chosen test chemistry. These process
conditions will be used in the above algorithm to find reactor specifications
and processing conditions that optimize waste minimization and film properties.
This process will be demonstrated on full wafers upon the completion of the
construction of a wafer scale chemical vapor deposition nonflowing reactor.