* 9727605
* Hormonal Influences on Size Change During Ontogeny and      Phylogeny in Higher Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Gerhard Baumann, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/28/2003
* USD 118,761.00

An understanding of the genetic and developmental influences on variation in
body size is fundamental to a series of issues in primate and human evolution.
Size change is frequently observed within lineages and also has myriad effects
on the physiology, life history and ecology of organisms. Recent work has
demonstrated the central role of the systemic growth hormones insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and growth hormone-binding protein (GH-BP) in regulating
overall growth rates and terminal body size in primates and other mammals. There
is also evidence that these systemic growth hormones are implicated in the
variation in growth patterning frequently observed in lineages undergoing size
diversification. In this project, we will test the hypothesis that serum IGF-1
and GH-BP levels are significantly correlated with growth rates and overall body
size variation within and between three species of macaque monkeys. The
relationships will be tested in small (Macaca fascicularis), medium (M. mulatta)
and large (M. nemestrina) macaque males of known age and body weight betweeen
approximately three and eight years of age, a period of high growth rate and
marked size increase. These data will comprise the first such information
collected for an interspecific series of primates, and will contribute to our
understanding of the connections between micro- and macroevolutionary size
change in higher primate and human evolution.