* 9727921
* Novel Multichannel Environmental Monitoring Network         Controlling Virulence of Ralstonia solanacearum
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1998,07/31/2003
* Timothy Denny, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2003
* USD 300,303.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ralstonia (Pseudomonas)
solanacearum causes a lethal wilting disease of over 200 different plants
worldwide. Secreted plant cell-wall-degrading exoenzymes and the EPS I
exopolysaccharide, both contribute to its successful colonization of a plant's
vascular system after root invasion. Because EPS I blocks water flow in the
xylem, it is also a primary cause of wilting and killing. Biosynthesis and
export of EPS I, a long unbranched polymer of 3 amino sugars, are encoded by the
16-kb eps operon. Transcription of the eps operon, as well as genes encoding
some exoenzymes and other virulence genes, is controlled by a large, interactive
regulatory network of over 12 proteins that is responsive to multiple
environmental signals. This network is comprised of two distinct two-component
regulatory systems (VsrAD and VsrBC), the unique signal integrator protein XpsR
and the unusual Phc signal transduction system. Preliminary data suggest that
the Phc module employs an atypical phosphorelay cascade that responds to
3-hydroxypalmitic acid methyl ester (3-OH PAME), a new type of volatile, quorum-
indicating molecule. Phc and 3-OH PAME in turn regulate phcA, encoding a global,
LysR-type transcriptional regulator that controls reversible switching between
two very different physiological states, one adapted for virulence in plants,
the other for saprophytic survival. A major goal of this project is to
understand at the molecular level how the Phc module responds to 3-OH PAME, and
how the Phc components subsequently control phcA function. Using two different
approaches, a genetic one (transposon mutagenesis) or a biochemical one (DNA-
affinity chromatography of R. solanacearum extracts on columns with the eps
regulatory region covalently bound), missing genes that mediate regulation of
eps by XpsR and VsrC), will be searched for, cloned, and characterized. These
studies of the R. solanacearum virulence regulatory network are important
because one of the most critical factors for successful pathogenesis is the
ability to coordinate production of virulence and pathogenicity factors in
response to environmental signals, and because the ability of the R.
solanacearum network to process and integrate multiple signal inputs is largely
unparalleled. These studies should give insight into the ways multiple
environmental cues are processed by pathogens to adjust virulence gene
expression. Finally, genes required by R. solanacearum for rapid, efficient
colonization of plants by cloning and analysis of genes encoding several vsrD-
regulated exoproteins will be searched for. In parallel, in vivo expression
technology will be adapted and applied to R. solanacearum. This technology
identifies and isolates genes that are highly expressed. by a pathogen only
during colonization of a host. Either or both of these approaches will provide a
way to access new, important genes, and provide insight into a pathogen's
strategies for successful colonization of plants.&lt;br/&gt;