* 9727971
* Receptor Phospatases and Control of Neurite Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Eduardo Macagno, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2002
* USD 503,238.00

9727971 MACAGNO Despite many novel recent findings, it is still a mystery how
cells in the developing nervous system know where to grow. Most neurons, by the
time they have reached maturity, have elaborated long projections (axons) that
follow set pathways to reach targets far from their cell bodies. To do this,
they must make a myriad of choices, such as when and where to grow, where to
turn, and how to stop growing when they reach the correct target. These
phenomena are thought to be mediated by the growth cone, a specialized motile
structure found at the leading edge of the growing axon. Growth cones are
believed to posses a variety of molecular receptors on their surface membranes
that sense and relay into the cell local environmental signals as they are
encountered, which then induce the cell to make steering and growth decisions.
Dr. Eduardo Macagno and his collaborators will study how a pair of newly-
described molecular receptors, known as LAR-like receptor tyrosine phosphatases,
are involved in axon growth and in target selection. The structure of these
molecules suggests that their domains outside the cell can bind specific
molecules and that such binding could activate their domains inside the cell,
which can in turn modify the properties of other components of the cell
machinery. Preliminary experimental results have suggested that these molecular
receptors play important roles in the decisions of where and perhaps when
certain neurons will grow. Using the embryonic leech as a simplified system in
which to study the process of axon outgrowth, it was demonstrated that when the
normal functioning of these receptors is interfered with, the neurons that
normally express these receptors often undergo strongly aberrant patterns of
growth. Dr. Macagno's research group will be examining in more detail what roles
these receptors play in normal neuronal development. For example, do they help
decide where and when branches turn, or how fast they grow? To help answer suc h
questions, observations will be made over time on live, individual neurons, as
their axonal projections extend in the developing embryo. They will also use
both genetic and biochemical approaches to identify the molecules that bind to
these receptors, determine where such molecules are located in the developing
embryo, and study what happens in the growth cone when they bind to the
receptors. Results from these studies will help elucidate the nature of the
molecular receptor-based signaling processes that occur in growth cones, and
thus help us to understand how neurons find and recognize their targets in the
developing animal.