* 9727366
* Catalytic Activation and Oxidation of C-H and C-C Bonds by  Metal Species in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Ayusman Sen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 01/31/2001
* USD 350,000.00

Dr. Sen is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program to study the mechanisms of homogeneous catalysts. He has developed a
rhodium chloride based catalytic system that is capable of the selective
oxidation of methane to methanol or acetic acid in the presence of oxygen and
carbon monoxide. Further, this system will preferentially cleave carbon-carbon
bond of higher alkanes to produce methanol or acetic acid. A second catalytic
system based upon copper chloride and palladium is able to oxidize the carbon-
hydrogen and carbon-carbon cleavage products of alkanes at rates comparable to
commercially utilized processes. The PI has proposed to undertake a detailed
kinetic and mechanistic study of the bimetallic catalytic system. Key issues to
be addressed in this investigation are the roles of carbon monoxide and water in
the catalytic cycle and the nature of carbon-hydrogen and carbon-carbon bonds
upon oxidation products. Specific methodologies will include kinetic isotope
effect studies and the design and fabrication of a custom flow reactor.
Selective partial oxidation chemistry is one of the most actively explored
fields in the US chemical industry. The conversion of hydrocarbons to
commercially valuable feedstock materials such as alcohols and carboxylic acids
is commercially important. The development of new catalysts to perform this
function is of great practical importance due to the value-added nature of the
process.