* 9727582
* Collaborative Research: Biological Baselines for Assessing Environmental Impacts  in Antarctica Coastal Areas
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Paul Arthur Berkman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2001
* USD 73,917.00

Berkman 9727582 Antarctic coastal environments have been the site of recent
studies on the effects of human activities on marine ecosystems. This
international, collaborative study will focus on developing methodologies to
generate biological baselines for the benthic nearshore habitat in the Ross Sea
region of Antarctica. These baselines will be useful to for studies to
distinguish between natural environmental variability from anthropogenic impacts
and to assess the recovery capacity of coastal marine populations which have
been exposed to natural and anthropogenic stresses. The study will take place in
Terra Nova Bay and will be conducted in cooperation with the Italian Antarctic
Program. The research will focus on populations of the scallop Adamussium
colbecki from a natural-impact site (meltwater stream), anthropogenic-impact
site (in the vicinity of the Terra Nova Bay Station in Tethys Bay) and control
site (no meltwater stream in a pristine area of Tethys Bay). Diver- assisted
collection and remotely operated vehicle photo- surveys will provide data to
determine bivalve size frequencies and densities along with benthic community
patterns across depth and distance gradients from the shoreline at each site.
Environmental gradients will also be measured. Bivalve physiology profiles will
be generated by micro-respirometry measurements of oxygen consumption rates as
well as nitrogen excretion rates under ambient and temperature-stressed
environmental conditions. Biochemical assays will be used to assess metabolic
activity. The physiological and biochemical assays will be complemented by
cellular biomarker analysis performed by the Italian collaborators. Integration
of these biochemical, physiological and population assays will provide examples
of biological baselines for assessing indicator species' responses to natural
and anthropogenic impacts in the Antarctic coastal zone.