* 9727648
* A Model for Physics Education in Physics Departments:       Improving the Teaching of Physics from Elementary through   Graduate School
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2002
* Stamatis Vokos, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2002
* USD 1,640,060.00

The project is the fourth and fifth years of a five-year multi-faceted program
conducted by the Physics Education Group in the Physics Department of the
University of Washington. The program consists of a group of interrelated
projects that focus on undergraduate course improvement, teacher preparation and
enhancement, and university faculty development. The overall goals explicitly
identified in the original proposal are: (1) to expand our knowledge of how
students learn physics, (2) to increase student learning in the introductory
university physics course, (3) to prepare (K-12) preservice and inservice
teachers to teach science as a process of inquiry, and (4) to improve the
teaching effectiveness of college and university faculty. In addition, a fifth
activity has evolved into a major goal: (5) national dissemination of the work
in research, curriculum development and instructional innovation. The project is
working toward the first goal by continuing the investigation of student
understanding in physics. It is working toward the second and third goals by
using results from this ongoing research as a guide in developing instructional
materials for introductory physics students and for preservice and inservice
teachers. It is working toward the fourth goal by developing a model program for
preparing physics graduate students and post-doctoral research associates for
their teaching responsibilities as future faculty and by giving talks and
conducting workshops for new and experienced faculty on physics education
research and its use as a guide in the development and assessment of curriculum.
It is working toward the fifth goal by publishing articles about the work and by
conducting seminars and workshops for university faculty and precollege teachers
to promote the use of Tutorials in Introductory Physics and Physics by Inquiry,
two major curriculum development projects. Tutorials in Introductory Physics is
intended to supplement the lectures and textbook of a stan dard introductory
course. The tutorials are designed to engage students at a sufficiently deep
intellectual level to develop the concepts and reasoning skills necessary to
achieve a functional understanding of the material. Physics by Inquiry is a
laboratory-based curriculum designed to be used by college and university
faculty to prepare precollege teachers to teach physics and physical science as
a process of inquiry.