* 9727054
* Mid-Oceanic Wintertime Surface Fluxes and Atmospheric       Boundary Layer Structure:  Relationship to Cyclone          Development and Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Ola P Persson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 192,693.00

9727054&lt;br/&gt;Persson&lt;br/&gt; Fluxes of heat and momentum from the
ocean√Üs surface to the atmosphere are known to be important to the development
of a variety of meteorological phenomenon. Despite the importance of this
problem, little actual data has been collected of surface fluxes under high wind
conditions (&gt;15 m/s). &lt;br/&gt;This research project will utilize data
collected during the Fronts and Atlantic Storm Tracks Experiment (FASTEX) to
document the relationship between mid-ocean surface fluxes and boundary layer
structure and the structure and evolution of the mid-oceanic extratropical
cyclones. FASTEX is an international research field program whose objective is
to understand the mid-oceanic development of extratropical cyclones. Its field
phase was conducted in January-February, 1997. This research will focus on ship-
based surface-flux measurements collected in a high wind-speed marine
environment, the associated sea state measurements, and the quasi-continuous
measurements of the mid-oceanic boundary-layer structure. It is unknown to what
extent present flux and boundary layer parameterizations represent these
environmental conditions. Despite the significant fluxes likely to be present
under these conditions, very few such measurements have been obtained
previously. More than 130 hours of data were collected during FASTEX by the RV
Knorr under these conditions, representing a multi-fold increase in the amount
of data available in this wind speed range. The measurements will be used for
the validation/modification of current marine flux and planetary boundary layer
parameterization schemes used in forecast models. Because the FASTEX flux and
boundary layer measurements were obtained within and in coordination with a
larger field program with extensive downwind mesoscale validation data, these
measurements will also be able to provide a clear demonstration of their impact
on marine extratropical cyclone development and forecasting.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;