* 9727714
* Computer Simulations of Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2002
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2002
* USD 305,000.00

9727714 Landau This is a renewal grant to a senior computational physicist to
conduct a series of simulations of condensed matter systems. Computer
simulations represent a powerful tool for obtaining fundamental information
about wide ranging problems in statistical physics and can complement
traditional theoretical and experimental approaches. This research will continue
development and refinement of large scale simulation methods for the study of
phase transitions in systems which are difficult to treat analytically. The
techniques to be used include diverse Monte Carlo and spin dynamics simulations.
Models are expected to be relevant to magnetic materials, cubic binary alloys,
adsorbed atoms on crystalline substrates, and disordered media. Several of the
problems include particles which may move continuously in space and which are
subject to elastic interactions, whereas other problems will be confined to
rigid lattices (including classical spins with continuous degrees of freedom)
with discrete near neighbor interactions. In many of the systems finite
geometries and/or the presence of walls are responsible for behavior which is
different than that which is observed in the bulk. Both static and dynamic
critical phenomena for systems in equilibrium will be carefully examined. Simple
non-equilibrium models of film growth will be studied using kinetic Monte Carlo
methods. %%% This is a renewal grant to a senior computational physicist to
conduct a series of simulations of condensed matter systems. Computer
simulations represent a powerful tool for obtaining fundamental information
about wide ranging problems in statistical physics and can complement
traditional theoretical and experimental approaches. This research will continue
development and refinement of large scale simulation methods for the study of
phase transitions in systems which are difficult to treat analytically. The
techniques to be used include diverse Monte Carlo and spin dynamics si
mulations. Models are expected to be relevant to magnetic materials, cubic
binary alloys, adsorbed atoms on crystalline substrates, and disordered media.
***