* 9727897
* Learning the Syntax and Semantics of Verbs: Children
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Katherine Demuth, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 03/31/2002
* USD 254,970.00

One of the long-standing issues in the study of language acquisition has
centered about what is 'innate' and what must be 'learned'. Much of this debate
has focused on structures at the syntax/semantics interface, dealing
specifically with how children acquire the argument structure of verbs. Some
scholars have proposed that the semantics of verbs is especially salient for
children, and propels the acquisition of the syntactic structures with which
they are used. Others have proposed that the syntactic frames in which verbs
appear provide children with essential evidence for constructing the meanings of
verbs. Still other researchers have proposed that verb meanings and their
syntactic frames are acquired item by item as unanalyzed 'constructions'.
Interestingly, there seems to be some support for each of these positions,
possibly because of the relatively conservative word order of English, the
language on which the majority of these studies have been based. The purpose of
the project is to explore these issues more fully using evidence from the Bantu
language Sesotho, where word order is flexible and productive verbal morphology
signals an increase or decrease in the number of arguments a verb may take.
Bantu applicative constructions (also known as 'benefactive' or 'double object'
constructions) present a particularly interesting area for exploring the
semantic, syntactic, morphological, and lexical contributions to language
learning. The project will use multiple sources of evidence, including data from
children's longitudinal spontaneous speech productions and performance on
experimental tasks. Preliminary evidence from the spontaneous speech of
2-3-year-olds suggests that children are conservative 'lexical' learners, making
few errors of commission. Applicative verbs are, however, used in a number of
syntactic frames, mediating against a strict constructionist' approach.
Nonetheless, certain syntactic frames, such as 'double object' constructions
with both Benefactive and Theme object NPs, never occur in children's
spontaneous speech, nor in the adult speech directed toward them. The data from
younger children will be complemented with an examination of older children's
use of applicatives in spontaneous speech, where errors of commission are
expected. These results will be compared with results from cross-sectional
experimental studies designed to test children's use of the applicative with
novel verbs from different verb classes, and to test their developing knowledge
of word order restrictions in 'double object' constructions.