* 9727394
* Electron Magnetic Resonance Studies of Transition Metal     Ions in Microporous Oxide Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Larry Kevan, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 01/31/2001
* USD 473,000.00

This research project at the University of Houston is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Professor Kevan and his coworkers use
electron magnetic resonance and electron spin echo modulation spectrometry to
elucidate the structural environment of transition metal ions in microporous and
mesoporous oxide materials. These aluminophosphate (AlPO) and
silicoaluminophosphate (SAPO) compounds are important catalytic materials, and
the work of this project is directed toward understanding their structure as it
relates to catalytic function. Nickel and manganese ions in particular will be
examined, and newly synthesized hexagonal phase AlPO and SAPO oxides will be
emphasized in these studies. The materials investigated in this work have
important applications in petroleum refining, and hydrocarbon process chemistry.
The use of electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy for the structural
elucidation of transition metal ions in oxide materials is the focus of this
research project. Nickel and manganese ions incorporated into alumino- and
silicoaluminophosphate supports are being examined. Connections between
structure and function of these catalytic materials are the expected results of
this work, which has important implications for the development of petroleum
refining catalysts.