* 9727745
* Oligomerization of DctD and NtrC
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* B. Nixon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

9727745 Nixon The Rhizobium melitoti dicarboxylate transport (dct) system and
the Salmonella typhimurium nitrogen regulation (ntr) system are partly
understood signal transduction systems. Each one utilizes a two-component
transduction mechanism to regulate the active state of a sigma54 dependent
transcriptional activator (DctD and NtrC, respectively). Despite some
similarities, it is clear that two diverse physical strategies are used to
integrate two-component signal transduction with sigma54 dependent transcription
activation. DctD is controlled negatively, with its ATPase domain being actively
repressed by the two-component receiver domain until the latter is
phosphorylated; in contrast, NtrC is controlled positively, with the
phosphorylated form of its two-component receiver domain being needed for the
ATPase domain to display its activity. The long-term objective is to understand
the biochemical mechanisms of two-component signal transduction through the DctD
and NtrC proteins to the RNA polymerase-sigma54 dependent promoter complexes
with which they interact. The immediate goal is to begin determining how
regulated self-assembly controls the active state of these sigma54 dependent
transcriptional activators. Specific aims include: 1. quantifying the
oligomerization properties of native DctD, constitutively active DctD variants,
fragments 1-127, 1-143, and 1-384 of these proteins, NtrC, and NtrC-P; 2.
determining if and to what extent the oligomerization of DctD is affected by the
molecules with which it is known to interact: ATP, specific DNA binding sites,
sigma54, and the (-subunit of core RNA polymerase; 3. determining if there is a
correlation between cooperativity and oligomerization properties for DctD,
DctD-P, and constitutively active variants of DctD, using DNAse I footprinting
to measure free energies of intrinsic DNA binding and cooperativity, and
comparing these results with those of objectives 1 and 2; and 4. identifyi ng
mutants of dctD that encode DctD substitutions affecting cooperative but not
intrinsic DNA binding, both for the transcriptionally inactive and active states
of the protein, and assessing whether or not those residues are also important
for oligomerization. In order to respond to changes in their environment,
organisms use a "two-component" signal transduction mechanism, which results in
differences in gene expression. This kind of response is ubiquitous in
eubacteria, and has also been characterized in eukaryotes and archaebacteria.
The purpose of this project is to investigate transcription factor proteins that
cause changes in gene expression when they are phosphorylated in response to
environmental changes. Following phosphorylation, they may bind cooperatively
with each other and with DNA, to bring about changes in gene expression. The two
systems under study are the dicarboxylic acid transporter from Rhizobium
meliloti, which is required for nitrogen fixation, and the nitrogen regulation
system from Salmonella typhimurium. This project will study the detailed
interaction of these transcription factors with each other and with DNA in
response to environmental changes.