* 9727325
* Main Group and Intermetallic Coordination Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Daniel Reger, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/2001
* USD 350,000.00

Dr. Daniel L. Reger, Chemistry Department, University of South Carolina at
Colulmbia, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for an investigation of
poly(pyrazolyl)borate and poly(pyrazolyl)methane complexes of s- and heavier
p-block metals. The flexibility and large size of these ligands leads to
unusually stable monomeric complexes and complexes of these species will be
investigated in the solid and solution state. One basic question to be addressed
involves the stereochemical activity or inactivity of lone pairs in the p-block
derivatives. The complexes will also be used as starting materials for the
synthesis of intermetallic compounds that contain main group element to
transition metal bonds. Oligomeric species derived by coupling derivatized
poly(pyrazolyl)methane units will be prepared and used to form extended arrays
of metal complexes. This is a wide ranging study that seeks to develop new ways
of preparing compounds containing 'post-transition' metals such lead, tin,
indium, thallium, and cadmium. These species will then be used to form compounds
in which the post-transition metal is directly joined to a transition metal.
These metals have many applications and the species designed in this research
may be developed into precursors for various electronic materials, new catalysts
will be designed, and fundamental spectroscopic information will be obtained for
heavy metals.