* 9727519
* Microstructural and Developmental Anatomy of the Dentition  of Ardipithecus Ramidus
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Scott Simpson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/2002
* USD 88,848.00

The fossil record is still the only guide to the timing and sequence of
anatomical adaptations that resulted in modern humans. Beginning in 1992,
fossils representing the earliest known, and perhaps first, species of our
lineage were recovered from the Afar region of Ethiopia. This new species, named
Ardipithecus ramidus, lived 4.4 million years ago in the tropical forests of the
northern East African Rift. By the end of the 1997 field season, fossilized
remains representing dozens of individuals were found including many teeth.
Preliminary analyses of A. ramidus teeth distinguish it from all other known
hominids by demonstrating unique gross and microstructural dental anatomy. Due
in large part to our better understanding of the growth and development of
dental tissues, we can now reconstruct with some fidelity the timing, nature,
and duration of dental, facial, and somatic growth from these dental and facial
remains. In addition, gross changes in the size and shape of the teeth also
provide insight into their function. This study will explore the dental anatomy
in Ardipithecus ramidus, other early hominids, extant apes, and modern humans
using a variety of approaches to shed light on the adaptations, growth, and
evolution of our earliest ancestor.