* 9727594
* Conference at MSRI in Low Dimensional-Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Joel Hass, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 08/31/1999
* USD 25,000.00

9727594&lt;br/&gt;Casson&lt;br/&gt; This award will provide partial
reimbursement for travel and&lt;br/&gt;subsistence of speakers and participants
in a conference on&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional topology that took place at the
Mathematical Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Research Center, Berkeley, California, May
22-26, 1998. The purpose of&lt;br/&gt;the conference was to bring together
researchers working in all strands of&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional topology and to
enable them to gain an overall perspective&lt;br/&gt;on developments in the
field. Recent years have seen exciting new&lt;br/&gt;developments in the study
of 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds and knot&lt;br/&gt;theory. Bringing
researchers in these fields together encouraged a&lt;br/&gt;cross-fertilization
of ideas and techniques, exposed graduate students&lt;br/&gt;to these ideas, and
encouraged new collaborations. The conference took&lt;br/&gt;place one year
after the end of a closely related year-long program at&lt;br/&gt;M.S.R.I. Thus
it was natural to review how progress had been&lt;br/&gt;consolidated in this
area over the ensuing year, and an added benefit of&lt;br/&gt;the conference was
to expose this progress to the wider mathematical&lt;br/&gt;community.
Approximately 150 mathematicians attended the conference,&lt;br/&gt;more than 50
of them graduate students. Some talks were tailored&lt;br/&gt;specifically for
these students.&lt;br/&gt; Topology addresses those geometric properties that
depend only on&lt;br/&gt;continuity, i.e., on the notion of one point being
close to another, but&lt;br/&gt;disregards the stock in trade of high school
geometry, measurement of&lt;br/&gt;quantities such as distance, angle, area,
volume, and so forth. Topology&lt;br/&gt;of the plane is often referred to in
popular scientific literature as&lt;br/&gt;rubber sheet geometry, and this
captures the essential spirit of the&lt;br/&gt;discipline without giving so much
as a hint of the techniques topologists&lt;br/&gt;might use in their science.
They confront some very basic but elusive&lt;br/&gt;properties, those that
remain after rigidity has been exorcised, and the&lt;br/&gt;past century has
seen the gradual assembly of a considerable arsenal of&lt;br/&gt;weapons for
dealing with these properties. Low-dimensional topology,&lt;br/&gt;mainly the
topology of 3- and 4-dimensional geometric objects, presents&lt;br/&gt;special
problems of its own, for while we have the intuition that we&lt;br/&gt;should be
able to apprehend these object more readily, living as we do
in&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space and 4-dimensional space-time, in fact much of
the&lt;br/&gt;algebraic machinery that has been developed for topology fails in
these&lt;br/&gt;lower dimensions. Recent years have seen some remarkable
advances on this&lt;br/&gt;front too, and this was the central theme of the
conference at M.S.R.I. in&lt;br/&gt;May. It is also noteworthy that low-
dimensional topology has become&lt;br/&gt;sufficiently highly developed to be
useful, for example, in applications&lt;br/&gt;of knot theory to polymer
chemistry and to the study of DNA. As this field&lt;br/&gt;continues to
progress, the immediacy of the objects with which it deals is&lt;br/&gt;likely
to lead its further technical advances to find equally
natural&lt;br/&gt;applications in the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;