* 9727050
* Can a Deaf Child Learn to Sign From Hearing Parents?
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Dan Slobin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 340,056.00

The aim of the project is to document and compare 30 individual case studies of
initial acquisition of sign language in Dutch deaf children in the age range
from 15 to 36 months. The data consist of longitudinal video recordings made in
home and preschool settings, vocabulary checklists gathered from parents, and
scales of motor and cognitive development. Two samples of deaf children of
hearing parents are compared: 13 using a natural sign language (SLN: Sign
Language of the Netherlands) and 13 using a nonnatural sign system (SSD: Sign
Supported Dutch). In both samples, the parents began to learn a manual language
before the child was old enough to begin linguistic communication. A control
group of four children learned SLN from deaf parents. The video recordings will
be transcribed and coded on a number of linguistic, gestural, and communicative
dimensions. Transcription and coding will include the communicative behavior of
children, parents, and preschool teachers. Quantitative and qualitative analyses
will be carried out, relating coded dimensions with each other, with measures of
vocabulary and nonlinguistic performance, and with types of parental input.
Developmental patterns will be established for each type of input. Four major
predictions are made: (1) Adequate sign language development is possible with
"imperfect input" from hearing parents provided the input is a natural sign
language (SLN). (2) SLN is a natural language, and is acquired in similar
fashion to other natural languages spoken and signed. (3) SSD does not provide
sufficient input for adequate primary language acquisition. (4) A natural sign
language (SLN) can successfully function as a second language for hearing
parents in interacting with a deaf child. (Findings with regard to SLN, in the
age range considered, are expected to closely match findings with regard to
American Sign Language.) Confirmation of these predictions would argue for early
intervention programs in w hich hearing parents are taught a natural sign
language, such as SLN or ASL, in order to establish normal language and
communicative development in a deaf child. It is expected that the study will
lead to new insights into the linguistic structure of SLN and other natural sign
languages with consequences for linguistic theory and for the assessment and
education of deaf children. Implications will be drawn for theories of child
language acquisition, including the cognitive, communicative, and biological
foundations of human language. The findings and implications will be of
immediate relevance to deaf children and their families in the United States, as
well as the Netherlands and other countries.