* 9727077
* Influence of Seasonal Ice Cover on Pelagic and Benthic      Communities:  Long Time-Series Studies
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/2001
* USD 573,155.00

9727077 SMITH The annual expansion and contraction of ice cover in the Southern
Ocean is the largest seasonal process in the World Ocean. This seasonal
variability in ice cover creates extensive fluctuations in primary production,
which heavily impacts pelagic and benthic communities. This research will
initiate a long time-series study of the water column and sea floor using long-
term, autonomous monitoring and sampling systems developed for use in the
Antarctic. The study will be located in Post Foster, Deception Island, which
supports a pelagic and benthic fauna representative of the Antarctic coastal
zone and experiences seasonal ice cover. A bottom-moored, upward-looking
acoustic instrument will be deployed on the sea floor for a period of one year
to monitor the vertical distribution, abundance and biomass of acoustically-
detectable macrozooplankton and micronekton in the water column. Collections
will be made over this period using a newly-developed vertically-profiling pump
sampling. Simultaneously, a time-lapse camera system will be moored on the sea
floor to monitor the spatial distribution, sizes and movements of the epibenthic
megafauna component of the benthic community. The instrumentation development
will allow the research project to focus on the effect of the seasonal sea ice
cycle on the distribution, abundance and biomass of the macrozooplankton and
micronekton in the water column. Similar questions on the distribution,
abundance, size and movements of the epibenthic megafauna will be addressed.
Results from this study will provide a valuable data base for the evaluation of
the pelagic and benthic community responses to seasonal variability in the
Southern Ocean.