* 9727681
* Collaborative Research: Ecological and Evolutionary         Physiology of the Stress Response and Stress Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Billy Geer, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 14,420.00

Dybas 9727681 A major issue in ecological and evolutionary physiology is the
relationship among the traits of complex organisms, organisms' ability to
exploit diverse environments, and species' persistence in time. The proposed
investigation examines the heat-shock protein Hsp70 in Drosophila to address
this issue. In response to heat or other stresses, nearly all organisms express
heat-shock proteins (Hsps), highly-conserved proteins that contribute to stress
tolerance by functioning as molecular chaperones. Research supported by a
previous NSF award has established that experimental manipulation of copy number
of the hsp70 gene of Drosophila, which encodes Hsp70, is sufficient to cause
changes in thermotolerance. The proposed research will build upon this finding
to examine the physiological mechanism of Hsp70 function; i.e., how thermal
stress disrupts function and how Hsp70 protects against heat damage or aids
recovery from it. This issue will be examined in the larval gut of Drosophila,
which is especially susceptible to heat damage. Electron microscopy will be used
to determine which particular tissues and cells are most vulnerable to heat
damage, and to document protection of these tissues and cells by the heat-shock
protein Hsp70. Larval Drosophila that differ in Hsp70 expression will be
examined. The projected outcome of the proposed research has immense potential
to integrate molecular, genetic, functional, and evolutionary perspectives to
advance understanding of adaptation.