* 9727687
* Family Stability in Cooperative Breeding Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1998,12/31/2002
* James Dietz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2002
* USD 277,750.00

This project is a continuation of behavioral and demographic monitoring of
golden lion tamarin monkeys in Poco das Antas Reserve, Brazil. The study
population, now continuously monitored for 13 years, consists of about one third
of the approximately 346 tamarins in the reserve. Date and circumstances are
recorded for every migration event in the population. Maternity is recorded for
each infant born into the study population and probable paternity determined
using behavioral and molecular-genetic techniques. Demographic data are entered
into SPARKS, software designed to track genealogies and perform demographic
analyses for captive populations. One major objective of this research is to
test hypotheses concerning the social and ecological circumstances that
influence timing of natal dispersal in this cooperative breeding primate.
Demographic analyses will also permit calculation of effective population size,
an important measure for setting conservation goals for this endangered species.
In addition, we will apply newly available fecal endocrine assays to address
questions concerning physiological suppression of fertility in subordinate
females, endocrine correlates of forced and voluntary dispersal of individual
tamarins, and of social dominance. Finally, this research site, the study
population, and the supporting databases will continue to serve as a center for
Neotropical research.