* 9727312
* Lattice Dynamics and Bistability of Electronically Labile   Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* David Hendrickson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2001
* USD 427,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research by Dr. David N. Hendrickson of the Chemistry Department,
University of California at San Diego, on lattice dynamics and bistability of
electronically labile complexes. Detailed studies will be carried out on
transition metal complexes that have two or more electronic states that are
close in energy. For compounds in which vibrational modes are closely coupled
with electronic modes, changes in crystal lattice parameters such as those
caused by modifying solvent or counter ions can result in spin-crossover or
phase transitions in response to changes in light or other external parameters.
A primary goal of this project is to characterize magnetic bistability in
molecular species. Specifically the magnetic behavior of a series of
dodecamanganese-oxo-carboxylate complexes will be probed to characterize the
factors affecting the potential-energy barrier and the mechanism of resonant
magnetization tunneling in these single-molecule magnets compounds.
Investigation of photoinduced valence tautomerization in cobalt complexes and
spin crossover in opically sensitive iron complexes will continue. Methods will
then be sought to attach these species to a functionalized surface or polymer.
The long-term goal of this project is to develop molecules or collections of
molecules for use in electronic circuits and devices. In this research,
compounds containing a small number of metal atoms will be tested for
sensitivity and specificity of response to external physical stimuli. Only a few
examples of molecules in which the magnetic field changes in response to changes
in external magnetic field are known. In this investigation additional examples
will be prepared and the factors that control their behavior will be determined.
These results can lead to nanoscale devices which change spin, number of
electrons, or magnetic properties in response to electric, magnetic, optical, or
thermal changes. Many applications as switches or for information storage can be
envisioned. In addition to the scientific content, an important aspect of this
project is the training of young scientists.