* 9727827
* Symposium: 13th International Congress of the International Union for Study of Social Insects (IUSSI) December 29, 1998 - January 4, 1999 in Adelaide, Australia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1998,07/31/1999
* P. Kirk Visscher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

Visscher 9727827 Terrestrial ecosystems are dominated by social species. Social
cooperation among conspecifics was a major evolutionary innovation that occurred
repeatedly in diverse taxa. The study of social insects has provided
unparalleled insights concerning both the evolution of sociality and the
behavioral mechanisms involved. Similarly the study of social insects has
contributed broadly to many fields of scientific inquiry. The most important
international organization of social insect scientists is the International
Union for the Study of Social Insects (IUSSI). This group holds the only
international congress devoted to research on social insects every four years.
Funds are requested here so that students, postdocs, and early career social
insect scientists from the United States can travel to the 13th International
Congress of the IUSSI to be held in Adelaide, Australia, from 19 Dec. 1998- 4
Jan. 1999. Typically, IUSSI Congresses attract scientists from over 30 countries
and cover a wide range of disciplines including genetics, physiology, behavior,
population biology, ecology, evolution, and systematics. Largely due to previous
NSF funding, members of the North American Section (NAS/IUSSI) presented 25% or
more of the program in the three most recent meetings (Munich, Germany 1986;
Bangalore, India 1990; and Paris, France 1994). In turn, American social insect
scientists substantially benefited from this involvement. Because this
multidisciplinary Congress is the primary international forum for discussion of
new information regarding social insects, it is essential that researchers and
students from the United Stated attend this meeting. Moreover, this congress
will provide North American scientists the opportunity to open new dialogues
with overseas colleagues and initiate plans for collaborative research. Funds
are requested to insure that American researchers are able to participate in
this very significant congress. 1