* 9727710
* A National Library for Undergraduate Science, Mathematics,  Engineering, and Technology Education:  Needs, Options and  Feasibility
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Rodger Bybee, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 02/28/1999
* USD 240,000.00

The National Research Council's Center for Science, Mathematics. and Engineering
Education (The Center) proposes to undertake for the National Science Foundation
a project that would examine the need, options, and issues in establishing a
digital National Library for Undergraduate Science, Mathematics, Engineering,
and Technology (SME&amp;T) Education (hereafter referred to as the "National
Library"). The purpose of such a library would be to provide a comprehensive,
dynamic, and readily accessible and searchable collection of high-quality
educational material in undergraduate science, mathematics, and engineering
education that is intended to facilitate and enhance the NSF's programs to
improve and evaluate undergraduate teaching and learning. To facilitate the work
of the NSF, the NRC will assess the strategy, and potential effectiveness for
the Foundation to develop a National Library. The proposed NRC project will
produce a consensus report of findings and recommendations concerning the need
for a digital National Library for Undergraduate SME&amp;T Education, and the
options, timeline, and components that will be important for planning a National
Library. First, background papers on key subjects by acknowledged experts will
be commissioned to provide state-of-the-art surveys of current opportunities for
establishing a National Library and the challenges that NSF must confront if the
Foundation decides to fund the National Library. Second, these papers will be
presented and discussed at a two-day workshop to be attended by individuals with
technical expertise in digital libraries, representatives from the federal
agencies sponsoring national library projects, college/university faculty and
students, and representatives from the corporate sector. Third, workshop
proceedings will be developed to summarize the outcome of the workshop and offer
recommendations about the feasibility and logistics for developing a National
Library for undergraduate SME&amp;T education. The proceedings will be delivere
d to the Foundation in mid-September, 1997.