* 9727136
* LT:  Formalization of Disassembly Process to Support        Serviceability and End-of-Product Life Options
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Venkat Allada, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 99,907.00

9727136 Allada Stricter environmental legislation, corporate image, public
perception, and rising waste-disposal costs are impetus for evolving research
initiatives in the area of environmentally conscious design (ECD). One of the
critical research issues of ECD is design for disassembly (DFD). Product
disassembly considerations have major impact on serviceability and various end-
of-product life cycle issues such as recycling, reuse, and remanufacturing. This
research project attempts to conduct deeper investigations into the disassembly
process by (1) Formalizing the disassembly process using graph theory and
abstract algebra techniques and, (2) Developing an advanced design tool to
evaluate product "greenness" at the concept design and final design stages. The
context chosen is mechanical/electromechanical artifacts. The design information
is fuzzy (of approximate nature) in the early design stages. However, crucial
design decisions are made at the early design stages. As the design activity
proceeds to the final stage, the design variables start assuming crisp values.
However, there are fewer avenues to improve product greenness at the final
design stages since there is less flexibility to incorporate the redesign
suggestions. Maximum benefits will be reaped if a phased evaluation is performed
at the concept and final design stages. A formal methodology for representing
and processing imprecise design information of a conceptual artifact is proposed
in this study. The green evaluator will have different evaluation perspectives
for the concept and final design artifacts -- moving from generality to
specificity. Fuzzy neural networks (FNN) in conjunction with expert reasoning
system will be used to build this green evaluation design tool to determine the
initial feasibility and green indices of a candidate design. The approach
adopted in this study is to infer various life-cycle disassembly,
serviceability, and recycling characteristics; provide qualitative evaluation by
identifying portions of a design artifact that are environmentally burdensome;
and compute appropriate green indices. Component-level and productlevel green
indices will be computed in terms of factors such as relative disassembly cost
and time, relative service cost and time, and relative product salvage value.
Research issues relating to formalization of disassembly process and development
of a computational design tool will involve interaction with the industrial
supporters (Ford, Boeing, Finale International Tool, and Home, Inc.) of this
project. The concepts and computational tools discussed in this study will lead
to an increased understanding of the disassembly process and the development of
advanced computer-based design tools to produce environment-friendly products.
This will help the U.S. companies to meet the targeted ecological goals and gain
advantage in the global marketplace. The Manufacturing Research and Training
Center (MRTC), MO, has kindly agreed to cost share $24,976 over a period of two
years. ***