* 9727039
* RUI: Collaborative Research:  Maintenance of Species        Diversity in Temporary Ponds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* John Fauth, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 08/31/2002
* USD 175,000.00

Fauth & Resetarits 9727039 & 9727543 Ecologists have long been interested in
understanding the factors controlling the abundance and distribution of species
and particularly concerned about identifying the processes controlling species
diversity. This project focuses on understanding species diversity in Anuran
communities in temporary ponds in coastal and sandhill regions of the
Southeastern US, habitats with the highest levels of diversity for these
organisms outside of the tropics. Despite substantial earlier work, there is
little understanding of the factors that influence the high diversity of these
communities under natural situations. This work will test a model of amphibian
species richness in Southeastern temporary ponds using a series of replicated
whole-pond experiments. Ultimately, the model will be further developed and
refined to include other taxa and systems. This research will also address one
of the most common criticisms of previous investigations of these amphibian
communities. Much earlier work has been conducted in artificial habitats and
little effort has been made to relate this work to processes occurring in
natural ecosystems. Through its use of experimental manipulations of natural
temporary ponds, this project will address this fundamental concern. Ultimately
it will be able to test the extent to which mesocosm experiment that are
designed primarily to test general or specific ecological theories can
simultaneously describe in detail and make specific predictions about the
structure and dynamics of natural communities. This work will have important
implications for both basic ecology and conservation biology. It will help to
identify the factors that have maintained high Anuran diversity in Southeastern
habitats while substantial reductions of amphibian species have been noted
elsewhere in the US.