* 9727361
* Theoretical and Computational Studies of Density            Inhomogeneties in Supercritical Fluids and Their Effect on  Solute Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Susan Tucker, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 12/31/2002
* USD 293,800.00

Susan Tucker is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue her studies of density inhomogeneities in
supercritical fluids and their effects on solute reactions. Supercritical fluids
are industrially important as environmentally benign solvents for carrying out
chemical reactions. Tucker will investigate, using molecular dynamics modeling,
the way in which various density inhomogeneities affect reaction dynamics. More
specifically she will seek to answer the following questions: 1) How do solvent
density inhomogeneities affect solute reaction dynamics? 2) Which are the
relevant processes controlling the reactive event? 3) Under what conditions are
enhanced solute-solute distributions expected? and 4) What influence will these
distributions have upon solute reaction dynamics? Supercritical fluids have
recently received widespread attention as potential solvents for use in
industrial chemical processes, even though reactivity in these solvents is not
yet well understood. The excitement over supercritical fluid solvents arises
because the solvating properties of these fluids may be altered dramatically and
continuously with modest changes in temperature and pressure. This tunability
suggests that it may be possible to conduct a wide variety of chemical reactions
in environmentally benign solvents such as supercritical water or carbon
dioxide. Tucker's work seeks to understand the unique features of supercritical
fluid solvation at the molecular level. This understanding can lead to an
improved understanding of how supercritical fluids can be more widely employed
in environmentally benign industrial syntheses.