* 9727633
* Catalysis by Shape Selected Metallic Nanoparticles:         Mechanism of Shape Control and Nanoparticle Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/28/2001
* USD 336,000.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
focusses on the characterization of transition metal nanoparticles prepared by a
process involving hydrogen reduction and control of particle shape by the
presence of capping polymers. Professors El-Sayed and Wang and their students at
Georgia Tech will characterize the shape and composition of these nanoparticles
using high resolution transmission electron microscopy, parallel- detection
electron energy-loss spectroscopy, energy-dispersive X- ray spectroscopy, and
Raman and FTIR vibrational spectroscopies. The objective is to establish an
understanding of the synthetic parameters that control the shapes of these
nanoparticles and their properties. The long-term aim of this work is to develop
useful nanoparticle structures for applications in heterogeneous catalysis. A
new synthetic process for preparing transition metal nanoparticles that can
control their shape has been developed by Professors El-Sayed and Wang at
Georgia Tech. This process involves reduction of metal ions using molecular
hydrogen in the presence of polymers that cap the particle surface. The factors
that are important in controlling the size, shape, and composition of these
particles will be determined using an array of surface characterization methods,
particularly high resolution transmission electron microscopy. The long-term
goal of this work is to develop a family of new low temperature heterogeneous
catalysts for industrial use.