* 9727137
* LT:  In-Situ Generation of Hazardous Reactants for Chemical Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* George Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 09/30/1999
* USD 49,955.00

9727137 McConica The chemical industry frequently deals with hazardous chemicals
by adopting alternative technologies that avoid the use of such raw materials.
This is an attractive strategy, but it is not universally applicable. The
alternative processes can be major generators of environmentally-harmful waste,
and can involve materials that are only marginally less hazardous. Thus, other
options are needed. This proposal examines a novel approach to the problem of
using reactive and hazardous chemicals: in- situ generation. Successful
development of this concept will create important new options in the area of
environ- mentally-benign chemical synthesis. Formaldehyde is an example of a
hazardous and costly chemical that has traditionally been avoided in chemical
synthesis. It is a suspected or probable' man carcinogen, and it is so reactive
that it cannot be stored or shipped in pure form. However, a number of important
chemicals could be produced with much less pollution and with greater safety via
formaldehyde than by their current commercial processes. For example,
substitution of formaldehyde-based processes for the technologies currently used
to produce methyl methacrylate and styrene could eliminate the use of about 8
billion pounds of benzene and about 250 million pounds of hydrogen cyanide
annually, and could eliminate about 1 billion pounds of ammonium bisulfate waste
and about 100 million pounds of aluminum trichloride waste annually, in the
United States alone. The recent development of high-temperature slurry reactors
in our laboratory, coupled with steady progress in the catalysis and reaction
engineering of polystep reactions, permits a new approach to utilization of
hazardous chemicals. In essence, the hazardous chemical will be generated and
consumed in situ in a single reactor. For example, it is known that formaldehyde
can react with methyl propionate over various heterogeneous catalysts in the
temperature range of 300 to 400' C to form methyl methacrylate. It should be
possible to simultaneously dehydrogenate methanol to formaldehyde in the same
reactor, using a different catalyst. The coupling of these two reactions would
result in the synthesis of methyl methacrylate from methanol and methyl
propionate. Similarly, styrene could be synthesized from methanol and toluene.
The key is to employ a slurry reactor containing a physical mixture of a
methanol dehydrogenation catalyst and a catalyst for the formaldehyde-consuming
reaction, with the rates of the two reactions properly balanced. This research
will focus on in-situ formaldehyde generation, i.e., the dehydrogenation of
methanol to formaldehyde, in a high-temperature slurry reactor. Emphasis will be
placed on understanding the effect of catalyst composition and structure, and
the reactor design and operating variables, on the kinetics and selectivity of
the reaction. This knowledge will provide a sound fundamental basis for coupling
in-situ formaldehyde generation with various formaldehyde-consuming reactions.
The proposed research program has the potential to produce a major advance in
environmentally-benign chemical synthesis, since the novel concept of in-situ
generation should have broad applicability as an enabling technology for process
substitution. The proposed research will also provide an important scientific
advance, i.e., a more fundamental basis for the a priori design of catalyst
systems for polystep reactions in slurry reactors. ***