* 9727590
* Star Porphyrazines, Solitaire Phthalocyanines and Related   Multimetallic Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Brian Hoffman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2001
* USD 505,000.00

Dr. Brian M. Hoffman, Chemistry Department, Northwestern University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division for a collaborative project with Dr. Anthony G. M.
Barrett, Chemistry Department, Imperial College of Science and Technology,
London, England, aimed at synthesis and study of star porphyrazines, solitaire
phthalocyanines and related multimetallic macrocycles. A series of porphyrazines
that are peripherally substituted with heteroatoms will be synthesized. These
will be converted into complexes with metals bound to the peripheral heteroatoms
and to the core of the central macrocycle. Extended arrays will be formed by
connecting several of the metalla-porphyrazine units through peripheral metal
bridges. The resultant complexes will have unusual spectroscopic, magnetic, or
electrical properties properties due to electron delocalization and metal-metal
interactions through the macrocyclic pi-system. Compounds which contain several
metals often have unique magnetic and electronic properties. In this project a
series of such materials will be prepared. The specific design involves a
central metal which is surrounded by a rigid structure of other atoms (a
macrocyclic ligand) to which additional metals are attached. This results in
star-shaped or linear arrays of metal atoms. These are expected to have a
diversity of applications including biomedical optical imaging, optical sensors,
the separation of chiral substances, and catalysis. The project involves the
collaboration between a group in England, where the macrocylic ligands will be
prepared, and one at Northwestern University, which will be responsible for the
conversion of the ligands into metal complexes. Students will be exchanged
between the groups and thus will receive an extremely broad training in
synthetic organic and metal chemistries. The collaboration also provides the
opportunity for US students to experience the international aspects of modern
science.