* 9727948
* Ultrafast Studies of Electron Transfer in Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Roseanne Sension, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2002
* USD 255,000.00

9727948 Sension In this research project state-of-the-art ultrafast
spectroscopic techniques will be used to study the primary electron transfer
processes in photosystem II. Three specific lines of attack will be pursued in
this series of investigations. (1) Ultrafast fluorescence detection will be used
to study the excited state population dynamics directly in the D1-D2-Cyt b559
reaction center complex. A streak camera of novel design, which provides greater
flexibility, superior signal averaging and sub five picosecond time resolution,
will be used. These characteristics are necessary for the study of energy
transfer and change separation in PSII. (2) Larger PSII complexes will be
prepared in order to study the electron transfer rate in active centers and set
to rest any speculation as to whether or not the D1-D2-Cyt b559 complex retains
the native reaction center structure and dynamics. The studies will investigate
the D1-D2-Cyt b559 complex, the CP47-D1-D2-Cyt b559 complex, and the reaction
center core under consistent conditions permitting direct and quantitative
comparisons. (3) Finally, the addition of external replacement quinones will be
used to study the primary and secondary electron transfer processes in PSII.
These measurements will be performed on the D1-D2-Cyt b559 complex and the
CP47-D1-D2-Cyt b559 complex. These studies will explore the effect of the
presence of a secondary electron acceptor on the population equilibrium
distributed over the locally excited fluorescent and charge separated dark
states. A rigorous understanding of the primary electron transfer reactions in
biological photosynthetic systems is one of the keys to a complete understanding
of natural solar energy conversion. The protein complex referred to as
photosystem II is responsible for the ability of green plants to utilize light
energy to fuel the production of oxygen from water. The PSII protein complex
works in conjunction with a second complex, photosystem 1, to form carbohydrates
from carbon dioxide. From a chemical point of view, the ability of green plants
to produce oxygen and carbohydrates from light, water and carbon dioxide
represents an amazing achievement. The overall goal of this investigation is to
understand the factors that control the efficiency of photosynthesis in green
plants.