* 9727866
* US-Brazil Workshop on Formal Foundations of Software        Systems:  Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, November 1997
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Michael Mislove, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 21,117.00

9727866 This project will organize and run a US-Brazil Workshop on Formal
Foundations of Software Systems at Tulane University, November 9- 12, 1997. The
workshop is a follow up to a similar activity held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in
May of 1997. The workshop will further the establishment of collaborative
research projects between computer scientists in Brazil and their counterparts
in the United States. It will be composed of plenary sessions in two broad
areas: theory of programming language design and analysis and formal tools for
software verification, validation, and refinement. In addition, there will be
smaller sessions for the presentation of detailed research interests, as well as
interest- group planning sessions for laying out common research goals. There
will be approximately twenty participants from each of Brazil and the US,
selected by a Program Committee of three individuals from each country on the
basis of position papers stating their research interests and aims for
collaboration. One outcome of the workshop will be a report to NSF giving the
results of an open discussion planned during the workshop focusing on promising
areas of potential collaboration and future research, as well as ideas for
promoting such collaborations in the future. The workshop is jointly sponsored
by CCR and CDA at NSF and by the Brazilian counterpart agency, CNPq. ***