* 9727209
* LT:  Models and Instruction for Life Cycle Material Content Decisions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Kurt Koelling, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 110,000.00

9727209 Stuart This proposal focuses on engineering approaches for
sustainability and design for materials reuse through the development of polymer
degradation models, product characterization models, and life cycle material
content decision models. Because these challenges are multidisciplinary,
collaboration between Chemical Engineering (polymer processing), Industrial
Engineering (manufacturing processes), Operations Research (applied mathematical
modeling), and Mechanical Engineering (product design) are described. An
important element of this proposal is the integration of environmentally
conscious engineering approaches into undergraduate and graduate engineering
curriculum. As the demand for plastics by the transportation, aerospace, and
durable goods industries is increasing, the disposal of plastics is also
increasing. The analysis of life cycle trade-offs between use of recycled
plastics, recyclability, reduction of process wastes, energy consumption,
yields, and product performance are complex. To date, most companies process
either 100% virgin material or virgin material with small percentages of
regrind. Sources of pure regrind may be internal or from another industrial
processor(s). Companies embracing product stewardship are struggling to develop
viable approaches to economically process and recycle returned products. Post-
consumer polymers have been exposed to various thermal and mechanical
conditions. In addition, post-consumer products contain polymer blends as well
as additives such as reinforcements, paint, or flame retardants. Thus, post-
consumer plastics introduce additional raw material uncertainties into the
manufacturing process. To achieve corporate sustainability goals for cradle to
cradle products, companies producing advanced polymers and composites need
polymer degradation models, product characterization models, and decision tools
for recycled material content choices as well as engineers who understand
sustainability issues and approaches. Several materials, manufacturing, design,
and decision modeling issues as well as curriculum integration must be
addressed. First, we must be able to identify the measure of degradation for
incoming recycled materials. Previous studies have demonstrated the relationship
between the molecular weight distribution (MWD) and polymer degradation
properties such as viscosity and melt index. We will investigate the feasibility
of measuring the MWD for common material mixes where mixes refer to various
recycling generations (virgin through fifth generation) as well as polymer
blends. We must also characterize the product complexities and the corresponding
material properties required. Next, we will investigate the relationship between
the product complexities and the material degradation properties. Typical
industrial processing parameters for temperature and pressure will be used. The
goal is to characterize the relationship between the ratio of recycled content
to virgin content and the mold geometry, mechanical properties, and rheological
properties. The materials degradation models will provide valuable input for the
life cycle material content decision model. The objective of the life cycle
material content decision model is to select material content ratios in order to
minimize costs subject to constraints on regrind, post-consumer, and virgin
material supply, energy consumption, cycle time, and quality. In five different
undergraduate and graduate classes, the principal investigators will motivate
future engineers to grapple with environmental materials selection challenges.
Industrial ecology principles as well as analytical methods for life cycle
material content decisions will be integrated into the engineering curriculum.
***