* 9727797
* Planned Behavior, Environmental Values and Domestic Water   Conservation.  A Longitudinal Case Study of the             California-Nevada Truckee River Watershed
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1997,09/29/1998
* Craig Trumbo, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/29/1998
* USD 204,098.00

This study uses mail survey methods to examine attitudes and behaviors toward
water conservation throughout the Truckee River Watershed in California and
Nevada. The survey area extends from California's Lake Tahoe Basin to Fallon and
Pyramid Lake in Nevada, and includes the rapidly growing metropolitan area of
Reno-Sparks, Nevada. The project will describe the range of water conservation
attitudes throughout the Truckee River Watershed to determine what natural
(e.g., geographical) and attitudinal communities exist, and to discover cross-
jurisdictional opportunities for consensus building on water issues. It will
also observe water conservation attitudes and behaviors across time to determine
how these might be shifting as communities grow and diversify. In terms of
general usefulness, this project will add contextually to existing work on
conservation in two ways. First, relatively little conservation research has
been applied to home water conservation (as opposed to conservation of energy,
for example). And second, previous work examining water conservation has been
executed within political boundaries (especially cities), versus more
environmentally meaningful boundaries such as watersheds. Understanding how the
diverse set of interests within the watershed can cooperate to share a vital,
highly variable, and ultimately limited resource will offer valuable lessons.
Policy efforts aimed at building such cooperation will be aided by a scientific
understanding of the range of orientations toward water conservation throughout
the watershed. Further, the rapid growth and diversification of the Reno-Sparks
metropolitan area presents an outstanding opportunity to not only understand the
dynamics of water conservation during such growth but also to consider and
recommend information strategies and policy alternatives designed to promote
conservation, both in Nevada and elsewhere.