* 9727234
* Morphological Differentiation in a Filamentous Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Richard Losick, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

9727234 Losick The goal of this project is to elucidate the nature of the
signals and the signaling pathways that govem the process of aerial mycelium
formation in the filamentous bacterium Streptornyces coelicolor. The formation
of the aerial mycelium depends on so-called bld (i.e., "bald") genes, mutants of
which produce smooth, hairless colonies. A striking property of bld mutants is
their capacity to regain the ability to form an aerial mycelium when grown near,
but not in contact with, certain other bld mutants, a phenomenon known as
extracellular complementation. Experiments will be carried out to purify
extracellular factors that stimulate the formation of the aerial mycelium. One
such factor is transported into cells by a peptide importer, and a gene required
for its production will be cloned. In traditional searches for developmental
mutants, many bld mutants were probably missed due to extracellular
complementation by wildtype colonies under conditions of high colony density.
Additional bld mutants will now be sought by carrying out screens at low colony
density, and the mutated bld genes will be cloned and characterized. Finally, to
facilitate the discovery of additional bld genes, a new procedure for generating
insertional mutants will be developed. Aerial mycelium formation is one of the
most fascinating and dramatic examples of morphological differentiation in the
world of procaryotic organisms. Streptomyces coelicolor and other streptomycetes
are filamentous bacteria that grow by the formation of a mold-like, branching
network of multinucleoid hyphae. The aerial mycelium consists of hyphae that
grow into the air away from the colony surface to form a luxuriant lawn of hair-
like filaments that eventually metamorphose into chains of pigmented spores. The
colony can be thought of as a kind of community in which the cells are in active
communication with one another so as to coordinate the formation of the aerial
mycelium. It is anticipated that this project will help elucidate the nature of
the intercellular interactions that govern aerial mycelium formation. It is
likely that the findings derived from this work will provide insights into
signaling systems used by other kinds of bacteria as well as by cells of higher
organisms.