* 9727841
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Perception of Continuous and       Discrete Visual Events:  Vernier Acuity, Motion Smear,      Color, and Attention
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Beena Khurana, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/2000
* USD 70,087.00

This research uses a striking visual illusion, the flash-lag effect, to study
the normal functioning of the human visual system. One example of the illusion
involves a line segment rotating about its center. A stationary segment is
briefly flashed at each end of the rotating segment, such that the rotating and
stationary segments are in alignment. Surprisingly, observers perceive the
stationary segments not as aligned with the rotating segment, but rather as
lagging slightly behind it. Even more striking is a version of the phenomenon
involving color. If a red line is flashed within a stationary green bar,
observers perceive the line as yellow (because mixing red and green light yields
yellow, due to the way the visual system processes color). However, if a red
line is flashed briefly within a rotating green bar, observers don't see a
yellow line within a green bar; rather they see a red line trailing the green
bar. Our hypothesis is that the flash-lag effects result from mechanisms within
the visual system that compensate for delays in neural transmission time.
Transmission of information from the eyes to the brain takes appreciable time;
by the time information about a moving object reaches the brain, the object has
moved some distance. Thus, we might expect the object to be seen not where it
actually is, but rather where it was a short time ago. However, we suggest that
the visual system extrapolates the registered location of smoothly moving
objects to compensate for the effects of the delay. Thus, given collinear moving
and stationary line segments, the moving segment is seen as leading the
stationary segment because the visual system extrapolates the location of the
moving but not the stationary segment. We will study several forms of the flash-
lag effect under various conditions. The results will increase our understanding
of how the visual system compensates for neural delays; also, the studies
involving colored stimuli will allow us to test competing theories of color
vision.