* 9727424
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Optimal Design and       Control of Multibody Systems:  A Parallel Manipulator       Case Study
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* James Bobrow, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 07/31/2002
* USD 25,645.00

9727424 Bobrow This award provides funds to permit Dr. James E. Bobrow,
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California -
Irvine to pursue with Dr. Frank C. Park, Department of Mechanical Design and
Production Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea, for 36 months, a
program of cooperative research on optimal design and control of multibody
systems, a parallel manipulator case study., Using techniques from modern
differential geometry, compact, closed-form equations for the dynamics of such
systems have been developed in prior research by the collaborators. The goal of
the present research is to integrate various mathematical methods, developed
previously, into a single unified design methodology for multibody design and
control. These previously developed equations have led to the development of
gradient-based numerical optimization algorithms for optimal design and motion
planning applications. The collaborators expect to validate their proposed
approach with a case study, by applying the methodology to the design,
construction, and control of a pneumatically actuated parallel manipulator for
use as a vehicle simulator. The practical goal of this project is a low-cost
vehicle simulator whose performance is optimized using efficient and robust
design optimization algorithms. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation is supported
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***