* 9727059
* TECO: Collaborative Research: The Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment: Ecosystem-scale Responses to Elevated CO2      Warming, Nutrient Deposition, and Increased Moisture Inputs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 569,718.00

Field 9727059 Global changes over the coming decades are almost certain to be
multi-factorial, with altered levels of atmospheric CO2, temperature, nitrogen
deposition, and precipitation. To date, no experimental studies address this
full suite of interacting global changes in the field. Despite a profound lack
of consensus on the nature of the interactions among these factors, the
foundation for interpretation and prediction is built largely from observations
on natural patterns and data from single-factor experiments. While these can, at
least in principle, yield access to the full suite of potentially important
mechanisms, single-factor experiments and observations along natural gradients
do not provide a context for evaluating our ability to predict the consequences
of several, simultaneously operating mechanisms. To address this lack of
information, this project will use field experiments with a factorial
combination of altered CO2, temperature, water inputs, and nitrogen inputs.
Focusing on four integrated response variables - primary production, soil carbon
storage, soil nutrient availability, and species or functional group composition
- this research will test the null hypothesis that responses to warming and
elevated CO2 in combination are essentially additive, the sum of the responses
to the individual factors. The experiments will employ mini-FACE and infrared
heater technology in a California annual grassland, where it is feasible to
execute a design combining several generations of the dominant organisms, a
range of treatments, and reasonable replication. To facilitate the comparison
with model output, experiments with three levels of CO2 and three levels of
temperature will be used.