* 9727811
* Mechanism of Action of Bacteriophage T4 Translational       Repressor RegA Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Eleanor Spicer, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 04/30/2002
* USD 274,975.00

9727811 SPICER This project will examine the mechanism of action of the
bacteriophage T4 translational repressor, regA protein. The regA protein is a
uniquely promiscuous translational repressor, which specifically recognizes and
binds to at least 15 different T4 early mRNAs and blocks their translation. How
regA protein distinguishes these mRNAs from the 150 other T4 mRNAs present in
the cell at the same time is not clearly understood and is the subject of this
project. The overall goal of this work is to assess the participation of
individual regA residues and specific functional groups in a model RNA substrate
(i.e. the T4 gene 44 RE) in inter-molecular interactions that lead to specific
complex formation. The specific objectives of this study are: 1) to identify
specific residues in regA that participate in RNA binding and quantitate their
contribution to the free energy of RNA binding; 2) to assist the efforts in Dr.
Chul-Hee Kang's laboratory to solve the crystal structure of a regA protein:RNA
complex; 3) to determine the hierarchy of regA binding affinities for four T4
mRNAs; and 4) to characterize the repression sensitivity of synthetic
recognition element RNAs in vivo. To accomplish the first of these objectives,
site-directed mutagenesis will be used to test the role of specific residues
predicted to participate in RNA binding from earlier biochemical studies. In
addition, random mutagenesis coupled with an in vivo screen will be used to
identify new functional residues. To better understand how regA-sensitive mRNAs
are recognized and distinguished from other T4 mRNAs, the hierarchy of regA
binding affinities for defined RNA sequences will be measured in vitro. The
recognition elements defined by these in vitro studies will be tested for regA
repression sensitivity in vivo, using a lacZ fusion gene as a reporter gene. By
determining relative repression ratios for RNA sequences, it should be possible
to determine if in vitro RNA binding affinities correlate with mRNA repression
sens itivities in vivo. In all cells, a variety of macromolecular interactions
occur that govern the specific functions of the cell. Many of the critical
biochemical functions that occur within the cell involve specific interactions
between proteins and nucleic acid molecules (DNA and RNA). The work carried out
in this project seeks to understand better how proteins recognize and
selectively interact with RNA to regulate translation, the process by which
proteins are synthesized using the information encoded in the RNA. The model
system being studied offers the opportunity to gain novel insights into this
type of molecular recognition process. Ultimately, these insights should have
implications for better understanding of a variety of cellular processes,
including the replication of RNA viruses, the control of gene expression and the
synthesis of proteins.