* 9727504
* Dissertion Research: Women's Participation in Activist      Organization in the Solomon Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Virginia Dominguez, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Iowa. The research investigates the effect of particular
religious affiliation has on the political activity of women in the Solomon
Islands. While religious Christian doctrine stresses modernization over
traditional customs, there is variation in how different religious organizations
stimulate or suppress the political activities of women. The project will
investigate how the religious Christian doctrines that women are learning
through affiliation with Catholic, Anglican, Methodist, Evangelical, Adventist,
Pentecostal and other denominations relate to their involvement with social
change organizations such as NGOs. The student will interview women and their
husbands or other adult male relatives who are activists, as well as those who
are not activists. Participant observation and focus groups will serve to
discover variations in beliefs and activities, and archival information will
provide historical context on missionary activities. This research is important
because it will advance our understanding of the sources of activism in a
community where women have historically been inactive in political change. The
project will also advance our knowledge about this important region of the
world.