* 9727738
* RUI:  Genetic Analysis of the Function of Cytochrome Oxidase Subunits Encoded on Mitochondrial DNA in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2004
* Vicki Cameron, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/29/2004
* USD 206,394.00

Cameron 9727738 Cytochrome c oxidase is an enzyme complex required for
respiration in all eucaryotes and some procaryotes. The enzyme complex is the
terminal member of the electron transport chain, responsible for transferring
electrons from cytochrome c to molecular oxygen. Electron transfer is coupled to
proton pumping, and the ensuing proton gradient is used to drive the synthesis
of ATP. The number of subunits in the complex is variable, ranging from three or
four in bacteria to as many as 13 in the bovine enzyme. The three largest
subunits, subunit I, II and III are encoded on mitochondrial DNA in eucaryotes
and are homologous to the three subunits found in some procaryotes. Therefore,
it is likely that these mitochondrially encoded subunits represent the
catalytically significant subunits of the enzyme. Subunit I is required for both
electron transport and for proton pumping. Subunit II has been shown to carry a
binuclear copper center, which is the initial site of electron transfer from
cytochrome c. In contrast to subunits I and II, the function of subunit III is
not well understood, and it has not been demonstrated to have a role in either
electron transfer or proton pumping. Subunits II and III are encoded by simple,
unspliced genes and all three of these genes contain regions of amino acid
sequence which are conserved in all organisms in which the genes have been
studied. To better understand the function of subunits II and III of cytochrome
c oxidase, yeast strains with defects in the enzyme due to mutations in these
two mitochondrial genes have been identified. Such defects lead to loss of the
ability to carry out cellular respiration. A number of strains bearing mutations
in the gene encoding subunit II ( COXII ) and three frameshift mutations in the
gene encoding subunit III( COXIII ) have been identified and analysis of some of
these strains has been completed. The remaining strains are being investigated
in detail. In addition, the collection of strains bearing mutations in t hese
two genes will be enlarged by identification of additional spontaneous mutants
and by construction of specific mutations of interest using site-directed
mutagenesis. Once strains with mutations that have the potential to shed light
on the function of the subunits have been identified/constructed, the
investigation will be extended to revertants of these strains, where the
revertants have recovered function. Classes of revertants that may be obtained
are true revertants that restore the wild type sequence, pseudo-revertants where
a different amino acid codon is substituted for the one which originally resided
at that site, intragenic suppressors where a mutation in one region of a
polypeptide chain can compensate for an alteration in another region, and
strains carrying extragenic suppressors. Among the latter group may be gene
products, both nuclear and mitochondrial, that interact directly with these two
subunits or are involved in their expression. This analysis will yield
information concerning functionally critical amino acids in the proteins and
possibly about interactions between oxidase subunits. Undergraduate students
will be involved in both the research and analysis of the results. Because the
subunit amino acid sequences are so highly conserved, information deduced about
the function of these proteins in yeast should help to elucidate the function of
these proteins in higher organisms. Such an understanding is of importance to
understanding how organisms use oxygen in the process of generating energy.