* 9727826
* Structure/Function Analysis of Trans-sialidase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Daniel Eichinger, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9727826 Eichinger Trans-sialidase is a novel type of sialic acid metabolizing
enzyme, made by the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. this enzyme very efficiently
moves sialic acid from one carbohydrate donor to another carbohydrate acceptor
molecule. The enzyme thus first functions as a sialidase, by removing alpha
2,3-linked sialic acid from donors, and then as a sialyltransferase, by
reattaching the sialic acid to beta-galactose-terminated acceptors. The
mechanism of this unique two step sugar transfer reaction is unknown. The
investigator has recently identified two domains of the enzyme which are
involved in the cleavage and transfer reactions. An N-terminal domain with
sequence similarity to bacterial sialidases and a C-terminal domain with weak
sequence similarity to a Fn3 domain each have amino acids involved in the
enzymatic reactions. The investigator will now extend the analysis of these two
domains, using domain-swap, site-specific, and random mutagenesis of the genes
encoding trans-sialidase and related sialidases, to gain a more complete
understanding of the structure/function aspects of the enzyme. The investigator
will also compare the sequences of trans-sialidases and sialidases from a
variety of other lower eucaryotes, to explore the range of conservation of
structure in these sialic acid metabolizing enzymes. Sialic acid is an important
type of sugar found on many biologically active molecules. It is usually added
to proteins as they are synthesized by enzymes found inside cells. Recently, a
unique enzyme, called trans-sialidase, was found which moves this sugar from one
molecule to another, uses already synthesized glycoproteins as substrates, and
acts outside of cells. How the enzyme transfers sugars from one molecule to
another is not known. A detailed understanding of the steps in the sugar
transfer reaction, and the structure of the enzyme domains that interact with
the sugar donor and acceptor substrates, would allow for the design of
inhibitors of the enzyme with which to define its role in the organisms that
make it, and for the directed alteration of this and other related enzymes,
themselves already scientifically and commercially valuable, into novel types of
sialic acid metabolizing enzymes.