* 9727709
* Mounds at Moundville: Development of Public Architecture at a Large Mississippian Ceremonial Center
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Vernon Knight, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1999
* USD 60,879.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Vernon Knight will
continue his archaeological research at the site of Moundville. Located near the
Black Warrior River in Alabama this site marks one of the highest cultural
achievements of pre-Columbian Native Americans. It consists of a large number of
mounds arranged in roughly symmetrical order, many containing tens of thousands
of cubic meters of fill. Archaeological evidence indicates that these
structures, which were likely built over extended periods of time contained
religious structures at their tops and also served as burial chambers. Several
have yielded large series of skeletons and burial goods. Of central importance
is not the structures themselves but the natureof the social organization which
made them possible. To construct such massive earthworks requires a social and
political organization which can mobilize a large amount of labor for long
periods of time. Dr. Knight's research should provide insight into this
underlying social structure. Building on past work, Dr. Knight will conduct a
number of analyses of excavated material. To understand the sequence of mound
construction, careful chronometric dating is essential. This can be accomplished
through AMS radiocarbon dating of single pieces of charcoal since this avoids
the potential problem of sample mixing. Artifacts will be analyzed, photographed
and illustrated in preparation for publication. The award will also provide
summer time to permit Dr. Knight to write up the results. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
scientists. It will also increase our understanding of how, at a technologically
simple level, complex societies develop and are maintained. ¥ ¢Á¥¥%Á_Á&gt;¥
¢╣¥Á¢ /&gt;┤ ?¥©Á╝ ÂÁ/¥┐╝Á¢ ┴╣%% ▓Á │/╝ÁÂ┐%%` ¢┐╝└Á`Á┤ /&gt;┤ ╝Á│?╝┤Á┤ ¼©╣¢
╝Á¢Á/╝│© ╣¢ ╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ Â?╝ ¢Á└Á╝/% ╝Á/¢?&gt;¢ ¿¥ ┴╣%% ║╝?└╣┤Á
╣&gt;Â?╝_/¥╣?&gt; ?Â ¥©Á ©╣¢¥?╝` /º ^ ¥╣%╣¥` ?Â / ┴╣┤Á%` ║╝/│¥╣│Á┤
¥╝/┤╣¥╣?&gt;/% /À╝╣│┐%¥┐╝/% ¥Á│©&gt;╣╗┐Á ¿¥ ┴╣%% ¢©Á┤ &gt;Á┴ %╣À©¥ ?&gt; %?&gt;À
¥Á╝_ ©┐_/&gt; Á&gt;└╣╝?&gt;_Á&gt;¥ ╣&gt;¥Á╝/│¥╣?&gt; /&gt;┤ ║╝?└╣┤Á ┤/¥/ ?Â
╣&gt;¥Á╝Á¢¥ ¥? ▓?¥© /╝│©/Á?%?À╣¢¥¢ /&gt;┤ &gt;/¥┐╝/% ¢│╣Á&gt;¥╣¢¥¢