* 9727355
* Archaeological &amp; Environmental Investigation of Yemeni      Terrace Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* McGuire Gibson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 48,337.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Tony Wilkinson and McGuire Gibson
will continue their archaeological research in the Dhamar region of highland
Yemen. The country is divided into better watered highland and more desertic
lowland areas and it is in the upland regions that population density is
greatest. In their past work the investigators have elucidated a cultural
sequence which covers in excess of 5,000 years. They have also examined a
complex agricultural landscape which includes extensive terracing, walls,
cisterns and water catchment features. The goal of the current phase of the
research is to examine the relationships between population change, terrace
construction and environmental degradation. They speculate that it was a growing
population and increased pressure on the landscape which led to the development
of a more efficient terrace form of agriculture and that this in turn actually
served to conserve soil and check the environmental consequences most often
associated with increased population pressure. To accomplish this work the
investigators will focus their attention on five limited test regions. They will
use aerial photographs to locate and map terraces and other agricultural
features. Through surface survey, and limited excavation they will locate and
date archaeological sites to determine rough measures of population change over
time. A wide range of analytical methods (phytolithic analysis, soil
micromorphology, particle size, detailed C-14 assay and the retrieval of
cultural inclusions) will be employed to pinpoint episodes of increased
runoff/erosion, intensive cultivation and manuring. In addition, a program of
coring and related microfossil analysis will be used to establish an accurate
environmental history and chronological framework. Significant settlement sites
and other features will be carefully surveyed and recorded. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide information of the history and
utility of a widely practiced traditional agricultural technique. It will shed
new light on long term human-environment interaction and provide data of
interest to both archaeologists and natural scientists.