* 9727083
* Dissertation Research:  Late Woodland Subsistence and the   Transition to Agriculture in the Northeastern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Robert Dewar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2000
* USD 8,329.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Dewar, Mr. David George will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will address the question of the development of
agriculture among prehistoric Native Americans in the United States. With the
advent in recent years of techniques to radiocarbon date single seeds and the
application of scanning electron microscopy to examine plant structure and
determine domestic status, our understanding of the advent and effects of
agriculture in North American has been transformed. It was previously believed
that the first domestic plants in the Eastern part of the continent were maize
and squash which diffused northwards from Middle America. With the adoption of
maize agriculture, archaeologists believed, societies significantly changed.
More recent work however has revealed a substantially different picture. In many
parts of the East, domestication of local plants preceded the appearance of
maize by perhaps a millennium. Plants such as sunflower, goosefoot and squash
were, likely through accident, domesticated and incorporated into local diet.
Both the presence and affects of these domesticates varied locally and in many
instances - in contrast to archaeological predictions - had very little effect
on social complexity or lifestyle. Although it is quite possible that the
Northeastern United States participated in this process, extremely little
relevant research has taken place in this area. It is clear that by 1,000 AD
domestic maize was present at some sites, but little is known about the
domestication of local species either earlier or later. With National Science
Foundation support Mr. Geroge will examine this question. He has located large
samples of botanical remains recovered by controlled excavation from secure
archaeological contexts and will analyze these to determine the species present
and their relative frequencies. He will section and study potential domestic
status through scanning electron microscope examination. He will also submit
samples for AMS radiocarbon dating to establish a secure chronological context
and to examine change in plant use over time. Through comparison of the
Northeast pattern with data collected in other parts of the continental United
States, it will be possible to gain insight into prehistoric Native American
subsistence adaptations and the interplay between subsistence and social
complexity. This research will shed new light on the relationship between human
populations and environment and how this changed and developed over an extended
period of time. It will provide data of interest to both archaeologists and
ecologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.