* 9727116
* Effect of Fungal Endophyte Infection on the Structure of    Experimental Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Keith Clay, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 03/31/2002
* USD 160,000.00

Clay 97 27116 Biotic interactions have long been of considerable interest in
ecology particularly in light of their interactions with diversity in
influencing ecosystem processes. One of the more widespread and potentially
important of such interactions is the symbiosis occurring between grasses and
fungi that live within their cells. In this project, the PI, Keith Clay, will
take advantage of an association between endophytic fungi and tall fescue,
Festuca arundinacea, a species that occurs commonly in grasslands. This
particular association is unusual in Festuca arundinacea occurs in strains that
do or do not have fungal endophytes. This research will manipulate these two
forms in experimental tests of the potential benefits of the symbionts for this
grass species. Investigations will evaluate how fungal endophyte infections
influence the diversity and production of Festuca arundinacea grasslands. They
will also evaluate the degree to which resistance to herbivory and stress
influence the dominance of endophyte-infected grasses. A series of plots will be
planted with seeds of endophyte- and non-endophyte infected grass strains to
examine their effects on plant diversity and production. Fencing and insecticide
applications will be used to vary the levels of herbivory and the relative
proportions of infected and noninfected grass strains that survive will be
quantified. Ecologically marginal sites will also be planted with the two
strains as well as four other fescue species to examine their overall success
rates. The ultimate goal of this work will be to examine general role of
microbial symbiosis in the structure and function of plant communities. This
work will provide important practical information because tall fescue is one of
the dominant species across the eastern US in grasslands.