* 9727941
* Collaborative Project: Pokeweed Antiviral Protein and Inhibition of Ribosomal Frameshifting
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Nilgun Tumer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2001
* USD 148,196.00

9727941&lt;br/&gt;Tumer/Dinman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pokeweed antiviral protein
(PAP), a 29-kDa antiviral protein isolated from Phytolacca americana,
catalytically removes a specific adenine residue from the alpha-sarcin loop of
eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes. Ribosomes depurinated in this manner are
unable to bind the EF-2/GTP complex and protein synthesis is blocked at the
translocation step. PAP displays broad-spectrum antiviral activity against plant
and animal viruses, including influenza virus, poliovirus, herpes simplex virus,
and HIV. While the mechanism underlying the catalytic activity of PAP has been
determined, much less is known about how PAP gains access to its ribosomal
target and the role other proteins play in this process. Research from these
laboratories has focused on characterizing the mechanism of cytotoxicity and
antiviral activity of PAP. Recently, it has been demonstrated that expression of
PAP in S. cerevisiae leads to specific inhibition of frameshifting in the +1
direction and significantly inhibits retrotransposition of the yeast retrovirus
Ty1. These results suggested that PAP can be used as a specific probe to dissect
the mechanisms regulating programmed ribosomal frameshifting and as a general
tool to study the elongation phase of protein synthesis. The primary objective
of this project is to use recombinant PAP mutants and yeast cellular mutants to
investigate the mechanism by which PAP gains access to the ribosome and inhibits
+1 frameshifting in S. cerevisiae. These studies will enhance our basic
understanding of the mechanism of action of PAP and elucidate the role of PAP in
translational reading frame maintenance and virus propagation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use Pokeweed Antiviral Protein (PAP), a
plant protein that modifies the ribosome and thereby affects cellular protein
synthesis, as a tool to study a phenomenon known as ribosomal frameshifting.
Ribosomal frameshifting is a process by which messenger RNA, which contains
information defining the sequence of amino acids in a newly synthesized protein,
slips in the protein synthesis machinery, so that different three letter words
are read. The project will characterize the structure of PAP that is responsible
for this activity and examine other cellular proteins that may be involved. This
project will increase our understanding of ribosomal frameshifting, which is
required for the replication of some viruses. It may also increase our
understanding of translation elongation, the process by which the three letter
words are read and amino acids are added to the newly synthesized protein.
Finally, it could lead to therapeutic or antiviral strategies for animals and
plants.&lt;br/&gt;