* 9727668
* Paleolithic Faunas of the Zagros Mountains:                 Zooarchaeological and Taphonomic Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Curtis Marean, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2002
* USD 128,088.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curtis Marean and colleagues will
analyze faunal remains recovered from archaeological sites in the Zagros
Mountains of Iran and Iraq. From the early 1950s until political difficulties in
the 1970s made fieldwork impossible, American archaeologists excavated a number
of cave and rock shelter sites in this region. In addition to material which
shed light on the origins of agriculture, extensive Middle Paleolithic material
was recovered. Generally attributed to Neanderthal people and dated between ca.
40,000 and 200,000 years ago, it documents the culture of the inhabitants of
Europe and Western Asia prior to the appearance of anatomically modern humans.
While archaeologists have examined the stone tools from many of these sites, the
associated fauna is almost completely unstudied. Much of it is stored in museums
within the United States and Dr. Marean and colleagues will conduct a systematic
analysis of these materials. The project has several goals. Most of the faunal
remains were introduced into the sites by humans as food and therefore reflect
the range of species eaten. Through analysis of the body parts represented and
the cut marks they contain, it will also be possible to determine the methods by
which prey were obtained. Some archaeologists believe that Neanderthal peoples
were fully competent hunters while others argue that they obtained meat from
large animals primarily through scavenging. Dr. Marean's previous work has
demonstrated that to address such questions it is necessary to examine not only
complete bones and large easily identifiable fragments but also smaller pieces
which archaeologists usually ignore. He has developed a methodology to
accomplish this goal. Finally, through an intersite comparison it will be
possible to examine the issue of behavioral variability. Preliminary evidence
has surprisingly indicated relatively little stereotypic behavior but a
different mix of species at sites which are environmentally similar.
Archaeologists have focused attention on the Neanderthal peoples of Europe
because they are the immediate predecessors of anatomically modern humans. While
they share many traits, both behavioral and biological, with modern humans,
archaeological data exhibit patterns (observed but not understood) which are
clearly distinct. Through analysis of these `near relatives` it is possible to
examine modern human adaptations in a broader comparative context. This research
will provide data of interest to many prehistorians. It will also assist in
graduate student training.