* 9727896
* Individual Differences in Emotion Discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Lisa Feldman Barrett, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 05/31/2004
* USD 431,670.00

Emotional intelligence is defined, in part, by the capacity to discriminate
between different emotional experiences. Considerable evidence suggests that
there are individual differences in people's tendency to discriminate: some
individuals use discrete emotion labels to name their feelings in a distinct and
specific fashion, whereas others use the terms to refer to more global feeling
states. The long-term objective of the proposed research is to examine the
factors that contribute to this individual difference, with the larger goal of
understanding the relationship between conscious emotion labeling, emotional
intelligence, and effective emotion regulation. The research will investigate
two psychological characteristics associated with individual differences in the
labeling of discrete emotional experiences: valence focus (the extent to which
individuals incorporate pleasantness or unpleasantness into their conscious
affective experience), and arousal focus (the extent to which individuals
incorporate subjective experiences of arousal into a conscious affective
experience). One series of studies will determine whether valence focus is a
characteristic specific to emotion labeling, or whether it is part of a broader
cognitive style defined by a chronic tendency to make evaluative judgments of
all sorts. If successful, these studies will indicate whether the failure to use
discrete emotion labels distinctly is a function of (1) a general cognitive
style or (2) incomplete knowledge of emotion and emotion regulation strategies.
A second series of studies will use Signal Detection Theory to determine whether
those who are higher in arousal focus (i.e., who incorporate subjective
experiences of arousal into their emotional experience) have more accurate
perceptions of their internal sensations (arising from autonomic nervous system
activity). If successful, these studies will demonstrate that bodily cues are
more important to the emotional experiences of some individuals than of others,
and will provide the foundation for studying the role that the body plays in
emotional intelligence more broadly. The proposed research has implications both
for basic theory in emotion and for the role of emotional experience and emotion
regulation in mental health.