* 9727652
* Collaborative Research:  Kinematics and Strain Localization in the Himalaya and Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9727652 Bilham This project is aimed at understanding the details of the
collision between two continental plates - India and Asia. GPS (Global
Positioning System) geodesy will be used to measure the motion of some 100
points distributed throughout parts of the collision zone, between the northern
plains of India, and the Tarim basin north of Tibet. In particular, the P.I.s
are interested in the unique processes that occur beneath southern Tibet and the
Greater Himalaya because these appear to be close to the nucleation zone of
great earthquakes whose future recurrence will be disastrous to the populations
of northern India and Nepal. The study builds on their 1997 finding that the
Himalaya are contracting north-south at a rate of 21+-3 mm/year, but that this
contraction is largely concentrated in a zone less than 100 km wide. It appears
that Tibet may also be contracting at 5-10 mm/year. Observations indicate it is
probable that Himalayan contractionis largely elastic (strain energy developing
for future great earthquakes), and that Tibetan contraction at depth is largely
plastic (driving east-west expansion of the plateau and surface seismicity). The
measurements the P.I.s propose are designed to provide constraints on the
physics underlying these processes, and details of the transition zone between
them. ***