* 9727613
* Structure and Role of D-Amino Acid Transaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* James Manning, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2002
* USD 255,000.00

9727613 Manning The enzyme, D-amino acid transaminase (DAT), has intrinsic
interest for its enzymological and its bacteriological properties, which are
related. This research will focus on its stereochemical relationship to an
enzyme that acts only on L-amino acids. The investigators have both structures
(which are remarkably similar overall) on their Silicon Graphics workstation and
they have compiled tables of sequence homologies and differences, which will be
used for site-directed mutagenesis studies in order to convert one enzyme
specificity to the other. The bonding between the subunits will be studied by a
new procedure using very high resolution gel filtration. Studies on enzyme-
catalyzed side reactions, coenzyme binding, and the stabilization of a reaction
intermediate by mutant enzymes will be continued. This is a project to study the
stereochemistry and structure of D-amino acid transaminase (DAT), a vitamin B6
(pyridoxal phosphate or PLP) containing enzyme. DAT supplies the building blocks
for biosynthesis of peptidoglycans, constituents of bacterial cell walls. It has
unusual features, such as inactivation by substrate under certain conditions.
Understanding how physiological compounds mediate substrate inactivation could
be predictive of in vivo regulation of the enzyme. Using this enzyme to
understand how to alter stereospecificity in enzymic reactions is a potential
payoff. The mechanistic studies proposed should be generalizable to other
enzymes in the transaminase family.