* 9727638
* Interpreting Spatial Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Laura Carlson, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/2001
* USD 179,856.00

In everyday life we constantly talk about objects in the world around us: we may
enlist help in looking for an object (e.g., `Where are my keys?`); we may point
out a surprising object in the environment (e.g., `Look at that billboard in
front of the building!`); or, we may give instructions to put objects in certain
locations (e.g., `Put the lamp to the left of the chair.`). In each case we must
perform a mapping between the linguistic elements in the utterance and our
perception of the objects and their relation in the world. For example, the
words `lamp` and `chair` need to be mapped onto their appropriate referents in
the world, and the relation `to the left of` needs to be mapped onto the spatial
relationship between these objects. This project focuses on how linguistic
spatial terms are mapped onto spatial relations in the environment. Two specific
aspects of the process will be examined. The first is how spatial terms are
mapped onto directions in space. This is an interesting topic because sometimes
more than one mapping is possible. For example, in the utterance `Put the lamp
to the left of the chair,` `left` could refer to the speaker's left side or to
the chair's left side. Because these disagree for a speaker facing a chair,
there is some ambiguity as to where the lamp should be placed. Understanding a
potentially ambiguous utterance may therefore be difficult if all possible
interpretations are considered. Previous research suggests that multiple
interpretations of spatial relation terms are initially considered. In the
present project one series of experiments uses an eye tracking methodology to
examine the simultaneous activation more closely, with the additional goal of
examining how the degree of disagreement among the varying interpretations
influences the degree of difficulty in understanding the utterance. Another
series of experiments examines how one interpretation is selected when multiple
interpretations are initially activated. The specific question is whether the
selection of one interpretation is accompanied or assisted by an inhibition of
the other interpretations. The second aspect of the mapping process examined in
the present project involves dividing up space around the objects into regions
to which the relation term (e.g., `above`) does and does not apply. A series of
experiments explores how such regions are defined, and examines factors that may
influence the size of these regions, such as the conceptual size of the objects,
the presence of other objects in the scene, or the functional relationship
between the two objects. Together these experiments should further our
understanding of the online interpretation of spatial relations. This has
important implications theoretically for our understanding of the interface
between language and spatial representation, and practically for our ability to
use effective and unambiguous communication.