* 9727248
* LT:  Models and Tools for End-of-Life Product Management
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Manbir Singh Sodhi, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 99,851.00

9727248 Knight Increasing environmental concerns and impending legislation,
particularly concerning product takeback, emphasize the importance of the end-
of-life management of products. This has resulted in efforts to recover value
from components and materials before discarding of such products and to reduce
environmental impact. Among the various ways in which value can be recovered
are, disassembly or de-manufacturing, bulk recycling, and incineration for
energy generation. Materials only have significant recycled value when they are
divided into clean separate types. This means that the viable recycling of
manufactured products depends greatly on the efficiency with which materials can
be separated from each other. The separation and recovery of items and materials
from products for recycling can be approached in two main ways, which can be
used together. These are relatively careful disassembly and bulk recycling,
which often involves the shredding of mixes of materials and using various
separation techniques on the stream of particles produced. In the long term,
recycling can be made more effective by the design of products for greater ease
of disassembly and recycling. This requires the development of suitable product
analysis tools to enable design teams to evaluate the ease of disassembly and
recycling of alternative product concepts during the early stages of design. In
addition, the development of better methods of bulk recycling and for increasing
the efficiency of existing bulk recycling processes is important. The work to be
carried out in this proposal addresses both of these aspects. The proposers have
previously been involved in the following developments: Product analysis tools
which simulate end-of-life disassembly and evaluate the financial and
environmental effects of different product designs and end-of-life scenarios.
Modeling of bulk recycling processes, in particular to evaluate the best
processing sequences for material separation processes. Building on this
previous work, this proposal is concerned with the investigation of several
cases of the problem of selecting the best sequence for recovery of materials by
bulk recycling, including the matching of mixes of different products. The use
of this information in analyzing the best combination of disassembly and bulk
recycling for recovered value or environmental impact will be also investigated.
Based on this investigation, tools for helping designers examine the
consequences of material selection upon the end of life recovery of materials
will be constructed, to enable design teams to evaluate the recycling potential
of proposed products through optimal combinations of disassembly and efficient
bulk recycling. In addition, models of material separation processes for bulk
recycling will assist bulk recycling facilities to operate in an economic
manner, enhancing the end-of-life recovery of materials that would otherwise not
be recovered and be consigned to landfills. ***