* 9727382
* Electric Field Gradient Perturbations Due to Van Der Waals  Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Helen Leung, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2001
* USD 169,417.00

Helen Leung is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to use
Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectroscopy to investigate perturbations of
electric field gradients around quadrupolar nuclei. Preliminary indications that
these perturbations can arise from van der Waals bond formation will be explored
by systematic spectroscopic examination of N2O-containing complexes and
imidazole-containing complexes. Spectroscopic constants derived from rotational
spectra will be systematically compared for a series of complexes, to improve
the understanding of intermolecular interactions involving quadrupolar nuclei.
This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project provides an
introduction to modern physical chemistry research methods to undergraduate
chemistry majors. Van der Waals molecules are held together by forces that are
much smaller than the chemical bonds that hold atoms together in a molecule.
Examination of the structure of weakly bound molecules in gas phase complexes
provides an opportunity to sort out the specific forces that are at play in a
controlled environment. Weak van der Waals interactions are important when
molecules are in close proximity to one another, as is the case in biological
systems. The research aspects of this RUI project will serve as a meaningful
educational vehicle to introduce the scientific method to future scientists.