* 9727491
* Zooarchaeological and Taphonomic Analysis of the Die Kelders Cave 1 (South Africa) Middle Stone Age Fauna
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Curtis Marean, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2002
* USD 83,804.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curtis Marean and his students will
analyze faunal remains recovered from the archaeological site of Die Kelders.
Located on the southern coast of South Africa, approximately 120 km SE of Cape
town, it includes two adjoining caves and the stratified deposits contained
therein document human activity for possibly as much as a quarter million years.
The materials recovered by Dr. Marean and collaborators through NSF supported
research include stone tools and hominid teeth as well as abundant faunal
remains. This latter body of material constitutes the focus for the current
study. The group will analyze mammal bones - most introduced to the caves
through human hunting - from the earlier Middle Stone Age (MSA) levels of the
site. The goal of the work is to examine not only diet but to reconstruct the
techniques employed to obtain prey. It is possible through the examination of
body part distributions to determine whether the animal carcasses consumed
resulted from purposeful hunting or from scavenging of carnivore kills. A list
of species which were hunted and eaten also provides insight into hunting
capabilities. A study of this kind is time consuming because prior work by Dr.
Marean has confirmed the necessity to focus not only on large and easily
identifiable bone fragments but also on smaller splinters of longbone shaft
which archaeologists normally categorize as `unidentifiable.` Thus extensive
refitting is necessary. Archaeologists believe that the Middle Stone Age peoples
of Africa were either the immediate ancestors or first representatives of
behaviorally modern humans and through analysis of their behavior it will be
possible to gain insight into modern human origins. There has been extensive
disagreement about the level of cultural competence exhibited by such groups and
much of this has centered on subsistence competence. Some archaeologists have
argued that MSA groups lacked the ability to hunt large animals and that such
remains recovered in sites resulted from scavenging. Others believe exactly the
opposite is the case. With the carefully excavated materials from Die Kelders
and the analytic techniques Dr. Marean and colleagues have developed, it should
be possible to select among these, and several other alternatives. This research
is important because it will shed new light on the emergence of modern human
behavior. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
training and furthering the academic careers of several graduate students.