* 9727021
* Stereodynamics of Large Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Joseph Cline, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2001
* USD 323,000.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Cline will study the preferred molecular trajectories
produced in the photodissociation of related but structurally distinct
nitrosoalkanes. The experiments will measure the correlation between the angular
momentum and velocity vectors of products in the frame of the energized parent
nitrosoalkane parent molecule in addition to scalar population distributions
among product quantum states. In most experiments the angular momentum
distribution of nitric oxide product will be probed by polarized resonance-
enhanced multiphoton ionization laser spectroscopy. Time-of-flight mass
spectrometry techniques or new variations on two-dimensional ion imaging methods
will be used to measure velocities and spatial anisotropies in correlation with
angular momentum polarization. Experiments will be performed in low-temperature
molecular beams or low-pressure effusive jets. The major goals of this project
are to examine the influence of molecular rigidity and conformations on product
trajectories and to explore preferential helical product trajectories produced
in the photodissociation of chiral molecules. The data gathered in this study
will reveal useful information about preferential directional forces in
molecules. The addition of many such forces from a large number of molecules can
result in macroscopic amounts of work from molecule-sized systems such as
biological motors and hypothetical nanotechnology devices.