* 9727920
* Histidine Phosphorylation in Mammalian Cellular Signal      Transduction
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Christoph Turck, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 12/31/2001
* USD 199,863.00

Abstract 9727920 Turck The regulation of protein function by transient
phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues is common in a wide
variety of biological processes, including signal transduction events.
Phosphorylation of these residues by serine/threonine or tyrosine kinase enzymes
can lead to the activation of a protein or promote protein-protein interactions
through the newly phosphorylated residue. Histidine kinases mediate the
phosphorylation of histidine and have been found to be important in signal
transduction in bacteria, yeast and plants. Although phosphohistidine has been
observed in mammalian cells the identification and characterization of a
histidine kinase has not been reported. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) activates
a histidine kinase in mammalian cells, and this research will characterize and
study the function of this histidine kinase in signal transduction events
elicited by the fibrobast growth hormone receptor ( FGFR ). The enzyme will be
purified and its sequence determined. The cDNA will be cloned and its
specificity determined. Recently developed methods for the study of histidine
phosphorylation will allow its functional analysis. These studies are designed
to begin to understand the significance of histidine phosphorylation in signal
transduction in mammalian cells. The phosphorylation of amino acids in proteins
by kinase enzymes has been shown to be important in most signal transduction
pathways. Kinases are specific for the tyrosine, serine/threonine or histidine
residues in proteins. All of these enzymes have been studied in various
organisms, however until recently histidine phsophorylation was only found to be
important in signaling mechanisms of bacteria, yeast and plants. However it has
been found to also occur in mammalian cells. This objective of this research is
to purify and characterize a histidine kinase from mammalian cells and study its
function. This will be important in our understanding o f the various signal
transduction pathways which occur in all organisms. ***