* 9727898
* Transfer of the Atyeo Collection of Parasitic Mites from    the University of Georgia to the University of Michigan and Modernization of Collection Facilities for Ectoparasites
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Barry OConnor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 12/31/2001
* USD 65,489.00

ABSTRACT This project will facilitate the transfer of the collection of
parasitic mites of birds (feather mites) from the University of Georgia to the
University of Michigan. The collection, the most extensive of its kind in the
New World, is in danger of being orphaned. The project will also provide for the
improvement of collection storage facilities associated with the collections of
ectoparasitic and commensal arthropods of the Insect Division of the University
of Michigan Museum of Zoology (UMMZ). This existing collection of ectoparasites
is one of the largest and most diverse in the country, with over 120,000 slide
mounted specimens and 16,000 lots of parasites, primarily from mammals, birds
and insects from around the world. Of particular importance are the large
collections obtained through collaborations with vertebrate biologists
conducting faunal surveys in poorly known and endangered parts of the world such
as Madagascar and the Philippines. The project will additionally assist in the
preparation of slide mounted specimens from the large backlog of accumulated
alcohol lots in both the Georgia and UMMZ collections. Because most researchers
either require or prefer to receive parasite specimens mounted on microscope
slides rather than unprepared in alcohol lots, reduction of the backlog of
unprepared specimens is essential for the collection to serve the community.
Accomplishment of these goals will save the Georgia collection from potential
loss and greatly enhance the accessibility of the combined collection to the
scientific community.