* 9727765
* CNC Gene and Head Development in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,11/30/2001
* James Mohler, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/2001
* USD 314,875.00

The identity of individual segments in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster,
is regulated by the expression of the homeotic genes within specific segments.
These homeotic genes encode transcription factors that regulate segment specific
expression of other morphogenetic genes. Homologs of many Drosophila homeotic
genes have been identified throughout much of the animal kingdom, where they are
often expressed in analogous portions of the embryonic body plan. Analysis of
the roles of the Drosophila homeotlc genes and of the interrelationships among
these genes during Drosophila embryology is likely to provide important
developmental principles involved generally in animal embryology. The
cap'n'collar (cnc) gene of Drosophila is a homeotic gene that is important in
defining the identity of the mandibular and labral segments during embryonic
development. Unlike most other homeotic genes which encode monomeric DNA-binding
proteins, cnc is unique in encoding a subunit of a dimeric bZIP transcription
factor. The research proposed here will continue the analysis of the role of
this gene in Drosophila development, of the Dlochemical mechanisms of its
function and of its interaction with the Drosophila bZIP gene, mat2. In
particular, this study will characterize the developmental function of mat2 by
mutational analysis and ectopic expression, investigate the ability of the CNC
protein to form functional heterodimers with other Drosophila bZIP proteins,
identify the enhancer regions controlling cnc spatial expression and investigate
the role of cnc in oogenesis. This study will also isolate and characterize cnc-
like genes from zebrafish, in order to elucidate whether the homeotlc function
of cnc is evolutionarily conserved to vertebrates.