* 9727331
* Partial Support for Scientific Planning for the             International Human Dimensions (of Global Environmental     Change) Program (IHDP)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Julia Marton-Lefevre, International Science Council
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1999
* USD 155,000.00

Scientific planning activities will be undertaken to further develop the revised
scientific agenda of the International Human Dimensions (of Global Environmental
Change) Program (IHDP). These activities will focus on planning for studies of
the Institutional Dimensions of Global Change (IDGC); of Industrial
Transformation (IT) to more sustainable production and consumption patterns; and
of Global Environmental Change and Human Security (GECHS). An implementation
plan for research on Land Use and Land Cover Change Program (LUCC: studies
supported jointly by the IHDP and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program
(IGBP)) will be developed. Scientific capacity-building and networking,
especially with scientists in developing countries will be enhanced; interaction
between IHDP scientists and policy makers will be developed; and scientific
planning meetings and workshops will be organized on emerging human dimensions
issues such as the interaction between global change and urbanization, health
and water. These activities will be coordinated by the revamped IHDP Scientific
Committee with strong support from the IHDP Secretariat recently established at
the University of Bonn under a major grant from the German Ministry for
Education, Science, Research and Tech- nology (BMBF). Oversight for these
activities will be provided by the International Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU), with cooperation from the International Social Science Council (ISSC).