* 9727402
* Dissertation Research: Social Networks, Health Beliefs, and Women's Treatment Seeking for Tuberculosis in Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Janet McGrath, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Case Western Reserve University. The project studies the treatment seeking
process for tuberculosis (TB) among relatively understudied Baganda women in
Uganda. It explores the variation in the role of a patient's social network,
across urban and rural settings, in seeking treatment. The project will
interview one hundred women who have been diagnosed with TB from two sites, an
urban TB clinic and a rural health clinic. Subjects will be interviewed three
times over six months using open-ended and semi-structured survey instruments to
determine symptom labeling, behavioral alterations, consultation with friends
and relatives and how they sought treatment from professional care givers, and
their reaction to situations where the advice of traditional care-givers
contradicts that of bio-medical providers. The study will contribute to our
knowledge of the interaction between social network structure and functioning in
medical treatment-seeking for this chronic illness. The advance in our
understanding of general principles of how and why people seek and adhere to
medical advice will be important in developing programs of health improvement.
The project also increases our expertise about this important region of the
world.