* 9727659
* A Study of the Determinants of Microbial Diversity:  The    Community Ecology of Cactus-Specific Yeasts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2000
* William Starmer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 05/31/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9727659 Starmer The species of yeast that live in decaying stem or fruit tissues
of cactus are distinctly different. Even though the two communities are found
side-by-side, they rarely share common species. This grant will use this
biological situation as an experimental system to examine the reasons for
membership in biological communities and their overall diversity. Factors that
will be studied include: 1) dispersal, the role of drosophilid vectors that
distribute the yeasts from habitat to habitat; 2) species interactions, the role
of killer toxins produced by some of the yeasts; and 3) their interactions, the
role of trade-offs between colonization and competitive ability. Interactions
between dispersal and interactions will be investigated in depth to test the
hypothesis that increasing the colonization ability of highly competitive
organisms has a greater influence on community membership than increasing the
colonization ability of poorer competitors. The work will be done by using
experimental microcosms in a laboratory. These investigations should contribute
to an understanding of the factors influencing microbial diversity and provide
knowledge on what maintains distinct community types in the natural world. The
study relates directly to concerns in applied biology about the maintenance of
biological diversity in general and about the practical use of microorganisms
for biological control.