* 9727707
* Ability Perception and Sex Differences in Cardiovascular    Response to Behavioral Challenge
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Rex Wright, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2003
* USD 167,271.00

This project investigates sex differences that have been observed in
cardiovascular (CV) response to stress. The most common sex effect is greater
systolic blood pressure responsivity in men than in women. However, some studies
have yielded an opposite CV response pattern, others have yielded CV sex effects
only on certain tasks, and still others have yielded no CV sex effects at all.
Questions of where, how, and why the sexes differ in CV response are
scientifically important, and also of practical concern because chronically high
CV responses are suspected to contribute to the development of CV disease, for
which men are at increased risk. The current project is based on a perceived
ability analysis of CV sex effects, which begins with the assumption that women
and men tend to differ in how capable they feel with regard to some tasks, but
tend not to differ in how capable they feel with regard to other tasks. The
analysis then applies a recent model of effort and CV response to identify
conditions under which CV sex differences of different types should and should
not emerge. In addition to shedding theoretical light on CV findings that have
puzzled research scientists for some time, the proposed experiments should
provide important new evidence regarding the fundamental perceived-ability/CV-
response relation and afford a special opportunity to compare different
theoretical views that pertain to it.