* 9727836
* Dissection of Nutrient Deprivation Responses in             Cyanobacteria and the Degradation of the Light-Harvesting   Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9727836 Grossman Phycobilisomes are multiprotein complexes that harvest most of
the light energy that is used to drive photosynthesis in cyanobacteria and
eukaryotic red algae. When cyanobacteria are deprived of an essential
macronutrient, the organism undergoes a suite of responses, some of which are
specific to the limiting nutrient (e.g. elevated expression of transport systems
that help in the acquisition of the limiting nutrient), while others are general
and occur during a number of different stress conditions (e.g. the degradation
of phycobilisomes). There is little knowledge concerning the regulatory elements
that control the general and specific responses; they may have any intersecting
control points. To isolate mutants with defects in the regulation of the general
responses, a visual screen to identify strains unable to degrade their
phycobilisomes during sulfur deprivation was used. Many of the mutants had a
lesion in a gene, designated nblA (for nonbleaching), that encodes a polypeptide
of 59 amino acids which is essential for phycobilisome degradation. Six
additional nonbleaching mutants which do not have lesions in nblA have been
identified. Four of the mutants do not express nblA during nutrient limitation
and the remaining two are downstream of the NblA polypeptide in the pathway
leading to protein degradation. All of the mutants that do not express nblA are
complemented by a gene that encodes a response regulator typical of two-
component regulatory systems. Four distinct screens to isolate additional
mutants in the regulation of the general responses and the sulfur stress-
specific responses are being used. One of the screens would also allow the
isolation of additional mutants defective in elements downstream of NblA in the
pathway leading to phycobilisome degradation; this screen could identify the
proteins with which NblA interacts and the mechanism(s) that lead to the rapid
degradation of the multisubunit light-harvesting complex. It is important to
elucidate the function of NblA in the bleaching process since, while it is
understood how critical proteolysis is for the eliminating denatured, improperly
folded and unassembled proteins and for controlling developmental processes and
regulatory cascades, little is known about the mechanisms that govern
proteolysis and the ways in which specific protein complexes are targeted for
degradation.