* 9727945
* Genetic Analysis of U14 snoRNP Core Protein Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,06/30/2002
* E Stuart Maxwell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 06/30/2002
* USD 308,000.00

9727945 MAXWELL Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis occurs in the nucleolus where
rRNA is synthesized as a large precursor transcript that undergoes processing
and subsequent assembly into new ribosomal subunits. The eukaryotic nucleolus
contains a large population of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) which are critical
for ribosome biogenesis. Investigations have demonstrated that the snoRNAs are
important for pre-rRNA folding, rRNA processing, and rRNA base modification. U14
is one such eukaryotic snoRNA species, essential for pre-rRNA processing and 18S
rRNA accumulation in both vertebrates and yeast. Previous investigations have
defined the RNA sequences and structures within the U14 snoRNA:pre-mRNA
precursor required for U14 excision from its pre-mRNA intron. These essential
processing elements include nucleotide boxes C and D, consensus sequences
important not only for processing but also for snoRNA transport to the nucleolus
and pre-rRNA methylation. A "box C/D core motif" has been defined within this
U14 snoRNA element and shown to serve as a binding site for nucleolar proteins
that are required for snoRNA synthesis. The widespread occurrence of the box C/D
core motif indicates that this snoRNA element as well as its associated
nucleolar proteins are critical for the biogenesis and function of the box C/D
snoRNA family. While the essential snoRNA elements are well defined, the
nucleolar proteins that bind this core motif remain uncharacterized. Therefore,
this project will isolate and define these critical nucleolar proteins,
characterize their genes, and then genetically examine in yeast the role
individual proteins play in snoRNA processing, nucleolar transport, and rRNA
methylation. Ribosomes are essential components of all living cells, necessary
for the synthesis of proteins crucial for cell structure, growth, and function.
Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis occurs in the nucleolus where numerous RNAs and
proteins participate in a coordinated series of events necessary for ribos ome
assembly. U14 snoRNA is an essential snoRNA species required for pre-rRNA
processing and the accumulation of 18S rRNA. Strikingly, U14 was the first of
what is now a rapidly-growing class of snoRNA species that are encoded within
interruptions in the protein coding regions of genes (introns) and synthesized
via an intron-processing pathway. Analysis of mouse U14 snoRNA biosynthesis has
demonstrated that an RNA structural motif is essential for processing.
Additional experiments have shown that nuclear proteins bind this core motif and
are also crucial for snoRNA synthesis and function. These experiments will
define these important but as yet uncharacterized proteins. These results will
provide new and fundamental insight into the role these proteins play in snoRNA
biosynthesis as well as snoRNP function during ribosome biogenesis.