* 9727818
* Microtubule Associated Proteins in Mitosis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Roger Sloboda, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 02/28/2002
* USD 351,100.00

Sloboda 9727818 The goal of this project is to understand the role of a protein
termed p62 in two key processes of cell division, mitosis and cytokinesis. Cell
division is an essential feature of life: it is the process whereby all
organisms reproduce themselves and whereby multicellular organisms develop from
a single-celled zygote. Cytokinesis is the process in which the cell cleaves
itself into two separate cells. Mitosis is the complex process immediately
preceding cytokinesis, in which the chromosomes of the dividing cell are
separated and equally apportioned into the regions destined to become the
daughter cells. A cytoskeletal framework is erected by the cell in order to
accomplish these tasks. For mitosis, the framework is called the mitotic spindle
because of its appearance under the microscope, and it consists primarily of
microtubules. For cytokinesis, in animal cells the framework consists of highly
organized actin microfilaments directly under the plasma membrane in the cortex
of the cell. Prior work from Dr. Sloboda's laboratory has implicated the p62
protein in both cytokinesis and in the anaphase A stage of mitosis (the stage in
which the separated chromosomes move away from the middle of the dividing cells,
toward the poles, or pointed ends, of the mitotic spindle apparatus). The
protein is physically closely associated with the spindle, and mitosis can be
inhibited at the start of anaphase by microinjection of antibodies specific for
p62. An essential feature of anaphase A is the disassembly of microtubules, and
a drug known to prevent microtubule disassembly, taxol, affects mitosis in a
manner analogous to the anti-p62 antibodies. Thus, p62 appears to play some role
in allowing or mediating the mitotically-regulated disassembly of microtubules.
The protein is also concentrated in the cortex of dividing cells, and has been
shown to undergo phosphorylation when the cortex is induced to contract. The
cDNA for p62 from sea urchin eggs has been cloned and sequenced, and the protein
has been expressed in bacteria. For the purposes of this project, additional
reagents (purified p62 and additional antibodies) will be developed. Purified
p62 will be used for in vitro studies of its effect on microtubule stability,
binding to the mitotic apparatus, and cortical contraction. The information
obtained from these studies will be combined with information from experiments
in intact cells, using antibodies to localize and to inhibit the functions of
p62. Site directed mutagenesis will be used to alter the phosphorylation sites
in p62 to determine the role(s) of these sites in these processes. Also, p62
homologues will be sought in other systems that offer the opportunity of genetic
manipulation. The general hypothesis underlying this project is that p62 plays a
pivotal role in mitosis, particularly during anaphase A, not only by allowing
microtubule disassembly to occur but also by inducing the activity of the
cleavage furrow. Understanding the characteristics of p62 and the functional
interactions of p62 with other components of the machinery of mitosis and
cytokinesis will lead to a greater understanding of these critically important
cellular processes.