* 9727611
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Maize kn1 Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* linda hyman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 400,000.00

9727611 Hake Shoot meristems are self-organizing centers responsible for
organogenesis of the shoot. They contribute initial cells for lateral organs
while maintaining a population of indeterminate cells. Knotted1 (kn1) encodes a
homeodomain protein tht is abundantly expressed in shoot meristems and is absent
in leaves. The down-regulation of kn1 in the meristem appears to predict where
the next leaf will form. kn1 is expressed during embyrogenesis at the site of
the initiating meristem. Expression persists into the inflorescence, branch and
floral meristems, but disappears as carpels initiate. kn1 loss of function
mutants in maize are defective in meristem maintenance; fewer branches form from
the inflorescence but extra determinate organs such as leaves and carpels form.
Ectopic expression of kn1 in tobacco andArabidopsis causes a number of
alterations including very dwarfed plants and lobed leaves bearing ectopic
shoots. From these expression studies, gain and loss of function phenotypes, we
conclude that kn1 plays a significant role in meristem maintenance. A series of
experiments are proposed to understand the regulation and function of kn1 with
the long term goal of understanding how shoot meristems function. The mechanism
by which kn1 expression is restricted to specific domains of the meristem will
determined A construct has been placed into transgenic maize that contains 3kb
of the kn1 promoter and the kn1 3' end driving GUS. The expression of four
independent events revealed non-specific, ubiquitous expression rather than
meristem-specific expression as seen with in situ analysis. Further transgenic
experiments will test the role of the introns in spatial regulation of kn1
expression. The extent of posttranscriptional regulation will be explored by
examining kn1 RNA expression patterns in 35S:kn1 or UBI:kn1 transgenic plants.
The kn1 promoter construct will be used to determine whether KN1 regulates its
own transcription. In order to identify genes that interact with k n1, genetic
screens will be carried out to identify mutations that enhance or suppress the
kn1 loss of function phenotype. The yeast two hybrid system will be utilized to
identify other interacting components and to test whether zag1, the maize
AGAMOUS homolog, interacts with kn1 since the loss of function phenotype of the
female flower is similar for zag1 and kn1. To identify downstream targets of
kn1, an inducible system was constructed and transformed into Arabidopsis. kn1
will be induced for a limited time period and RNA isolated from induced and
uninduced plants to compare the populations of transcripts using differential
display and PCR-substraction cloning. Identification of the maize homolog is
then possible. The research goals of this proposal, understanding the mechanism
by which kn1 is regulated, finding proteins that interact with KN1, and
identifying potential targets, will collectively increase our understanding of
kn1 and thus increase our knowledge of how meristems function.