* 9727373
* Fourth International Conference on Constitutive Laws for    Engineering Materials: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Erhard Krempl, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 05/31/2000
* USD 26,820.00

Fourth International Conference on Constitutive Laws for Engineering Materials:
Theory and Application In Mechanics of Materials, constitutive equations are the
mathematical descriptions of material deformation behavior and are needed in
analytical and numerical stress analyses. Different materials have different
constitutive equations. Research in constitutive equations is usually associated
with certain fields such as mechanical or civil engineering or others. Three
previous conferences at the University of Arizona had constitutive equations of
nearly all materials used in engineering applications as a theme. A follow-up
conference is planned for summer of 1999 on the campus of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. This date also marks the 25th anniversary of a workshop on Inelastic
Constitutive Equations held at RPI and sponsored by the Solid Mechanics Program
of NSF. The proceedings of this workshop will serve as a gage for measuring
progress. Support is sought for the travel expenses of invited speakers,
graduate students and post-doctoral associates, and for publication of the
proceedings. A separate budget financed by registration fees covers other
expenses including announcements, preparation and conference organization.