* 9727721
* Adaptation of Proteins:  Nature Plus Nurture
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* George Somero, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 02/28/2002
* USD 520,000.00

Somero 9727721 Understanding how temperature-sensitive proteins are stabilized
in organisms that experience widely different temperatures has significance for
both basic and applied science. The PIs will examine two types of changes that
play major roles in temperature adaptation. First, changes in amino acid
sequences of proteins (their "nature") will be investigated. By determining
where adaptive substitutions occur in proteins of differently thermally-adapted
species, the PIs will gain a deeper understanding of how specific alterations of
protein sequence affect the molecules' structure and function, and how these
adaptive changes help to establish environmental tolerance limits. Temperature
changes of only a few degrees centigrade are adequate to perturb proteins and
affect organismal distribution patterns-a finding with clear implications for
models of global warming. Furthermore, an understanding of how evolutionary
processes alter protein stability will assist biotechnologists in developing
strategies for laboratory-engineering of protein stability. Protein stability is
also influenced by the small molecules and water that bathe proteins in cells.
The PIs will investigate how the aqueous medium in which a protein functions
helps to "nurture" the protein to enhance stability. Discovery of novel
stabilizing solutes could facilitate development by biotechnologists of new
types of solutions for the long-term, safe storage of drugs, cells, and tissues.