* 9727037
* The Role of Pollinators in Floral Evolution and Speciation  in Nicotiana
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Timothy Holtsford, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2001
* USD 190,000.00

9727037 Holtsford Flowers exhibit a wide range of shapes, sizes, colors and
scents. The diversity of floral features is thought to have evolved as a
consequence of a long history of interactions with the animals that forage for
pollen and nectar and in so doing, transfer pollen among flowers. Plants with
flower traits that elicit favorable pollinator service should have more
offspring so that favorable floral traits will increase in frequency. If
different pollinators prefer different types of flowers then pollen transfer
between plants with different flowers will be reduced which may lead to the
evolution of new plant species. This project will experimentally address two key
questions in the logical but untested scenario outlined above - what floral
features affect pollinator interactions and are pollinators choosy enough to
cause a divergence in floral form? Two species of wild tobaccos (Nicotiana alata
and N. forgetiana, Solanaceae), provide an excellent opportunity for
experimentation. These species are interfertile, morphologically divergent, and
their ranges overlap in southern Brazil. Their floral morphology, color,
phenology, and our observations suggest they are adapted to different
pollinators (N. alata is pollinated by hawkmoths, N. forgetiana is pollinated by
hummingbirds and bees). An F2 population derived from interspecific crosses
shows tremendous variation in many floral traits. By sowing this hybrid
population in an experimental garden within both species' natural range we will
be able to determine which floral traits are most important in attracting
different kinds of pollinators. Then, the offspring of these open-pollinated
flowers will be grown to see whether the pollinators' behavior changed the
distribution of floral traits in the next generation. This work is important
because it will provide detailed information about plant-pollinator interactions
and will provide an experimental test of a pro minent speciation scenario. We
know very little about the formation of new species, a shortcoming that is
especially important because we are losing species to extinction at an
unprecedented rate.