* 9727295
* LT:  Modeling the Industrial Ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9727295 Graedel A recent survey of directions for research in industrial ecology
identifies the analogy between biological and industrial ecosystems as the
central question to be explored in industrial ecology research. Biological
systems are customarily studied by iterations between models of system behavior
and data describing that behavior. As a newly- formed field, industrial ecology
has generated some usable data, but has yet to have inspired much in the way of
model development. However, if industrial ecology is to be usefully informed by
biological ecology, it is necessary to begin to explore models of its behavior
from an ecosystem perspective. In such a system, resources are provided from
virgin reservoirs by extractors, processed by one stratum of "organisms'
(smelters, refiners, chemical transformers), utilized by a higher stratum of
"organisms" (manufacturers), acquired by "top predators" (customers), and
eventually reclaimed by recyclers. The work proposed here seeks to gather
relevant data for selected resources, materials flows, and "organisms" in an
urban area and to generate the mathematical relationships needed to develop an
industrial ecology model describing reservoirs, the flows of resources among
them and the driving forces governing those flows. The resultant model will be
the first designed explicitly to computationally investigate the flows of
materials, energy, and capital in an industrial ecosystem. The industrial
ecology model that will be constructed will utilize as a framework the "Gecko"
ecosystem ecology model developed at the Yale University Center for
Computational Ecology. The equations describing the flows of resources will
incorporate both resource constraints and economic interaction parameters. The
investigators that will be involved include an industrial ecologist (also an
experienced modeler of complex chemical systems), a natural resources economist
(also a specialist in water supply economics), and a populati on ecologist (also
a co-developer of the Gecko model). The result of this research will be a model
that can be used to investigate specific questions of interest to industrial
ecology, such as "Are there optimal geographical patterns or mixes of
"organisms" in an industrial ecosystem?"; "What are the barriers to improved
industrial ecosystem realization?"; "How might these barriers be surmounted?"
"How are the results altered if (a) the natural resource base is changed (by the
exhaustion of a resource, for example); (b) the economic structure is changed
(by the initiation of a new tariff, for example), (c) system boundaries are
changed (from an urban region to a state or subcontinent, for example)?" More
important, it is reasonable to expect the models to help frame the thinking of
the industrial ecology field, as has happened in so many other specialty areas.
One can then hope to take a more enlightened approach to the role of industrial
activity (broadly defined to include the service industries, transportation
etc.) in our highly technological society. This framing will be especially
important with the dynamic models that have the potential to interact with
global geosphere-biosphere models and illuminate where we as a society and a
planet have been and where we might be headed. ***