* 9727882
* Violent Incidents Among African-American Public School      Students:  A Proposal for Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Daniel Lockwood, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 35,005.00

This research extends the theoretical and empirical development of our
understanding of school-based violence. The work adds to prior research by
conducting a sequence analysis of violent incidents among African-American
public school students, and by conducting a formal content analysis from a
social interactionist perspective The project's database is transcribed
interviews of participants in violent incidents. Both quantitative and
qualitative (ethnographic) methods are being used to analyze data from 100
participants participating in approximately 250 incidents. The particularly
intriguing aspect of this research and where it is likely to lead to a major
contribution to the literature on violence is that the research analyzes the
narratives of opposing antagonists in violent events. In the past, research has
typically been based on the account of only one participant. Because of its
interactionist perspective and use of the incident or event as a unit of
analysis, the research has the potential to augment other ongoing work being
conducted by researchers under the auspices of the NSF sponsored National
Consortium on Violence Research. The potential impact on the infrastructure of
science is significant, as well. %%% This research extends the theoretical and
empirical development of our understanding of school-based violence. The work
adds to prior research by conducting a sequence analysis of violent incidents
among African-American public school students, and by conducting a formal
content analysis from a social interactionist perspective The project's database
is transcribed interviews of participants in violent incidents. Both
quantitative and qualitative (ethnographic) methods are being used to analyze
data from 100 participants participating in approximately 250 incidents. The
particularly intriguing aspect of this research and where it is likely to lead
to a major contribution to the literature on violence is that the research
analyzes the narratives of opposing antagonists in violent events. In the past,
research has typically been based on the account of only one participant.
Because of its interactionist perspective and use of the incident or event as a
unit of analysis, the research has the potential to augment other ongoing work
being conducted by researchers under the auspices of the NSF sponsored National
Consortium on Violence Research. The potential impact on the infrastructure of
science is significant, as well.