* 9727294
* LT:  Pollution Control in Fuel Cell Applications Using      Ceramic Candle Filter for Cleaner Power Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Ziaul Huque, Prairie View A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 09/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9727294 Huque The overall objective of this research effort is to develop a
method of removing particulates and toxic pollutants from coal gas to be used in
fuel cell for cleaner power generation. First specific objective of this
research effort is to develop a working prototype of a preconditioned ceramic
filter and, through rigorous testing under varying flow conditions at ambient
temperature and pressure, show its effectiveness in protecting downstream
components of a fuel cell. A second objective of this research effort is to
develop a method of reducing sulfur and other contaminants from the coal gas by
introducing controlled size sorbent particles while zmg candle filter pressure
differential and the risk of filter candle blinding or plugging. Coal is the
most widely distributed and readily available resource in USA. Currently about
50% of electricity production is by directly burning coal or coal gas.
Combustion and gasification of coal produces both primary and secondary
pollutants. One of the alternative way to utilize this vast coal resource of the
nation and world with relatively cleaner emission is the use of coal gas in fuel
cell for power generation. Fuel cell provide a new and exciting option for the
efficient conversion of fossil fuels to electricity with much reduced emmission
of pollutants. Commercial development of fuel-cell technology has been underway
in the United States for over 25 years. A variety of fuel cells have been
developed of which molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) appears to be the optimum
fuel cell design approach. Gasified coal is expected to be the major source of
fuel gas for MCFCS, but because coal contains many contaminants in a wide range
of concentrations, fuels derived from this source also contains a considerable
amount of contaminants. A critical concern with these contaminants is the
concentration level that can be tolerated by MCFCs without suffering significant
degradation in performance or reductio n in cell life. Ceramic candle filtration
is an attractive technology for the removal of particulate at high temperature
in Pressurized Fluidized Bed Combustion (PFBC), Integrated Gasification Combined
Cycle (IGCC) and other coal utilization processes. Due to their simple, cost
effective design, high temperature capability, and effectiveness in particulate
removal. ceramic candles easily achieve New Source Performance Standards and
Clean Air Act mandates for particulate emissions, as well as gas turbine
manufacturer particulate requirements. Although the application of ceramic
candle technology to PFBC and IGCC applications has been vast, little progress
has been made to integrate candle filter technology to address the very
different and more stringent gas stream clean-up needs of fuel cell
applications. This two year project will focus on the design, testing, and
development of unique preconditioned candle filter which when combined with a
patented technique for the use of a controlled particle size, once-through
sorbent, will reduce the risk of fuel cell stack fouling and simultaneously
increase filter candle life expectancy and performance by maintaining a porous
dust cake on the filtering surfaces. A simple candle filtering will be
constructed at Prairie View A&amp;M University. Testing of several different
preconditioned filter candles will be conducted under various flow conditions.
Optimum preconditioning coating will be recommended for a given set of
conditions. Long term effect of sorbent particle size will also be explored. ***