* 9727123
* Engineering Foundation Conference: "Surface Characterization of Adsorption and Interfacial Reactions II", to be held    January 11-16, 1998, in Kona, Hawaii
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/1997,10/31/1998
* Jon Kellar, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1998
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9727123 Jan D. Miller "Surface Characterization of Adsorption and
Interfacial Reactions-II," is the title of the proposed Engineering Foundation
Conference. This conference will be sequel to the successful 1994 conference of
the same title and focus. Like the previous conference, international
participation of well-organized researchers is expected. In particular, numerous
researchers from the pacific Rim, South America, and Europe have already
demonstrated an interest in participating in the conference. The Conference has
multiple objectives. The first objective is to convene a truly multi-
disciplinary group of top quality researchers from academia, industry and
government interested in the advancement of the understanding of surface
characterization of adsorption and interfacial reactions. The second objective
is to provide a broad-based forum for these researchers to aid in cross-
fertilization of current findings and ideas. NSF support is requested for
transportation, lodging, and registration costs of invited speakers from the
United States. It should be noted that this support will augment substantial
support already committed by industrial sponsors of the Conference. The
Engineering Foundation, and the U.S. Japan/Air Force Office of Scientific
Research. ***