* 9727443
* Characterization of ME1 during neuronal differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Anne Chiaramello, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 08/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9727443 CHIARAMELLO The general focus of this project is on the mechanisms that
govern mammalian neuronal differentiation. Dr. Chiaramello will investigate the
roles of the basic helix-loop- helix transcription factor ME1 during brain
development. The ME1 gene encodes two isoforms of ME1, called ME1a and ME1b, due
to alternative splicing of the messenger RNA. However, only the ME1a form is
neuron-specific. Several lines of evidence suggest that ME1 plays an important
role in the development of the nervous system: 1) It has a strong homology with
transcription factors known to be essential for cell determination and
differentiation in the nervous system, such as Drosophila gene Daughterless; 2)
It is expressed in areas of the nervous system where neuronal differentiation
and plasticity occur; 3) It is also detected in the subependymal region of the
adult brain which includes constitutively proliferating cells (neural progenitor
cells) as well as relatively quiescent cells that have the capacity to self-
renew and give rise to neurons and glia; 4) It modulates the expression of two
neuronal target genes involved in neuronal growth and development, GAP-43 and
the low affinity nerve growth factor receptor p75LNGFR; and 5) It can assume
distinct functions as a transcription factor, acting either as an activator or
repressor. In this application, we propose experiments to further investigate
ME1 with respect to its molecular mechanism of action and its neuron-specific
partners during neuronal differentiation. The specific aims of this project are
as follows: In specific aim I, Dr. Chiaramello will examine the
posttranslational modification of ME1a during neuronal differentiation by
assessing whether phosphorylation of ME1a by casein kinase II dictates the
transcriptional activities of ME1 on neuronal target genes. In specific Aim II,
Dr. Chiaramello will unravel the molecular mechanism of action of ME1a during
neuronal differentiation. ME1a binds DNA as eit her a homodimer or heterodimer.
The specificity of the genes regulated by ME1 are thought to depend on the
dimerization partner. Therefore, it is of tremendous importance to identify the
heterodimeric partners of ME1a. In specific Aim III, Dr. Chiaramello will
analyze in detail the temporal and spatial expression of novel partners
identified in Aim II. Results from the project will elucidate the cascade of
regulatory events necessary for neuronal differentiation.