* 9727180
* Symposium:  Mechanics of Plants, Animals and their          Environments:  Integrative Perspectives January 11-16, 1998 Santa Barbara,  California
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Joseph Humphrey, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Humphrey 9727180 The Symposium will bring together a highly interdisciplinary
mix of biologists, physical scientists (chemists, physicists, mathematicians)
and engineers to present and discuss fluid-, solid-, them~o-mechanics and
dynamics phenomena related to plants, animals, and their environments. The
length scale range of interest spans single cells, to entire organisms, to their
host environments, implying length scale ratios exceeding 10'2 and including the
extremes of micro (molecular) and macro (atmosphericJoceanographic) forces. Many
disparate phenomena are described by a common set of physical laws. They include
the breaking of a limb from a tree, the lifting of a load by an ant, the sensing
of vibrations by a spider, the dispersion of seeds or chemical pollutants by the
wind, the flight of birds and insects, the swimming of fish, the transportation
of oxygen via blood cells, the rising of sap in trees, the hot chemical
discharge from the bombardier beetle, the solar radiation interception by a
butterfly's wings, the dispersal and sensing of pheromone plumes in moths, the
locomotion of water striders on water surfaces, filter feeding in marine
animals, insect sound production, the mechanics of single cells and their
membranes and skeletons, the physico-chemicai properties of arthropod
exoskeletons, the mechanics of blood flow through large blood vessels and in
capillaries, the optima of certain organismal forms in relation to function.
This provides a natural way to analyze a diverse collection of biological
phenomena that might otherwise: appear totally unrelated; a way to find
underlying commonalities among them, not in the traditional biological areas,
but in terms of the physics that affect them in their environments.