* 9727689
* Dissertation Research: Micro and Macroscopic Architecture of the Human Mid-shaft Femur: A Quantitative Study of         Variability with Age and Gender
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Timothy Bromage, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2000
* USD 11,292.00

Bone shape and microstructure are influenced by the mechanical loads they
experience during life. Their study is thus important to the reconstruction of
past human behavior and adaptation. However, such research is limited by a
knowledge of variability in modern humans. Novel microscopy and imaging
techniques will be employed to study bone architectural variability in the human
mid-shaft femur. Factors investigated will include collagen fiber orientations
within bone, the mineralization and density of the bone tissue, the histological
organization of bone, and the cross-sectional geometry of the femur. These
factors will be examined by means of quantitative analysis of images derived
from both light and scanning electron microscopy. As all of these factors
contribute to the overall architecture of the bone, and potential compensatory
relationships are expected to exist between them. These relationships will be
quantified, along with their variability with age and sex using a large adult
autopsy sample. This intra-population study of variability in bone architecture
will provide important data for the study of age-related bone diseases such as
osteoporosis. The techniques used, and the data obtained in this study, will
provide a basis for future comparative research on variability of bone
organization among contemporary populations, both adult and juvenile, as well as
among archaeological and fossil samples. Such research will, in turn, encourage
new hypotheses concerning the role of environment, nutrition, biomechanics, and
evolutionary history on bone architectural variability.