* 9727688
* Excavations at Panxian Dadong
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Sari Miller-Antonio, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1999
* USD 91,039.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Lynne Schepartz and Sari Miller-
Antonio and an international team of collaborators will conduct one season of
archaeological excavation at the site of Panxian Dadong, located in Guizhou
Province, Southern China. This large cavern is the middle in a series of three
stacked within a 230 meter high hill. Its eastward facing entrance is 55 meters
wide and 50 meters high and the main chamber averages 35 meters wide by 220
meters in length. Preliminary work by a joint Chinese US team of scientists has
revealed stratified archaeological deposits which contain both well preserved
faunal remains and stone tools. One fragmentary hominid tooth has also been
recovered. A large series of samples collected for Uranium series dating
suggests that the uppermost 2-3 meters of the deposits formed between 200,000
and 130,000 years ago and that on this basis it is likely that the bulk of the
deposits may be older that 250,000 years. Very little is known about the Upper
and Middle Paleolithic periods in Northern China and the investigators wish to
conduct a long term multi-season excavation to reconstruct the geological,
archaeological and environmental sequence and to place these into an absolute
chronological context. During the 1998 field season they will expand the depth
of the current excavation and also open additional trench units. This will serve
to maximize the area of exposed deposits. They will replace dosimeters which
measure soil radiation and collect samples for a suite of dating techniques.
Several travertine layers have been located but their stratigraphic context is
not clear and geologists will work to resolve this issue. Lithics and faunal
remains will be collected and analyzed. While China has yielded important
hominid fossils and numerous archaeological assemblages, most are poorly dated.
Because of this it is difficult to determine the role this vast area played in
the broad sweep of human cultural and biological development and it is unclear
whether the current focus on Africa as a crucial area results merely from the
fact that much more archaeological work has been conducted there. This project
should help to remedy this situation. It will provide an important
counterbalance, yield data of interest to many archaeologists, and establish a
regional framework within which other sites may be encompassed. It will further
the careers of two promising young archaeologists and enhance scientific
collaboration between China and the US