* 9727492
* Stabilization of Biopharmaceuticals in Single Crystal Hosts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1998,11/30/2001
* Jean Chmielewski, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/2001
* USD 476,000.00

Professor Bart Kahr, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Washington, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate through a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with
Industry (GOALI) award for his studies of the stabilization of
biopharmaceuticals in single crystal hosts. Through exploration of the
host/guest chemistry of single crystals of known biopharmaceuticals and
excipients and the single crystal matrix isolation of biopolymers in hydrogen-
bonded molecular crystals, Professor Kahr and co-Principal Investigators Jean
Chmielewski, of Purdue University, and Jerry Lewis, of Eli Lilly, are developing
methods for the stabilization toward light, heat, and moisture of various
peptidic pharmaceuticals, including glucagon and human growth hormone. The
stability of the mixed crystals and the activity of the biopharmaceuticals upon
release from their crystal hosts will be explored through a variety of physical
and biological assays. In part due to the emergence of recombinant DNA
technologies, a number of biopharmaceutical agents are appearing. These drugs,
often comprised of polypeptides (proteins), generally display poorer stability
toward ambient conditions of light, temperature, and humidity than do typical
small-molecule drugs, and development of methods for their stabilization beyond
storage at low temperature, which is not always practically feasible, are
required. Through a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with Industry
(GOALI) award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate support Professor Bart Kahr, of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Washington, for his studies of the inclusion of biopharmaceutical
agents within single crystal `hosts.` Professor Kahr's studies are focused on
the ability of biopolymers, including human growth hormone, to crystallize
within the crystal lattice of various pharmaceutical `excipients` and on the
effects of this incorporation on the thermal, light, and moisture stability of
these biopolymers.