* 9727917
* Functional and Structural Roles of Nucleolin in Vertebrate  Cell Nucleoli
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Patrick DiMario, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2001
* USD 103,640.00

9727917 DiMario In the nucleus of every eukaryotic cell, there is a
morphologically distinct region termed the nucleolus, which can be seen readily
by light microscopy. The primary function of the nucleolus is the production of
ribosomes. The ribosome is the machine which translates the genetic code (in the
form of messenger RNA) into specific protein sequences, and chemically it is a
supramolecular complex consisting of defined proteins and ribonucleic acid
molecules (r-RNAs). The genes (DNA) for the r-RNA molecules are located in the
nucleoli and are transcribed there, and certain aspects of ribosomal assembly
take place there. Although we know that nucleoli are the site in which ribosomes
are made, relatively little is known about the molecular interactions that occur
either between nucleolar-specific proteins and the small nucleolar RNAs, or
between nucleolar-specific proteins and the nascent ribosomal RNA that is
transcribed from genes within the nucleolus. Also, very little is known about
the functional contributions made by nucleolar proteins in pre-RNA processing,
ribosome assembly, or nucleolar structure. This proposal focuses on nucleolin,
an abundant nucleolar protein with a modular structure. Nucleolin is known to
bind to pre-ribosomal RNA, but little else is known about its function or its
interactions with other cellular components. The primary objective of this
project will be to genetically engineer a line of cultured mammalian cells (CHO
cells) in which the synthesis of nucleolin can be turned on or off at will by
the addition or subtraction of drugs from the culture medium (e.g., using either
the glucocorticoid-inducible MMTV promoter or the tetracycline transactivator
system). The resulting modified cell lines will be used to determine the life
span of endogenous nucleolin in vivo and to characterize nucleolar structure in
the absence of endogenous nucleolin. This information will be used as the basis
for subsequent studies (beyond the scope of this project) to determine the
biological consequences of expressing altered versions of nucleolin in the
absence of endogenous wild-type nucleolin.