* 9727570
* Metallaborane Chemistry:  From Small Heterobimetallaboranes to Large Metallaheteroboranes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,11/30/2002
* Lawrence Barton, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 11/30/2002
* USD 223,000.00

Dr. Lawrence Barton, Chemistry Department, University of Missouri-St. Louis, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division for research on metallaborane chemistry.
Heterobimetallaboranes that are derived from polyhedral boranes by substituting
two of the boron vertices by various metals will be synthesized. Early
transition metals will be combined with late metals to obtain species with
metals of different electronic configurations. Since early transition metal
complexes are good polymerization catalysts, heterobimetallaboranes containing
only these metals will be prepared and evaluated as borane oligomerization
catalysts. The work will be extended to the incorporation of main group nonmetal
atoms into a monometallaborane. Routes to large cage derivatives will be sought
and the mechanisms of cluster substitution processes will be evaluated. Boranes
form a series of compounds and ions with regular structures in which boron-
hydrogen units define the vertices of polyhedra. The ability of boron to support
these cage structures is unique. The object of this project is to substitute
some of the vertices in such cages with non-boron atoms. Special emphasis will
be placed on examples with two transition metals and ones with a transition
metal and a main-group nonmetal atom. These species will be designed as possible
catalysts and as probes to determine the details of how substitution occurs in
the boranes. This latter objective is important to preparing new metallaboranes
of specific shape and composition. In addition to the new chemistry that will be
uncovered in this project, postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students
will be educated in the very precise experimental techniques required for the
investigation of boron hydrides.