* 9727221
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Performance Analysis     Methodology for the Future Wireless Communicatin Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2000
* Kishor Trivedi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/2000
* USD 50,794.00

9727221 Trivedi This award provides funds to permit Dr. Kishor S. Trivedi,
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, to pursue with Professor
MyungWhan Choi, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang
University, Seoul, Korea, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on
performance analysis methodology for the future wireless communication system.
The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop new
performance analysis methodology including Stochastic Reward Net (SRN) models,
advanced modeling techniques, and a model specification language. New SRN models
which are suitable for various dynamic channel allocation (DCA) schemes and
handoff processes will be developed. These advanced modeling techniques will
handle both non-Markovian behavior and largeness of models arising from the
complexity of the systems being modeled. Efficient handoff is very important for
cellular mobile communication systems because the number of handoffs increases
as the cell size become smaller for high capacity systems. Designers of such
systems need accurate and timely performance analysis for the efficient design
and implementation of future wireless communication networks. The requested
support will allow the proposer's research group to interact with a group of
researchers in Korea, who have similar research goals. Both research groups have
a long history of research in performance analysis and will greatly benefit from
the ability to collaborate through the exchange of junior and senior
researchers. This research adds an international dimension to an ongoing project
under NSF Grant No. EEC-9714965 which supports the Center for Advanced Computing
and Communication, an NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center, at
Duke University. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Scie nce Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. This project will provide international training
and experience for two U.S. graduate students in an important area of research.
Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). ***