* 9727151
* The Impact of Episodic Events on the Nearshore-Offshore     Transport and Transformation of Biogeochemically Important  Materials in the Great Lakes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Kenneth Nealson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/2003
* USD 1,932,313.00

9727151 Edgington Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This is a
collaborative research project between investigators from ten academic and
government research institutions. The research is being conducted under the
auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal
Ocean Program. This collaborative, 5-year research program will focus on the
importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore transport and subsequent
ecological consequences. The study seeks to 1) determine what processes control
the cross- margin (inshore to offshore) transport of biological, chemical, and
geological materials in the coastal margins of the Great Lakes, and to 2)
develop and test scientific strategies for assessing, quantifying, and
predicting the impacts of multiple stresses both natural and anthropogenic, in
the Great Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions. A tight coupling between
contaminated sediments and overlying water exists in lakes and coastal
ecosystems through the process of sediment resuspension. Satellite observations
in Lake Michigan illustrate an annually recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore
transport, a 10 km wide plume of resuspended material extending over 200 km
along the southern shores of the lake. Preliminary evidence indicates that this
episodic event may be the major mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in
Lake Michigan. This type of event impacts recycling of biogeochemically
important materials (BIMS), ecosystem responses, cross-isobath transport in the
Great Lakes. The program results will be applicable to similar events in many
coastal areas. This comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement an
integrated observational program and numerical modeling effort to identify,
quantify, and develop prediction tools for the winter-spring resuspension event
and to assess the impact o f this event on the transport and transformation of
BIMS and on lake ecology. This component of the study focuses on a variety of in
situ and laboratory techniques designed to look at the fate and transformation
of biogeochemically active particles in a dynamic coastal system.