* 9727306
* Dissertation Research:  Harappa Bovid Exploitation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Rita Wright, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2000
* USD 8,645.00

Under the direction of Dr. Rita Wright, MS Laura Miller will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Her project has two goals. The first is
methodological and it involves the development of techniques for archaeological
faunal analysis. The second is substantive - MS Miller will examine animal
husbandry practices at the site of Harappa, located in the Indus River Valley.
Archaeological data from many Old World contexts suggests that the earliest
primary product obtained from domestic animals was their flesh. Animals were
raised and then slaughtered for this purpose. Shifts in patterns revealed by
faunal remains suggest that at some later time changes in animal utilization
occurred and prehistoric peoples focused more on secondary products such as milk
which provided a long term sustained return from a single animal. Likewise the
use of animals for traction, to pull plows, also had a positive and significant
impact on agricultural production. These changes are inferred from the `kill
profile` or demographic pattern revealed in skeletal materials. However such
profiles can have multiple interpretations. In her research MS Miller is
focusing on large bovids - cattle and water buffalo - from Harappa. Surprisingly
little information is available on these two important species. She has already
completed an ethnographic study which has documented modern animal use in the
region and has collected modern controlled faunal samples. With NSF support she
will conduct radiographic and cross sectional analysis of these remains to
determine the effect which continued milking has the bone structure and density
and the kinds of growth patterns and damage which results from the mechanical
stresses caused by pulling a plow. The methodologies thus developed will be
applied to archaeological materials from Harappa. Northern India and Pakistan
saw the rise of a civilization which developed largely independently from that
in the Near East and China and archaeologists have focused on this region to
increase their understanding of the processes which lead to civilization. MS
Miller will analyze bovid bone from different specialized activities area both
within and immediately adjacent to the site. She hopes to trace both the primary
and secondary roles which bovids played and to determine how these changed over
time. It should be possible to determine the relative importance of bovid meat
as well as dairy products and traction. By studying the spatial distribution of
materials it is possible also to gain insight into economic and political
organization. This research is important for several reasons. It will develop a
set of methodological tools which can be applied in many regions of the world.
It will shed new light on the rise of complex Indus river valley societies and
assist in training a promising young scientist.