* 9727375
* Demand Revealing Mechanism for Contingent Valuation Validity Tests:  an Experimental Approach Using Appropriate         Populations
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,12/31/1999
* William Schulze, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/1999
* USD 93,003.00

A critical issue in environmental policy and valuation is whether hypothetical
contingent valuation (CV) techniques can provide an unbiased measure of `true`
social willingness to pay for public goods. A large body of experimental
economics research provides convincing evidence that free riding prevents demand
revelation for actual public goods. As such, it is unclear whether the
hypothetical bias reported in previous public goods validity tests (where
hypothetical values are compared to actual payments) is due solely to `upward`
bias associated with the CV method itself, or is also a function of mechanism
bias associated with using actual public good collection mechanisms that do not
induce people to contribute their true value. This research has two primary
objectives. The first objective is to use laboratory experiments to develop a
better public goods auction mechanism that can be used as a criterion for public
goods validity tests, thus enabling an accurate measure of hypothetical bias in
public goods valuation. The second objective will be to provide a more realistic
test of the single shot provision point mechanism in field settings with more
`appropriate` populations of the type usually solicited in CV research, a more
realistic commodity, and with realistic stakes of a magnitude similar to those
reported in CV research. The intent of this second effort will be to evaluate
mechanism effects on hypothetical as well as actual payments. This research will
develop a robust mechanism for better collecting funds for public goods in a
practical single shot situation. This mechanism will be directly relevant to
laboratory and real world settings for testing and calibrating CV. It will also
provide a better collection mechanism for land trusts, green electricity, and
other public programs relying on individual contributions.