* 9727927
* Sigma Factor Exchange During Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2001
* William Haldenwang, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/2001
* USD 330,000.00

Haldenwang 9727927 The occurrence of multiple RNA polymerase specificity
determinants (sigma factors) provides a cell with a powerful device for gene
control. The substitution of one for another of these proteins on core RNA
polymerase (RNAP) can activate or suppress a large number of genes by a single
regulatory event. At least thirteen unique sigma factors are present in the
bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Four of these are synthesized only during a simple
differentiation (sporulation) that the bacterium undergoes in response to
nutritional stress. The sporulation-specific sigma factors replace the
vegetative sigmas on RNAP and are the chief activators of sporulation genes.
This project seeks to determine the mechanisms by which sigma factor
substitution is regulated to properly time and compartmentalize spore gene
expression. Experiments are planned to examine the process by which the
principal vegetative cell sigma factor (sigmaA) is excluded from RNAP and the
predominant sporulation-specific sigma factor (sigmaE) is activated to replace
it in just one of the two compartments that are formed by the developing cell.
SigmaE is necessary for sigmaA's displacement from RNAP. In vitro experiments
will measure the binding of sigmaA, sigmaE and the precursor form of sigmaE
(pro-sigmaE) to RNAP to determine whether differences in the inherent affinities
of each sigma for RNAP are sufficient to explain the in vivo pattern of sigma
factor turnover on RNAP, or if other regulators are likely to be involved.
Additional in vitro studies will ask which sigma factor activities are inhibited
by the 27 amino acid "pro" sequence that is present on the precursor form of
sigmaE. The pro sequence not only silences sigmaE, but also tethers pro-sigmaE
to the septum that separates the sporulating cell's two compartments. Genetic
and biochemical experiments will be employed to learn the elements of the "pro"
sequence that are responsible for membrane binding, the proteins in the membrane
with which this sequence is l ikely to interact, and whether membrane binding of
pro-sigmaE is essential for its processing into sigmaE. Other genetic
experiments will attempt to discover the identity of a putative forespore
specific protease which appears to be responsible for limiting sigmaE
accumulation in that compartment. Sporulation represents an extremely tractable
model for studying sequential gene expression in a differentiating cell. The
devices that Bacillus employs to communicate ongoing morphological development
to its transcriptional machinery have become paradigms for how such processes
could be controlled in a variety of systems. This research has at least two
areas of relevance. One is in defining how cells communicate structural changes
to the genes, whose activities need to be altered for the cell to properly
respond to these changes. This could provide insights into how the process in
which the communication could be improved, when needed for the repair of damaged
tissues. A second area involves determining the basic properties of prokaryotic
transcriptional regulators and the factors influencing protein stability in
prokaryotic cells. These types of information may be useful in improved
strategies for better expressing recombinant proteins in bacterial hosts.