* 9727859
* Theory and Computation of Optimal Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* John Sullivan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 80,000.00

Sullivan 9727859 The investigator, with his collaborators, studies geometric
optimization problems like finding minimum-energy shapes for surfaces and knots
in space. This project completes the classification of embedded constant-mean-
curvature surfaces with three ends and extends these results to greater numbers
of ends. The elastic bending energy of Willmore is used computationally to drive
several different sphere eversions, and to discover new minimal surfaces in
euclidean and spherical space. The investigator also studies the singularities
found in minimizers like soap films in higher dimensions; the foams likely to
provide solutions to Kelvin's partioning problem; and configurations for knots
that minimize energy or ropelength. Many real-world problems can be cast in the
form of optimizing some feature of a shape; mathematically, these become
variational problems for geometric energies. For instance, the films between
cells in a foam minimize their area and thus are constant-mean curvature
surfaces. Understanding these geometries will lead to better knowledge of
important structural properties of foam materials. Cell membranes are more
complicated bilayer surfaces, which seem to minimize an elastic bending energy
known mathematically as the Willmore energy. Knotted curves achieve an optimal
shape when a rope is pulled tight, or if a charged knotted wire repels itself
electrostatically; understanding such configurations helps explain the behavior
of biological molecules like DNA. This project explores such phsically natural
problems that are still challenging from both theoretical and computational
standpoints.