* 9727113
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Differentiation Among East   African Chimpanzees Communities (Pan Troglodytes            Schweinfurthii)
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Maryellen Ruvolo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2000
* USD 12,000.00

This study will examine the effect of social structure on the genetic structure
of local chimpanzee populations. Genetic samples will be collected from one
well-studied, habituated chimpanzee community (Kanyawara) and several other
neighboring communities in Kibale Forest, Uganda. DNA will be extracted from
these samples and used to examine the effects of chimpanzee dispersal patterns
(whereby males stay in the community in which they were born and females
disperse upon reaching sexual maturity) on three genetic elements with different
modes of transmission. Comparisons will be made of the distribution of variation
in Y-chromosomes (inherited through the male line), mitochondrial DNA (inherited
through the female line) and autosomes (inherited biparentally) both within and
between communities, to determine if they conform with patterns expected based
on dispersal behavior. In addition, the genetic data will be used to determine
the sires of all offspring in the Kanyawara community and subsequently generate
a pedigree outlining the genetic relationships between all individuals in this
community. This information will be used to assess asymmetries in the number of
offspring produced by different males, and the extent to which males outside the
community sire offspring. The results of this study will contribute to our
understanding of the evolution of social organization in chimpanzees.