* 9727589
* Technician Support (Phase II):   Isotope Geochemistry at    Lehigh University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Peter Zeitler, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2001
* USD 114,883.00

9727589 Bebout This grant provides two-years partial salary support for the
stable isotope/Noble gas mass spectroscopy laboratory technician at Lehigh
University. This is a Phase II technician support grant under the
Instrumentation and Facilities (IF) Program and follows three years of Phase I
support (EAR-9406135). The isotope geochemistry technician at Lehigh University,
Dr. Bruce Idleman, provides support for both the 40Ar/39Ar geochronology lab and
the stable isotope geochemistry lab under the directions of Dr. Peter Zeitler
and Dr. Gray Bebout, respectively. Under Phase I support, Dr. Idleman brought
on-line a new laser system for both step-wise heating and direct laser ablation
of samples for 40Ar/39Ar dating and has constructed a novel extraction line for
preparing samples for nitrogen isotopic analysis. As a result, these labs offer
some unique analytical methodologies including feldspar thermochronology and
nitrogen isotopic analyses of N2 extracted from igneous phases that are now
available to outside members of the community. Continued support of this
technical position will allow for expanded collaborative work with outside
investigators using these newly developed geochronologic and stable isotopic
techniques and will support inhouse research in tectonics, fluid/crust
interactions, igneous petrogenesis and thermal evolution of the crust. ***