* 9727257
* Sian Ka'an 97 Second Joint Mexico-US International Workshop on Neural Networks and Neurocontrol, August 19-29, 1997,    Playa del Carmen, Quintana Roo, Mexico
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Laurene Fausett, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Florida Institute of Technology, and the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico
will hold Sian Ka'an 97, the Second Joint Mexico-US International Workshop on
Neural networks and neurocontrol, August 19-29, 1997, in Playa del Carmen,
Quintana Roo, Mexico. The ten day conference will provide an opportunity for
academic and industrial researcher of the united States and Mexico, other
invited guests, and graduate students, to exchange ideas and research results
with the aim of enhancing the overall research effort reducing duplication, and
encouraging cooperation among the participants. Sian Ka'an 97 will follow the
general plan of the very successful Sian Ka'an 95, which was held in September,
1995. the conference is comprised of three main stands: keynote addresses and
panel discussions by leader sin the field, poster sessions for contributed
papers, and practical experience with interesting neural network and
neurocontrol applications. Approximately twenty speaker have been invited to
present keynote talks describing the state of the art of topics related to the
development of the theoretical and applied aspects of neural networks and
neurocontrol. Groups of several related talks will be followed by an informal
discussion in the form of panel chaired by one of the keynote speakers. Invited
and contributed papers will be presented in poster sessions to allow for
discussion of particular research results. The conference will also include a
hands-on workshop for students and beginners interested in having some practice
and more basic information about the topics addressed in the conference
presentations and poster sessions.