* 9727813
* RUI:  Cuticular Mechanisms for Starvation Hardiness in Ticks
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Olushola Adeyeye, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 03/31/2003
* USD 211,240.00

Adeyeye 9727813 The success of arthropods as terrestrial animals is
attributable partly to their cuticle, a versatile structure that acts as a
covering and skeleton. Ticks belonging to the genus Ornithodoros can live for
many years even when starved. Moreover, the relapsing fever tick, Ornithodoros
tuncaln, shows remarkable resistance to desiccation. This project will
investigate whether and how the cuticle of 0. Turicata is biochemically modified
in order to cope with starvation and/or desiccation. Comprehensive biochemical
analyses of fed and starved 0. turicata cuticle will be conducted. In
particular, proteins of interest will be purified and characterized using
various techniques. Also cuticular lipids of sequentially starved ticks will be
analyzed. The cuticular permeability will be determined and its possible
correlation with changes in cuticular lipids and proteins will be ascertained.
Two other ticks that differ in cuticular permeability and in
starvation/desiccation hardiness shall be studied to permit broader
generalization about the role of cuticular proteins and lipids in the of 0.
turicata resisting desiccation. Because so little is known about the chemistry
of the cuticle of soft ticks, the proposed studies will expand existing
knowledge vis-a-vis the structure and functions of tick cuticle.