* 9727574
* Statistical Mechanics of Driven Diffusive Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Beate Schmittmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2001
* USD 442,000.00

9727574 Zia This is a renewal grant to two researchers to continue their program
on driven diffusive systems: complex behavior of interacting many-particle
systems which are driven into steady states far from thermal equilibrium. A
combination of techniques will be used to study these systems including exact
solutions and simulations on discrete lattice models, as well as analytic
techniques on continuum field theories. These systems are relevant to such
diverse applications as surface/crystal growth, intercalation, granular
materials, fracture dynamics, gel electrophoresis, diffusion in complex
environments, traffic flow, etc. The first part of this grant will focus on
collective behavior in driven diffusive lattice gases. While the simplest models
are reasonably well understood, many of their generalizations, e.g., skew
boundary conditions, anisotropic interactions, extreme aspect ratios or charge
asymmetries, present unanticipated challenges. The second part will focus on new
directions. These include random walks in a dynamic background; the study of
histograms (full distributions) of various observables and the formulation of
systematic Grassmannian field theories for systems with strict volume
constraints; and, finally, fundamental issues in the statistical mechanics of
non-equilibrium steady states. %%% This is a renewal grant to two researchers to
continue their program on driven diffusive systems: complex behavior of
interacting many-particle systems which are driven into steady states far from
thermal equilibrium. A combination of techniques will be used to study these
systems including exact solutions and simulations on discrete lattice models, as
well as analytic techniques on continuum field theories. These systems are
relevant to such diverse applications as surface/crystal growth, intercalation,
granular materials, fracture dynamics, gel electrophoresis, diffusion in complex
environments, traffic flow, etc. ***