* 9727825
* Genetic Analysis of Flavobacterium johnsoniae (Cytophaga    johnsonae) Gliding Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Mark McBride, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2002
* USD 330,000.00

McBride 9727825 Gliding motility (the active movement of cells over surfaces
without the aid of flagella) is a trait shared by many unrelated bacteria, yet
the mechanism of gliding motility has remained a mystery for over 100 years.
Newly developed genetic techniques will be used to analyze Flavobacterium
johnsoniae (formerly Cytophaga johnsonae) gliding motility. Transposon
mutagenesis and cosmid complementation will be used to identify F. johnsoniae
gliding motility genes (gld genes). The gld genes will be cloned in E. coli,
sequenced, and analyzed. The sequences will be compared to sequence databases to
determine possible functions for the individual components of the gliding
machinery. Mutations will created in individual gld genes and the effects on
cell motility will be assessed. gld genes will also be cloned onto expression
vectors in E. coli to allow overproduction of the Gld proteins. These proteins
will be used for biochemical experiments aimed at determining their functions.
They will also be used to raise antibodies. The antibodies against the
individual GLD proteins will be used to determine the amounts of each GLD
protein in the motile cells. The antibodies will also be used to localize the
proteins within the cells by cell fractionation experiments and by
immunoelectron microscopy. These studies will lead to the development of a model
to explain the mechanism of bacterial gliding motility. In addition to expanding
our knowledge on this common but little understood means of bacterial
locomotion, these studies could have more practical value since gliding bacteria
are important as pathogens of plants, animals, and humans, as agents of
biodegredation, and as producers of enzymes, antibodies and other secondary
metabolites.