* 9727527
* Effect of Solvation and Hydrogen Bonding on Conformationally Fexible Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* John Cable, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 01/31/2002
* USD 223,800.00

John Cable of Bowling Green State University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to investigate hydrogen bonding in 1:1 clusters
formed between various aromatic molecules and either water or ammonia. These
studies concentrate on conformationally flexible molecules; by varying the
aromatic moiety, effects of steric hindrance and structural distortion on the
hydrogen bonding interaction will be examined. Mass-selected resonance enhanced
ionization spectroscopy and dispersed fluorescence of the cluster expanded in a
supersonic nozzle will be used to yield information on the excited and ground
electronic states, respectively. A related theoretical effort involves
simulations of the observed energy levels of isolated and clustered solutes for
chararacterization of the detailed structural perturbations resulting from
hydrogen bonding. The results of these investigations will provide a more
detailed understanding of the factors that affect the strength of a hydrogen
bond and how the electronic properties of a conjugated solute molecule can be
modulated by structural distortion in order to optimize the hydrogen bonding
interaction. Hydrogen bonding plays an important role in chemistry, from
strongly influencing the physical properties of solvents to determining the
structures of biological macromolecules. Although much weaker than ordinary
covalent and ionic bonds, hydrogen bonds are of crucial importance to the
molecular recognition processes that are significant in biological systems.
These studies will improve the understanding of the common types of hydrogen
bonds that are relevant to proteins and nucleic acids.