* 9727483
* Dissertation Research: African American Cultural Politics   and Social Action
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Brett Williams, American University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2000
* USD 9,479.00

Most research on American Blacks focuses on the social problems of the lower
classes. This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology
student from American University, who will study African American elites. The
project will study the relation between African American women's use of
`cultural politics`: ethnicity, cultural symbols, history and social interaction
and their involvement in focused social action to counter racism and economic
inequality. The student will conduct interviews with a sample of about 100
African American women divided into religious and secular leaders and non-
leaders drawn from an elite population of women involved with national, state
and municipal offices or organizations. The interviews will focus on life
history and engagement with discrimination, the formation of a self image, and
involvement with social action. This research is important because it will
document the use of cultural politics to counter negative images and racism and
to promote social change. The focus on religious as well as secular contexts
will provide valuable information on how members of a minority elite use the
social and cultural resources available to them to develop positive self-images
and influence social policy. The results of this project should be of general
interest, especially in light of the attention generated by the presidential
commission on race.