* 9727760
* RPG:  Preliminary Functional Studies of Hro-twi Protein in  the Leech Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Julio Soto, Eastern New Mexico University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1999
* USD 18,000.00

9727760 Soto The main focus of this research is to study the action of genes
involved in the process of mesoderm formation and differentiation in the leech
embryo. Morphological information, in addition to information obtained from more
recent nucleic acid and genetic analysis, has shown that many developmental
processes in invertebrate and vertebrate species are very similar, indicating
that these processes may be evolutionarily conserved. An example of one of these
fundamental processes gastrulation, involves the formation of mesodermal,
endodermal and ectodermal embryonic layers. The ectoderm, or outer layer, gives
rise to the epithelium and the nervous system. The mesoderm, or middle layer,
gives rise to connective tissue, muscles, blood cells, blood vessels, and some
organs. The endoderm, or inner layer, gives rise to the digestive tract and the
interior lining of some organs. Determining what regulates the formation of
these layers has clear implications for the understanding of both normal and
abnormal embryonic development. The main objective of this research is to
understand the process of gastrulation at both the cellular and molecular level
in a simple organism, the leech embryo. Two different approaches will be used to
study gastrulation events in the leech. The first will involve a molecular
approach where PCR and DNA cloning will be used to identify genes involved in
the process of grastrulation. The second approach is the utilization of cell
lineage analysis to identify cells involved in the process of gastrulation and
therefore affected by the genes identified by the DNA approach. During the
period covered by this planning grant, studies will focus on a candidate of
mesodermal determination in the leech embryo, Hro-twi (Soto et al., in press).
As part of the planning activities, polyclonal antibodies against Hro-twi
protein will be purified and protein expression determined. In addition,
preliminary functional analysis will be performed, which will determine th e
feasibility of antisense/overexpression approaches to study the function of
developmentally-important genes in the leech embryo.