* 9727881
* SGER:  Encoding and Strategy Use in Children's Problem      Solving
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Martha Alibali, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 20,002.00

This project concerns conceptual development in childhood, focusing on the
processes whereby children develop new problem-solving strategies. When children
solve problems, they `encode` - that is, extract and mentally represent --
perceptual regularities about the problems. The central theoretical premise of
this project is that children use this encoded knowledge when they need to
construct new strategies. This theoretical framework leads to predictions about
when children will generate new strategies, and about the types of strategies
they will generate. The proposed experiments examine problem encoding and
strategy change in children learning the concept of mathematical equivalence,
which is the notion that the two sides of an equation (e.g., 6 + 4 = 10)
represent the same quantity. Understanding of this concept will be probed with
problems of the form 3 + 4 + 5 = ? + 5; children are asked to supply the missing
number (in this case, 7). Study 1 tests two hypotheses: (a) that feedback and
instruction lead to changes in problem encoding; and (b) that children who
encode problem features they do not use in applying their current strategies are
especially likely to create new strategies. Study 2 explores two additional
hypotheses: (a) that modifications in children's encoding will lead them to
construct new strategies; an (b) that the types of new strategies children
generate will depend on the specific problem features they encode. In addition
to testing these substantive hypotheses the research will develop a set of new
methodological tools for assessing children's problem encoding. Two novel
behavioral measures will be developed: (a) assessments of performance on problem
recognition tests (e.g., Which problem did you see earlier?, with choices
including 3 + 4 + 5 = ?, 3 + 4 + 5 + 5 = ?, etc.); and (b) assessments of
spontaneous hand gestures produced during problem explanations (e.g., pointing
in a particular sequence to the numbers in the problem). The studies will
explore the relationship between these two measures, and how each relates to
strategy use and strategy generation. The results of the project will contribute
to understanding of cognitive development, and should also provide a basis for
improving instruction in mathematical problem-solving.