* 9727891
* Agile Manufacturing: Integrated Manufacturing Technology    Roadmapping (IMTR) Initiative
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Richard Neal, Department of Energy Oak Ridge Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 75,000.00

DMI-9727891 Neal This research is to develop a set of enabling technology
roadmaps which identify key cross cutting advances and capabilities required to
meet near and long term goals of the U.S. manufacturing community. This project
is intended to build on the roadmapping work done for the Next Generation
Manufacturing study by identifying specific research needs, opportunities, gaps
and overlaps for the next 15 years. The goal of this effort is to provide a
focused national research agenda which will highlight opportunities for
individual and collaborative R&amp;D throughout the U.S. manufacturing
community. The study will include:(1)a technology assessment - current state of
the art needs and barriers;(2)requirements - goals and objectives to advance
enabling manufacturing technologies over the next 15 years;(3) technology
roadmap - timeline of required capabilities and advances; and(4)current
programs-directory of related ongoing federal and private development
activities. Subject areas will be drawn from the Next Generation Manufacturing
study and will include: Adaptive Responsive Information Systems; Pervasive
Modeling and Simulation; Next Generation Manufacturing Processes and Equipment;
and Enterprise Integration tools. There has been little concerted effort or
collective focus to address the technical challenges associated with "Next
Generation Manufacturing". Many of these challenges are too difficult for a
single company or government agency to address. It is clear that there is a need
to develop broad-based plans that address the infrastructure tools and
capabilities essential to the evolution of the nations' manufacturing base. The
U.S. manufacturing community would greatly benefit by having a more cohesive
research agenda highlighting key technology needs in manufacturing
infrastructure. This is especially crucial in the current environment where the
amount of R&amp;D money available for manufacturing is declining. The results of
this project would provide a mechanism for agencies and industry to pool their
resources in areas of mutual interest.