* 9727980
* Superoxide Response Regulon of E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/09/1999
* Bernard Weiss, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/09/1999
* USD 110,000.00

Weiss 9727980 SoxR of the bacterium Escherichia coli is a transcriptional
activator for an oxidative stress regulon. It is one of only three known
regulatory Fe-S proteins and the only one with a 2Fe-2S center. Ultimate goals
of the study are (i) to find out how oxidation of the Fe-S clusters alters SoxR
to become a transcriptional activator, and (ii) to elucidate the redox pathway
that counters the autooxidation of its Fe-S clusters and keeps them in a reduced
state in the uninduced cell. As an aid to the intended studies, SoxR derivatives
will be produced containing deletions or protein fusions that may increase
solubility and stability of this difficult protein. The protein will be
dissected by deletion and point mutations in order to map specific domains and
to see which ones might interact. These domains, whose functions are to be
individually assayed, are ones involved in dimer formation, DNA binding, Fe-S
cluster formation, reductase recognition, RNA polymerase binding, and open
complex formation. Heterodimers of mutant and wild type proteins will be used to
determine the possible participation of both polypeptide strands in some of
these domains. In addition, the cellular reductase pathway for SoxR will be
investigated by standard techniques of protein and cofactor fractionation. In
addition, mutations for some possible genes in this pathway will be examined,
and toward this end, insertion mutations will be produced for each of the two
known flavodoxins. The SoxR protein of Escherichia coli regulates about 10 genes
responding to oxidative stress. It can sense changes in the oxidation state of
the cell, which are brought about by various oxidants such as the superoxide
radical anion or nitric oxide. Superoxide is produced from oxygen by electron
leakage during aerobic metabolism. It is also produced by some environmental
toxicants like the herbicide paraquat and by macrophages as an antibacterial
agent. The ultimate goal of this project is an understanding of cellular de
fenses against highly reactive derivatives of oxygen, which is important, for
example, in understanding how bacteria overcome plant defenses that involve
oxidants.