* 9727087
* US-India Cooperative Research: Two-Phase Flow Instabilities in Boiling and Condensing Flow System, Award in             Indian Rupees
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,07/31/2002
* P Sarma, Andhra University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2002
* USD 20,968.00

9727087 Sarma Description: This award is for a joint project in mechanical
engineering entitled "US-India Cooperative Research: Two Phase Flow
Instabilities in Boiling & Condensing Flow Systems". The co-investigators are
Sadik Kakac of the University of Miami and P.K. Sarma of Andhra University in
Visakhaputnam. The investigations on two-phase flow instabilities and heat
transfer in horizontal in-tube boiling and condensing systems are experimental
and theoretical. The main objectives of the research are to study the
fundamental mechanisms of various boiling and condensing two- phase flow
instabilities, the parametric effects on these instabilities, the interaction
between heat transfer and these instabilities, and to model these complicated
phenomena mathematically. By combining their expertise, the investigators expect
to be able to reveal the similar fundamental physical mechanism of both boiling
and condensing flows dynamics and heat transfer, and to further clarify the
differences between the two physical phenomena. Scope: This joint project
resulted from an NSF supported workshop held at Andhra University in 1995. The
research is complementary and mutually beneficial. The US PI has extensive
research experience in the study of boiling flow instabilities and oscillations;
while the Indian PI has extensive experience in the study of condensing heat
transfer and dynamics. Accordingly, experiments in boiling two-phase flow
instabilities will be conducted at Miami, while the two-phase flow condensation
instabilities and heat transfer experiments will be done at Andhra. Research
teams at both universities will participate in each other's experimental
investigations, and in the theoretical model development. As a new collaboration
and for its involvement of students in the research, this project supports INT
objectives. ***