* 9727249
* LT:  Removal of Organic Films and Contaminants from Surfaces Using Elevated Pressure, Elevated Temperature Water
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Dennis Hess, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9727249 Hess The worldwide semiconductor market currently exceeds one hundred
thirty billion dollars. Continued growth of this technology has occurred because
the complexity and hence the capability of microelectronic devices and
integrated circuits (ICs) has increased tremendously over the past 3 5 years
with essentially no increase in cost per IC chip. Yield and reliability of these
devices are determined primarily by the ability to avoid the incorporation of
deleterious impurities such as organic contaminants, alkali ions and metal
atoms/ions into the device during fabrication processes. Competitiveness and
market share in this rapidly changing technology therefore depend on cleaning
methodology. Future device structures and dimensions require modifications to
the traditional liquid cleaning steps. In addition, disposal of solvents, acids,
and large volumes of de-ionized water used in current cleaning techniques is a
significant environmental concern. The proposed research focuses on the
development of a novel approach to surface cleaning and conditioning that
ensures compatibility of this critical fabrication step with vacuum sequences in
the manufacturing process. By increasing the pressure of liquid water in the
vicinity of 100C, the advantages of liquid cleaning can be maintained; a
reduction in pressure results in water evaporation, permitting subsequent
transfer of substrates into a vacuum chamber. The addition of C02 to water under
elevated pressure and elevated temperature conditions enhances water reactivity
to organic materials, and thus provides a means to remove organic as well as
inorganic contaminants. Furthermore, this new cleaning approach minimizes the
volumes of solvents, acids, and de-ionized water used in the numerous cleaning
cycles required in the fabrication of ICs, thereby reducing greatly the
environmental impact of IC manufacture. Chemical and physical characterization
of silicon and silicon dioxide surfaces, intentional ly contaminated with
organic layers and subsequently cleaned, will be performed by X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (via in-situ transfer from the high pressure reactor
in the analysis system), in- situ Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy,
Inductively- Coupled Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS), atomic force microscopy and
contact angle measurements. These results will provide insight into fundamental
cleaning mechanisms of organic contaminants using water with and without
additives. Preliminary electrical measurements, combined with ICP-MS, will
generate information concerning the ultimate utility of this cleaning technique.
***