* 9727930
* Partial Support for the U.S. National Committee for the     Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1998,06/30/1999
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 06/30/1999
* USD 87,182.00

9727930 ABSTRACT CODATA &lt;br/&gt;The globalization of science is occurring in
parallel with a rapid extension in the speed and sophistication of information
and data handling technologies in their uses for scientific purposes.
Development in these areas permit the planning and execution of large scale
scientific programs. Such programs, in turn, frequenly require sophisticated
data handling and processing techniques. In view of the multilateral character
of many large scale scientific programs, the handling, processing, and
transmission of scientific data has become a major international enterprise in
its own right, one that is vital to those scientific programs. The Committee on
Data for Science and Technoogy (CODATA) is a non-governmental, multilateral body
affiliated with the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU.) CODATA's
principal objective is to facilitate worldwide communication on problems
relevants to scientific data. Like other memembers of the ICSU family, CODATA is
comprised of non-governmental National Member Organization. The National Acadmey
of Sciences (NAS) fulfill this function in the United States. A. U.S. National
Committee for CODATA, which is comprised of non-governmental scientists,
coordinates U.S. participation in the international body, with NAS serving as
its secretariat. This award will provide partial support to the NAS to continue
the activities of the U.S. National Committee. Additional support is also being
sought is also being sought from several other Federal Agencies: DoE, NASA, NIH,
and NIST