* 9727741
* The Urea Cycle in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Wilmar Salo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2001
* USD 220,000.00

9727741 Anderson Most fish remove waste nitrogen (from protein and energy
metabolism) as ammonia, which diffuses across the gills into the water. This is
in contrast to most terrestrial vertebrate animals, which convert ammonia to
urea which is stored and excreted periodically in the urine (referred to as
"ureotelic" species); the metabolic pathway for this conversion is called the
urea cycle. One group of fishes, the clasmobranchs (sharks and rays), synthesize
and retain high concentrations of urea in their tissues for the purpose of
maintaining an osmotic balance with the high salt concentration in sea water.
The urea cycle in these species is analogous to that in ureotelic species, but
with some significant differences. Dr. Anderson has determined the structure of
the gene that expresses this unique enzyme catalyzing the first metabolic step
in the urea cycle. This same unique enzyme is found in some telcost fishes as
well, but apparently is absent in most adult species, and he has determined the
structure of the gene for the enzyme in several teleost fishes. A surprising
finding is that is several teleost species, this enzyme and in some cases, all
of the urea cycle enzymes, is expressed primarily in muscle, rather than in
liver as expected. The proposed studies will help to establish if the gene for
this enzyme of the urea cycle is present in all fish and when and how and why it
is expressed. The hypothesis is that this enzyme and the urea cycle are
expressed only during embryogenesis (very early development) in most fish.
Ammonia toxicity is the number one problem in the aquaculture industry.
Understanding the mechanism of how expression of the urea cycle enzymes is
regulated in fish may provide an opportunity to genetically modify fish to
express the urea cycle and thus increase tolerance to ammonia.