* 9727088
* US-India Cooperative Research: The Effect of Light Quality  and Quantity on the Developmental Ecology of Indian Tropical Forest Trees, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Kailash Paliwal, Madurai Kamaraj University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2001
* USD 38,710.00

9727088 Paliwal Description: This proposal is for a US-Indo collaboration
between biological scientists David Lee, Florida International University and
Kailash Paliwal, Madurai Kamaraj University. The research is: "The Effect of
Light Quantity and Quality on the Developmental Ecology of Indian Tropical
Forest Trees." The researchers will study seedlings of 16 native South Asian
forest trees to determine how they respond to changes in light quantity and
quality as they grow in spectrally neutral and altered shade conditions. Plants
will be examined for growth rate, morphology, leaf anatomy, and physiological
response over a 10- 15 month period. Results will improve understanding of the
ecological responses of the species in natural conditions, their sylviculture,
and their establishment in nurseries. The research will increase fundamental
knowledge about the effect of light quality and quantity to the development of
trees in natural light conditions. Scope: This study will be conducted almost
entirely at the Madurai Kamaraj University by Indian researchers in close
collaboration with US PI David Lee who will spend part of his sabbatical there.
The approach is novel and should lead to significant advances in fundamental
knowledge about tree regeneration in tropical forests. The research is basic and
applied. It will greatly strengthen US science by focusing on a region little
studied by US researchers. As a new collaboration that will involve young
scientists, this project supports INT objectives. The project will strengthen
research links between the US and India. The interaction is mutually beneficial.
***