* 9727951
* Functional Signaling Domains of Notch Ligands
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Robert Fleming, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2001
* USD 351,063.00

Fleming, Robert J.. 9727951 During the development of multicellular organisms,
single cellular receptors are often used at multiple developmental periods. The
Notch gene family represents a highly conserved group of genes whose functions
are required in organisms as diverse as nematodes and humans. Notch and Notch-
related gene products function as cell membrane receptors for intercellular
signaling events to coordinate cell fate decisions in a variety of tissues
during development. Notch activity is regulated by membrane-bound ligands which,
in Drosophila, are represented by the products of the genes Serrate (SER) and
Delta (DL). SER-like and DL-like molecules have also been found to be conserved
in the same species where Notch family genes are found. These ligands
demonstrate distinct temporal and spatial expression patterns suggesting that
they each regulate NOTCH in particular processes. Interestingly, both SER and DL
can act to initiate NOTCH signaling and appear to have equivalent capabilities
during some processes yet function distinctly in others. Because SER and DL can
elicit distinct responses from the single NOTCH receptor and since NOTCH is
central to many cell fate decisions, these studies will investigate the
mechanisms by which specificity is generated by each ligand upon association
with NOTCH. The proposed experimentation will examine the roles of specific
protein domains within SER and DL that contribute to the ability of that ligand
to activate NOTCH in different cellular environments. Mechanisms of ligand
function will be determined by constructing mutations of extracellular or
intracellular (IC) domains of each ligand and expressing the mutant molecules in
vivo. By analyzing the properties of these chimeric molecules relative to normal
SER and DL, specific functional properties produced by individual protein
domains will be determined. Initially, studies will focus on possible parallel
mechanisms between NOTCH ligands and TGF(-like molecules that require IC domains
f or proper extracellular function. Preliminary studies in these areas suggest
that SER molecules function cooperatively and may activate NOTCH as a dimer or
other aggregated form during some aspects of NOTCH signaling. These findings
suggest other areas of experimentation including molecular examination for SER
cleavage products and functional interactions between extracellular region
mutations and the IC domain. Other areas of investigation include the
characterization of a unique cysteine-rich domain found only within the SER
ligand and not in DL. The properties of this domain will be characterized by
deleting it from SER and/or inserting it into DL and assessing the ability of
these modified ligands to interact with and/or activate the NOTCH receptor in
specific cellular environments. Taken together, these studies are expected to
expand the understanding of NOTCH signal regulation and further clarify
mechanisms by which receptors in general may serve to send multiple, discrete
signals upon activation by theft identified ligands.