* 9727607
* Primary Processes in Fe-S-Type Photosynthetic Reactions     Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Robert Blankenship, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2000
* USD 335,521.00

9727607 Blankenship The objective of this research is to extend the current
understanding of the energy trapping processes, primary photochemistry and early
secondary electron transfer reactions in photosynthetic reaction centers that
contain FeS centers as early electron acceptors. The particular systems that
will be studied include reaction centers from the primitive anoxygenic organisms
known as heliobacteria as well as Photosystem I of oxygenic photosynthetic
organisms. One of the overall goals of the work is to correlate some of the
pigments observed in spectroscopic studies with pigments observed in the recent
X-ray structure of Photosystem I. Specific proposed experiments include,
picosecond transient absorbance measurements in the blue spectral region in
Photosystem I, studies on Photosystem I mutants in the quinone-binding region
and the P700 binding region, dichroism experiments on Photosystem I and
investigation of secondary electron transfer reactions in heliobacteria
monitored using EPR and picosecond timescale transient absorbance spectroscopy.
These experiments will give new insights into the energy trapping process in
reaction centers that contain integral core antenna pigments and will help to
identify and characterize some of the early electron acceptors in these systems,
including chlorophylls, quinones and FeS centers. The goal of this work is to
understand how plants and other photosynthetic organisms convert the energy of
sunlight into chemical energy. This project is designed to give detailed
knowledge of the chemical mechanism of energy storage in a class of
photosynthetic complexes that is not well understood. Advances in understanding
the basic scientific principles at work in this essential biological process may
ultimately lead to the development of artificial energy storage systems. The
artificial systems may decrease our dependence on fossil fuels and reduce
emission of pullutants and greenhouse gases. Another possible benefit is the use
of this knowledg e in the development of improved plants that will help meet our
food and fiber needs. ***