* 9727319
* Collaborative Research:  Ultraviolet Radiation Induced DNA  Damage in Bacterioplankton in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Wade Jeffrey, University of West Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/2001
* USD 362,232.00

9727319 JEFFREY There is now strong evidence that ultraviolet (UV) radiation is
increasing over certain locations in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean as a
result of ozone depletion. A reduction in ozone concentration selectively limits
stratospheric adsorption of UV radiation and results in a higher UV irradiance
reaching the earth's surface. Research on the impact of increased UV radiation
due to ozone depletion has focused primarily on phytoplankton, with a much
smaller effort being directed to other trophic levels. This collaborative
project will address UV radiation induced damage and UV radiation effects on
bacterioplankton. Studies will examine interactions between bacterioplankton and
photochemical processes and interactions with higher trophic groups such as
phytoplankton and zooplankton. Topics to be addressed will include whether
bacterial-phytoplankton coupling modifies bacterial response to UV radiation,
how seasonal changes in UV radiation affect bacterial community dynamics and how
chemical photoproducts impact bacterial production.. This research project will
elucidate the molecular determinants responsible for changes in productivity and
the molecular and physiological responses to changing UV radiation. The overall
goal is to provide a greater understanding of the potential impact that changes
in UV radiation have on marine microbial communities.