* 9727858
* Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing '98 Conference,           January 4-9, 1998, Maui, Hawaii
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Teri Klein, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 04/30/1998
* USD 30,100.00

The third Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB), will be held January 4-9,
1998 in Maui, Hawaii. PSB brings together top researchers from North America,
the Asian Pacific nations, Europe and around the world to exchange research
results and address open issues in all aspects of computational biology. PSB
provides a forum for the presentation of work in databases, algorithms,
interfaces, visualization, modeling and other computational methods, as applied
to biological problems, with emphasis on applications in data-rich areas of
molecular biology. PSB attracts a balanced combination of computer scientists
and biologists, presenting significant original research, demonstrating computer
systems, and facilitating formal and informal discussions on topics of
importance to computational biology. Papers and presentations are rigorously
peer reviewed and are published in an archival proceedings volume which will be
indexed in Medline by the National Library of Medicine. PSB is designed to be
maximally responsive to the need for critical mass in subdisciplines within
biocomputing. For that reason, it is the only meeting whose sessions are defined
dynamically in response to specific proposals each year, organized by leaders in
emerging subdisciplines and targeted to provide a forum for publication and
discussion of research in biocomputing's "hot area". This proposal is to be
specifically used for funding participation and to provide a computing
environment an internet connection locally for the conference.