* 9727057
* TECO: Collaborative Research: Immobilization of Nitrate in  Temperature Forest Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Jon Chorover, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 281,987.00

9727057 Hatcher One of the most subtle and pervasive aspects of human-induced
global change is the chronic deposition of atmospheric nitrogen in the forests
of the northeastern United States. The mechanisms by which inputs of inorganic
nitrogen are converted to organic nitrogen and retained within the forest litter
layer and mineral soil are key to understanding the fate of nitrogen from
atmospheric deposition and its effects on carbon storage in forests. Currently,
the processes by which inorganic nitrogen from atmospheric deposition is
immobilized in soil are not understood. Whether or not organic nitrogen produced
in soil is subsequently made available for plant growth or if it is stored in
the soil-humus matrix are unknown. The "unknown nitrogen" fraction commonly
comprises the largest single fraction of total soil nitrogen in conventional wet
chemical analyses. This research will use 15N-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
technology to address these questions. Answers to these two fundamental
questions are needed to fully comprehend the soil N cycle, and to predict the
ultimate impact of chronic N deposition in forest ecosystems. This project will
address these two fundamental questions by using existing long-term forest
nitrogen addition experiments at Harvard Forest LTER site in Massachusetts, the
Bear Brook Watershed in Maine, and the Fernow Experimental Forest in West
Virginia.