* 9727341
* Impact of Episodic Transport and Resuspension on Coastal    Phytoplankton Processes: A Case Study of the Lake Michigan  Recurrent Coastal Plume
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2003
* Steven Lohrenz, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/2003
* USD 330,311.00

Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of Opportunity (NSF
97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This is a collaborative research
project between investigators from ten academic and government research
institutions. The research is being conducted under the auspices of the NSF
Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program. This
collaborative, 5-year research program will focus on the importance of episodic
events on nearshore-offshore transport and subsequent ecological consequences.
The study seeks to 1) determine what processes control the cross- margin
(inshore to offshore) transport of biological, chemical, and geological
materials in the coastal margins of the Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test
scientific strategies for assessing, quantifying, and predicting the impacts of
multiple stresses both natural and anthropogenic, in the Great Lakes or selected
coastal sub-regions. A tight coupling between contaminated sediments and
overlying water exists in lakes and coastal ecosystems through the process of
sediment resuspension. Satellite observations in Lake Michigan illustrate an
annually recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km wide plume
of resuspended material extending over 200 km along the southern shores of the
lake. Preliminary evidence indicates that this episodic event may be the major
mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan. This type of
event impacts recycling of biogeochemically important materials (BIMS),
ecosystem responses, cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The program
results will be applicable to similar events in many coastal areas. This
comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement an integrated
observational program and numerical modeling effort to identify, quantify, and
develop prediction tools for the winter-spring resuspension event and to assess
the impact of this event on the transport and transformation of BIMS and on lake
ecology. This component of the study focuses on understanding of
ecophysiological mechanisms controlling phytoplankton and community structure
during episodic, physical forcing events within the Great Lakes. The measurement
of cellular, species, group, and community processes coupled with state- of-the-
art, bio-optical instrumentation will allow for a unique comprehensive
examination of the taxon-specific and community responses to distinct physical
forcing factors. Work will also further develop, evaluate, and improve the
current bio-optical production model for Lake Michigan and assist in efforts to
develop fresh water remote-sensing algorithms.