* 9727578
* Genetics of Differences Between the Mating Systems of       Mimulus guttatus and M. nasutus
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* John Willis, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9727578 Willis The identification and analysis of quantitative trait loci
(QTLs) offers a powerful tool with which to assess directly the genetic basis of
evolved differences between interfertile organisms. One evolutionary transition
in plants that offers a unique opportunity to address the genetic basis of
adaptations is the evolution of self-fertilization from outcrossing, which is
perhaps the most frequent evolutionary transition in angiosperms. The genus
Mimulus (Scrophulariaceae), within which are many closely related and
interfertile species or populations, provides an excellent model system for
studying the evolution of self-fertilization and speciation. The common yellow
monkeyflowers in the Mimulus guttatus species complex are arguably the most
polytypic and most rapidly evolving members of the genus, and populations vary
tremendously in terms of the degree of self-fertilization. There are two
specific goals of the proposed study. First, we propose to conduct a thorough
genetic analysis of the floral differences between a primarily outcrossing
population of Mimulus guttatus and a highly selfing population of Mimulus
nasutus in order to determine whether genes of large effect contribute to the
extreme floral differences between these species. This goal will be accomplished
through the mapping of quantitative trait loci affecting floral morphology using
a high-resolution linkage map of the Mimulus genome based on microsatellite,
AFLP, and RAPD markers. Second, we propose to test whether quantitative trait
loci affecting floral traits that are correlated with selfing actually have
direct effects on the rate of self-fertilization in a natural population. This
goal will be accomplished by analyzing in the field the selfing rates of
introgression lines containing a M. nasutus allele for floral QTLs in a M.
guttatus background. These experiments will address long-standing and
fundamental questions about the role of mutations of large effect on the
evolution of adaptations. For example, a fundamental claim of neo-Darwinian
evolution is that natural selection acts on very slight phenotypic differences
among individuals in a population. If this subtle individual variation has a
genetic component, then adaptations will result from the steady fixation of
genes of small effect. Conversely, others have argued that adaptation frequently
results from drastic changes at a very few genetic loci. These experiments will
help to answer basic questions such as this. They will also contribute to our
basic understanding of how and why self-fertilization and other forms of
inbreeding evolve in natural and domesticated populations of plants and animals.