* 9727937
* The Role of the Protein in Structuring and Stabilizing the  Transition State in Enzymatic Reactions - A Computational   Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Thomas Bruice, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2001
* USD 186,000.00

PI: Thomas C. Bruice 9727937 Bruice A promising approach to the question of the
contribution of the force field of the enzyme structure to the rate of the
enzymatic reaction involves the use of a combined quantum mechanical and
molecular mechanical (QM/MM) methodology, to simulate the minimum energy
surfaces, reaction pathways and transition state structures. The choice of
enzymes for investigation is based on simplicity of the reactions catalyzed,
high resolution of the necessary crystal structures, and relatively small size
of the proteins themselves. Using a simple organic model for the enzymatic
reaction, minimum energy reaction profiles will be computed by both
semiempirical and ab initio methods in both the gas phase and polar dielectric.
Comparison of semiempirical and ab initio structures and energies must be
favorable in order to have confidence in the use of any particular semiempirical
method to represent QM atoms in the QM/MM program. By characterizing the
structural, electronic and energetic effects that an enzyme has on the intrinsic
chemical properties of the reacting species, it is hoped that the project will
provide answers to the question of why enzymes are such excellent catalysts.
Particularly, this approach enables the evaluation of the environmental effects
due to the enzyme on the energetics of an enzyme catalyzed reaction.