* 9727184
* SGER:  An Evolutionary Perspective on the Development of theSocial Amoeba, D. discoideum
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Richard Kessin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,999.00

The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum forages independently for bacteria in
the soil. When the food is exhausted, the cells have several options - they can
make resistant structures in the form of microcycts, macrocysts, or fruiting
bodies. Macrocysts are reproductive structures, but have not yielded a system of
genetic analysis. The PI suggests that standard strains are incompatible due to
a form of parasitism, in which one mating type exploits the other. Using
insertional mutagenesis and dominant drug resistance genes, he is attempting to
silence the incompatibility mechanism and develop a system of reproductive
genetic analysis. Insertional mutagenesis allows us to examine the nature of the
genes that cause incompatibility. Fruiting bodies have an exceptionally complex
development, leading to a stalk supporting a ball of viable spores. Because the
stalk cells constitute 20% of the population and they die, there is competition
to form a spore, rather than a stalk. The PI has used this evolutionary
principle to design selection procedures which have produced mutants that form
spores rather than stalk when they develop in chimeras with wild type cells. The
mutated genes are being recovered and characterized. The affected genes should
be central to the communication between developing cells. Dictyostelium
discoideum and other social amoebae have an unusual evolutionary biology which
can be applied to understanding their development.