* 9727534
* Energetics and Mechanisms of Organometallic Reactions       Relevant to the Functionalization of Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Karen Goldberg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 02/28/2002
* USD 288,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
provides continued support for studies on the energetics and mechanisms of
organometallic reactions relevant to the functionalization of alkanes by Dr.
Karen I. Goldberg, Department of Chemistry, University of Washington. This
project involves studies on the Pt(II)/Pt(IV) couple as a general model for d8
square planar and d6 octahedral compounds as well as for the catalytic potential
of this couple for alkane functionalization. Mechanistic and kinetic
investigations of oxidative addition of C-H and C-C bonds to Pt(II) and
reductive elimination of C-X (X = heteroatom, H, or C) bonds from Pt(IV) will be
carried out. Mechanistic studies will also be performed to determine the ideal
ligand/metal environment required to promote the oxidation of Pt(II) alkyls by
water or alcohols to form Pt(IV) alkyl hydroxides or alkoxides and hydrogen. The
reactivity of Pt(IV) alkoxides will also be explored as representative of high
valent late transition metal alkoxides. The reactivity of an open coordination
site on Pt(IV) will be examined. Such a site is necessary for reductive
elimination reactions and may also be useful for functionalization. Possible
coordination and insertion of small organic molecules and C-H activation by the
open site will be explored. This project will give fundamental information on
the activation and functionalization of alkanes and provide possible new
transition metal catalysts for this important reaction. Alkanes represent a
considerable portion of our natural gas and petroleum resources. The potential
of these enormous reserves for use in large scale chemical syntheses is limited
by the very unreactive nature of the alkane C-H and C-C bonds. Transition metals
have been shown to be capable of activating the C-H bonds in alkanes and
homogeneous transition metal catalysis is viewed as a promising solution to the
conversion of alkanes selectivity into more usable organic products, such as the
conversion of methane into methanol.