* 9727376
* Citizen's Preferences for Environmental Options:  Evidence  on Existence and Triggering
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Clifford Russell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2000
* USD 199,979.00

This project was suggested by questions from focus group respondents to a
forest-valuation, multi-attribute utility (MAU) questionnaire-in-the-making, who
asked, in so many words, `Should we use our personal preferences in responding
or should we put on our citizen hats and try to say what we think would be in
the public interest?` The possibility that at least some significant fraction of
ordinary people have available to or more preference orderings over unfamiliar,
albeit not wildly exotic, environmental options offers a striking contrast to
the view, coming out of psychology, that people are unlikely to be aware of any
preferences in such settings, until these are constructed during questioning.
Our objective is to investigate the claim of these respondents by seeking
evidence for or against it in a specially devised, 3-attribute MAU survey about
preferences over management options for a forested park in Nashville, TN. Our
general hypothesis is that, by stressing one or another of several `themes` for
the questions, we can trigger predictably different response patterns across
subsamples. While there is a long and respectable literature concerning the
existence and importance of multiple preference orderings co-existing in the
same individual, not nearly enough is know about the phenomenon empirically.
Greater knowledge will help us understand its practical importance in such
current areas of research as: the use of information as a policy tool; the
interpretation of warm glow effects and non-use benefits; and even the
explanation of the observed difference between mean bids evoked by dichotomous
and by open-ended CV question formats.