* 9727840
* Electron Transfer to Fe(III) in the Geobacteraceae
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Derek Lovley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2002
* USD 299,830.00

9727840 Lovley The objective of this study is to elucidate the mechanisms for
electron transport to Fe(III) in the dissimilatory Fe(III)-reducing
microorganism, Geobacter sulfurreducens. G. sulfurreducens is representative of
a family of microorganisms in the delta subclass of the Proteobacteria, the
Geobacteraceae, which have the capacity to conserve energy to support growth
from the oxidation of organic compounds coupled to the reduction of Fe(III). G.
sulfurreducens has been chosen for these studies because it is easy to mass
culture and should be amenable to future genetic studies. Initial studies will
focus on the NADH-dependent Fe(III) reductase complex that is localized in the
membrane fraction of G. sulfurreducens. The Fe(III) reductase complex will be
purified in sufficient quantities to characterize conditions for optimal
activity, substrate affinities, subunit composition, metal content, and redox
potentials. The genes for the subunits in the complex will be cloned and
sequenced. Disaggregation and reconstitution studies will be conducted to
determine if all of the five proteins that purify as the NADH-dependent Fe(III)
reductase complex are actually necessary for Fe(III) reduction. Special emphasis
will be placed on identifying which of the proteins is responsible for
transferring electrons to Fe(III). The Fe(III) reductase will be localized in
the cell using cytoimmunological techniques in order to determine if it is in
the outer membrane as would be expected for an enzyme that is considered to pass
electrons to extracellular Fe(III). Studies will be conducted in which the
essential components of the Fe(III) reductase complex will be incorporated into
artificial membranes to determine if Fe(III) is reduced at physiologically
relevant rates when the Fe(III) reductase components are membrane-bound. Once
the mechanisms for electron transport from NADH to Fe(III) are elucidated, the
electron transport components involved in H2-dependent Fe(III) reduction will be
studied. This will involve determining which of the hydrogenases in G.
sulfurreducens is capable of donating electrons for Fe(III) reduction, whether
the Fe(III) reductase that functions in H2 oxidation is the same as for NADH
oxidation, and determining what other components are necessary for Fe(III)
reduction. These studies are expected to provide a fundamental understanding of
the mechanisms by which microorganisms couple the oxidation of organic matter to
the reduction of Fe(III). It has recently been recognized that microorganisms
that can conserve energy by oxidizing organic compounds with the reduction of
Fe(III) play an important environmental role in the global carbon cycle and in
the remediation of organic pollution of aquatic sediments and groundwater.
Fe(III)-reducing microogranisms can substitute toxic metals for Fe(III) in their
metabolism and thus can also aid in the remediation of metal-contaminated
environments. Furthermore, geological evidence suggests that Fe(III) reduction
was the first globally significant process for completely oxidizing organic
matter back to carbon dioxide on ancient earth. Thus, elucidating the mechanisms
by which microorganisms transfer electrons to Fe(III) will provide important
basic insights into this important form of microbial metabolism, provide a
better understanding of the evolution of microbial respiration, and is likely to
advance the application of this metabolic pathway to environmental restoration.