* 9727268
* LT:  Life Cycle Design of Building Integrated Photovoltaic  Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Daniel Mazmanian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 04/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

9727268 Keoleian Conventional electricity generating systems based on fossil and
nuclear fuels are not sustainable because of the finite nature of these fuels
and the environmental impacts related to their use. Building-integrated
photovoltaics (BIPV) are rapidly emerging as an important application of a
renewable energy technology. BIPV systems are an integral part of the building
envelope and thus serve multiple functions including weather protection,
structural, aesthetic, and electricity generation. Despite the inherent
advantages of BIPV in roofing and facade applications, they are currently
limited by economic decision-making that ignores social benefits and costs. A
comprehensive assessment of the full energy, environmental and economic benefits
of BIPV systems has not yet been conducted. The purpose of the proposed project
is to develop a life cycle design model and computer software tool (the
Photovoltaic Building Integrated Design and Policy Assessment Tool, PV-BIDPAT)
for evaluating the full benefits and costs of BIPV technology relative to
conventional electricity generating systems and the building materials that they
displace. PV-BIDPAT will enhance the design, planning, and policy making
capabilities of key stakeholders who influence the future implementation of BIPV
technology. Life cycle inventory models for BIPV and functionally equivalent
conventional systems will serve as a foundation for comparative energy,
environmental, and economic assessments. The inventory component of PV-BIDPAT
will consist of a set of modules representing a variety of BIPV technologies
(amorphous silicon, crystalline, polycrystalline, CdTe, for example) and another
set of modules for characterizing the displaced building materials (fiberglass
asphalt shingles, galvanized metal roofing). The inventory model will be coupled
with a life cycle cost model comprising economic and policy modules that will
account for the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act (PU RPA), current Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rules, and existing and proposed emissions
allowance trading systems. The cost model will assign monetary values to social
costs from pollutant emissions and environmental damage associated with
electricity generation. PV-BIDPAT will compute the following metrics: pollution
prevention factors for air pollutant emissions, water pollutant effluents and
solid waste; energy payback time and electricity production efficiency; life
cycle costs including social costs. Life cycle inventory model parameters will
be measured for amorphous silicon BIPV products, using data collected from
United Solar, and for the displaced fiberglass asphalt shingles and standing
seam metal roofing materials. PV-BIDPAT will be applied to and tested on two
existing sites (South Face Energy Institute - PV shingle in Atlanta, Georgia and
the National Association of Home Builders, National Research Home Park 21st
Century Townhouses - PV standing seam metal roof in Bowie, Maryland) and three
proposed installations (Dana Building of the School of Natural Resources and
Environment - new roof for building renovation, Art and Architecture Building -
PV shingle demo, Nichols Arboretum Urban Environmental Education Center historic
structure relocation and renovation). The results from these cases and other
simulations will highlight the advantages of amorphous silicon BIPV for
different policy and economic scenarios. This interdisciplinary research project
will be undertaken by a University of Michigan team from the National Pollution
Prevention Center, the School of Natural Resources and Environment, and the
School of Architecture and Urban Planning that will bring together expertise in
life cycle design and assessment, PV technology, building design, environmental
economics and energy policy. This team will collaborate with United Solar and
the Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA) and a multi-stakeholder Advisory
Committee. ***