* 9727176
* Polar Hydrophobicity
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Stephen DiMagno, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2002
* USD 274,900.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Profesor
Stephen DiMagno, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Nebraska -
Lincoln, is developing `polar hydrophobicity` in the design of fluorinated hosts
and guests for molecular recognition. Through the synthesis and study of heavily
fluorinated carbohydrate analogs incorporating multiple CF2 (for CHOH)
substitutions, Professor DiMagno tests the hypothesis that preorganized sites
and bound guests are `harder` than equivalent structures in solution due to the
decreased importance of energetic terms arising from electron polarization. The
polar hydrophobic effect results from the peculiar physical characteristics of
the carbon-fluorine bond, which is at once both extremely polar and hydrophobic.
Since the polar characteristics of the C-F bond dominate in crystalline or
organized phases while hydrophobic effects are more important in solution, both
enthalpic and entropic factors may be more favorable for binding fluorinated
analogs than natural substrates. Thus, these studies are expected both to
demonstrate the use of polar hydrophobicity as a tool for the design of hosts
and guests and to contribute to the general understanding of molecular
recognition and hydrogen bonding. The specific recognition and binding of one
molecule by another forms the basis of a myriad of chemical and biochemical
phenomena. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
Professor Stephen DiMagno, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Nebraska - Lincoln, is developing the concept of `polar hydrophobicity` in order
to design new classes of `hosts` and `guests` for molecular recognition.
Professor DiMagno's studies focus on the peculiar physical characteristics of
the carbon-fluorine bond, which is at once both extremely polar and highly
hydrophobic (water-hating). Through the study of sugar derivatives in which
polar and hydrophilic (water-loving) groups are replaced by fluorine atoms,
Professor DiMagno obtains information about the roles of polarity and
hydrophobic interactions in molecular recognition events, gaining both practical
knowledge about the design of new `hosts` and `guests` for general molecular
recognition studies as well as detailed information about the biological
recognition of natural substrates.