* 9727155
* Refinement and Support of the Antarctic Geologic Database
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Rosemary Askin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/2001
* USD 107,085.00

The purpose of this award is to support further development the Antarctic
Geologic Database (AGD), an on-line database for geologic specimens collected in
Antarctica by members of the U.S. geologic community, and to provide for the
rescue of Antarctic geologic collections that are at risk of being lost. This
award, from the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation,
provides funds for a computer system to act as the server for the database, for
personnel costs associated with improving, updating, and running the database,
and for rescue of at-risk collections. A prototype of the AGD was designed as
part of a Small Grant for Exploratory Research. This initial version is now on-
line and available for use (http://polestar.mps.ohio
state.edu/AGDcgibin/Search_agd1.pm). It was tested by 15 geologists with varying
specialties, and comments from the Antarctic geologic community have now been
solicited. Continuing interaction with the community will ensure development of
a useful database. The database allows a user to search for rock samples by
geographic area, geologic age, rock type, formation or unit, fossil or mineral
content, collection purpose, and by whom and when the collection was made. It
informs the user what analyses have been carried out, where those results are
published, and also any possible unpublished results and their location and
availability. It can provide a great variety of descriptive information,
including anecdotal field observations. Most importantly, the Database records
where the rocks are currently stored, and the name and address of the collector
or contact person.