* 9727032
* Acquisition of a Cryogenic Magnetometer for Western         Washington University's Paleomagnetism Lab
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Myrl Beck, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/29/2000
* USD 106,278.00

9727032 Housen This grant provides partial support of the costs of acquiring a
superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) for the paleomagnetics laboratory at
Western Washington University. The PI, Bernie Housen is a recent addition to the
Geology Department faculty at Western Washington, having just completed a
postdoctoral program at the Institute for Rock Magnetism at the University of
Minnesota. In addition to Housen, Professor emeritus Myrl Beck and Russ
Burmeister will utilize the SRM in their research. The addition of an SRM at WWU
will allow analyses of weakly magnetized sediments for research aimed at
understanding the influences of oxidizing fluids and active deformation on the
magnetic properties of accretionary prism sediments and the combined effects of
chemical diagenesis and biological activity on the magnetic records recorded in
marine sediments both in natural samples and in laboratory cultures. This
facility will be unique to the Pacific Northwest region and will support
additional collaborative studies by researchers from nearby institutions
including the University of Washington, University of Puget Sound, University of
Idaho and the University of Montana. This SRM will be housed in a newly
constructed field free room and complement additional paleomagnetic
instrumentation that has recently been acquired (i.e. alternating field
demagnetizer, Kappa bridge). Support for this grant is shared between the Earth
Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program (EAR/IF) and Division of Ocean
Sciences Oceanographic Instrumentation and Technical Service Program (OCE/ITS)
and the Ocean Drilling Program (OCE/ODP) ***