* 9728083
* Molecular Interactions Regulating Cell Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* David Cafiso, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2001
* USD 333,753.00

9728083 Cafiso A number of proteins that are involved in cell signaling pathways
are water-soluble but participate in signaling only when they are associated
with the membrane interface. One objective of this project is to determine the
structures and forces that govern the association of proteins to charged
membrane interfaces. Protein domains known as PH and C2 domains are frequently
found in molecules involved in cell-signaling and are believed to facilitate the
attachment of these proteins to the membrane-solution interface. Although high-
resolution solution and crystal structures for these domains are known,
information on how these domains are positioned on the membrane and interact
with the interface has not been obtained. The goal of this research is to
determine the orientation and position of PH domains and C2 domains on the
membrane interface by the use of site-directed spin-labeling and EPR
spectroscopy. This methodology will also be used to investigate forces
controlling the membrane association of simpler structures that include the
charged domain of MARCKS (the myristoylated alanine rich C kinase substrate).
Finally, proteins such as MARCKS and other highly charged peptides induce the
lateral phase separation of negatively charged lipids including the
phospholipase C substrate PIP2 in fluid phase membranes. This process controls
the timing of second messenger production in cells and is believed to provide a
positive feedback mechanism for some signaling systems. A final objective of the
work will be to investigate the forces and protein structural requirements
necessary for the formation of these domains, which appear to be driven by
electrostatic forces. These measurements will make use of wide line 2H NMR
spectroscopy. Many proteins that function to control the metabolism and growth
of cells are inactive in the cytoplasm of the cell, but become active when they
are attached to the internal surface of the cell membrane. These proteins often
become attached to membr anes as a result of electrostatic interactions between
positively charged regions of proteins and negatively charged membranes. In some
cases, the membrane association of these proteins, and hence their activity, is
regulated by the enzymatic phosphorylation of sites within these positive
domains. Biological systems utilize this electrostatic "switch" to control the
membrane attachment of these proteins and to regulate cell growth and
metabolism. The objective of this project is to investigate the forces and
molecular interactions that attach these proteins to membrane interfaces.
Although the membrane attachment of basic protein domains is a general
phenomenon, there is relatively little information on the structures of the
protein domains and the magnitudes of the electrostatic forces that control
membrane attachment. ***