* 9728547
* Translational Control of RuBPCase Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* James Berry, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/28/2002
* USD 275,800.00

9728547 Berry/Gollnick Amaranth is a dicotyledonous grain plant that uses the
highly efficient c4 pathway of photosynthesis. In amaranth, the expression of
genes encoding the large subunit (LSU, produced from the plastid-encoded rbcL
gene) and small subunit (SSU, produced from nuclear-encoded rbcS genes) of
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBPCase) is strongly regulated by light and by
developmental processes. Previously, it has been shown that very rapid changes
in synthesis of the LSU and SSU polypeptides are induced in response to changes
in illumination, and that these changes are due to regulation at the
translations/level. In addition, alterations in translation from rbcL and RbcS
mRNAs are associated with changes in leaf photosynthetic capacity, and appear to
occur during various stages of leaf development. The research to be conducted
will analyze light-dependent mRNA/protein interactions that occur at the 5' UTR
of rbcL mRNA. The light-dependent binding of two 47 kDa proteins and the
formation of a slow-migrating gel mobility shift complex to processed rbcL 5'UTR
sequences are tightly associated with our observations of light-induced
activation of RuBPCase LSU translation. To better understand the role of
mRNA/protein interactions in regulating the synthesis of this plastid-encoded
photosynthetic polypeptide, the predominant 47 kDa rbcL 5' UTR mRNA binding
proteins will be characterized and their associated factors identified. The
formation and composition of the slow-migrating rbcL 5' UTR RNA binding complex
produced by plastid extracts from light-grown plants will be investigated, as
will the fast-migrating complex produced by the dark-plastid extracts. In
addition, it will be determined how processing differences in the length of the
rbcL 5' UTR prevent or enhance light-dependent protein binding and complex
formation. In the long term, the information acquired from these in depth
biochemical studies will be used to characterize the kinetic properties of the
light-dependent protein/R NA interactions, and to determine the role of the RNA
binding proteins using a transgenic C4 dicot system. These investigations will
provide novel insights into mechanisms that regulate photosynthetic gene
expression at the translational level in the C4 dicot amaranth and other higher
plants. In higher plants light serves both as a primary energy source and as an
environmental signal that regulates development. Investigations into light-
regulated responses in plants are of fundamental importance in determining how
factors controlling plant development respond to environmental stimuli. The
process of protein translation is an integral part of the overall pathway of
gene expression in all organisms. Rapid changes in the translation of specific
mRNAs may be a mechanism for adapting to sudden environmental changes that could
affect the survival of the organism. In addition to providing unique
perspectives about the genetic control of photosynthesis, this basic research
with amaranth will aid in its development as an agriculturally important crop
for food production and for industry.