* 9728409
* How Mussel Gill Mitochondria Choose Between Sulfide and     Endogenous Carbon Substrate as a Source of Electrons for    ATP Production
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* David Kraus, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 03/31/2002
* USD 160,000.00

Deoller 9728409 Hydrogen sulfide, a common constituent of several natural and
man-made aquatic habitats, is both a potent toxin of aerobic cellular
respiration and an electron-rich molecule used by some bacteria as an energy
source. In ciliated gills from Geukensia demissa, a marine mussel from sulfide
rich sediments, sulfide oxidation supports cellular work, indicating for the
first time that in an intact metazoan tissue, mitochondria switch from carbon
catabolism to sulfide oxidation for energy production. In this project, using
excised intact G. demissa gills and isolated gill mitochondria, three central
questions concerning the transition from carbon catabolism to sulfide oxidation
will be addressed: what is the nature of this transition; what factors regulate
it; and, since sulfide exposure history influences capacity for sulfide
oxidation, what mechanism(s) underlies this alternation in capacity? The results
of this work will help rigorously address a long-standing question, namely how
do organisms adapt to sulfide exposure? The findings may indicate that energy
budgets of ecosystems containing sulfide habitats need reconsideration if
sulfide oxidation can result in carbon sparing in metazoans. Assessment of
mitochondrial function using innovative and state-of-the-art techniques will
further our understanding of this possibly widespread adaptation to seemingly in
hospitable environments.