* 9728893
* U.S.-Colombia Planning Visit for Cooperative Coastal        Geological Research
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1998,08/31/1998
* Robert Morton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1998
* USD 3,678.00

9728893 Morton This Americas Program award will fund a short-term visit to
Medellin, Colombia, by Dr. Robert Morton, University of Texas, Austin, to plan
an international cooperative research project in collaboration with Dr. Ivan D.
Correa, Universidad EAFIT, Medellin, involving coastal geologic research focused
on the San Juan delta area, Pacific coast of Colombia. The Pacific coast of
Colombia is a region of significant geological interest because active tectonic
forces coupled with extremely high rainfall, a moderately high tide range, and
moderate wave energy have constructed a coastal plain with diverse depositional
environments and associated ecosystems. An analysis at geological and historical
time scales is necessary to understand its evolution of the coast and to predict
future changes. This visit is intended to specifically address research
responsibilities of the collaborators, such as sediment budget analysis and
tectonic influences, as well as tentative schedules for completion of phases of
the project, and the level of involvement by undergraduate and graduate students
of the US and Colombia. After traveling to the field area to examine river-bank
exposures, observing wave and tidal processes and beach morphologies, they will
return to Medellin to discuss final plans for collaboration, assignment of
responsibilities and schedule for proposal preparation. ***