* 9728791
* Generations of Metachronal Motor Patterns in Segmented      Nervous Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Brian Mulloney, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2001
* USD 309,600.00

Normal locomotion in vertebrates and anlaropods is a complex behavior, and the
neural mechanisms that coordinate their limbs during locomotion are not known
with any certainty. Rhythmic movements of the swimmerets of crayfish are known
to be coordinated by neural networks in their segmental ganglia, and the
analysis of the intersegmental circuit that coordinates movements of neighboring
swimmerets holds promise of new insights into neural mechanisms controlling
locomotion. This proposal presents new ideas about intersegmental coordination
in the swimmeret system. These follow the recent demonstration that an older
hypothesis, which postulated an increased excitability of local circuits in
segments that normally lead each cycle of movements, was incorrect; these local
circuits do not differ in their excitability. Instead, the intersegmental
circuit that coordinates them is polarized. Preliminary physiological results
show that axons of ascending and descending coordinating interneurons can be
isolated separately, so the predictions of the coupled-oscillator model will be
tested by selectively interrupting these axons and comparing the system' s
subsequent performance with the prediction. The proposal also presents a new
cellular model of the coordinating circuit that is based on published
descriptions of individual coordinating units. The cellular model was developed
by testing the performance of many alternative patterns of connections with
components of the local circuits in each ganglion that coordinating interneurons
might make. To test this new model, its responses to non-uniform excitation of
local circuits will be compared with the swimmeret system' s responses to non-
uniform excitation of individual ganglia. To test the cellular model' s
predictions, the neurons that are targets of individual coordinating
interneurons will be ma pped electrophysiologically. In experimental
preparations, firing of each interneuron will be perturbed with injected
currents. The system' s response to these perturbations will be measured and
compared with simulations of the same perturbations in the model.