* 9728656
* Molecular Basis of Sperm-Egg Binding in Frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* William Lennarz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Although great progress has been made in describing in detail receptor-ligand
interactions in a wide variety of biological systems, knowledge about such
interactions that mediate cell-cell adhesion, where the "receptor" is present on
one cell and the "ligand" is on another, is much less developed. Fertilization
is a specialized case of cell-cell adhesion that has a well-defined and profound
endpoint, formation of a zygote. Two systems that have been studied extensively
in this respect are the sea urchin and the mouse. A central issue to be resolved
in these systems is how, following interaction at the extracellular coat, the
sperm moves to the next stage, interacts and fuses with the egg plasma membrane.
Remarkably, the frog, although used very extensively and productively to study
basic phenomena related to early development, has received relatively little
attention with respect to the mechanism of gamete interaction during
fertilization. The frog system, perhaps better than any of the other biological
systems under study, has the potential to lead to elucidation of the staged
interactions of the sperm and the egg that culminate in fusion of the two
gametes. This is the case because 1 ) the initial interaction of the sperm with
a glycoprotein in the frog extracellular coat known as the vitelline envelope
(VE) has been characterized and 2) the relationship between the VE and the
plasma membrane in the frog has been well studied ultrastructurally by others.
In this proposal a glycoprotein (gp69/64) found in the VE and shown to be
involved in sperm binding will be further studied with respect to the structure
of its polypeptide chain and its oligosaccharide chains. The role of each
structural element of this glycoprotein in sperm binding and how this process is
developmentally regulated will be studied. Preliminary evidence has been
obtained for the presence of a high molecular weight glycoprotein in the plasma
membrane that cross reacts with antibody to the VE glycoprotein , gp69/64. A
study of the transition from VIE binding to plasma membrane binding and the
molecular basis of the latter event will be under taken. To do this, eggs from
which a portion of the VE has been removed to expose a "window" of the plasma
membrane, as well as eggs completely denuded of their VE, will be studied for
sperm binding. Finally, fusion of the plasma membrane of the sperm and egg will
be investigated and the possible role of the cross-reactive egg plasma membrane
protein in this event will be examined. It is anticipated that these studies
will bring new insight into the multistep interactions between sperm and egg
that culminate in fertilization.