* 9728599
* Neural Correlates of Selective Attention in                 Auditory Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Zoltan Fuzessery, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 03/31/2002
* USD 239,304.00

IBN-9728599 Fuzessery The world of sounds produces an auditory 'scene' which is
an analogue of the way we see a visual scene with our eyes. In a complex
auditory scene, different acoustic signals from different spatial origins
produce different 'streams' of sounds competing for the brain's attention.
Further, it has been assumed that particular circuits of nerve cells act as
dedicated 'feature detectors' to extract characteristic aspects of important
signals such as communication songs or language. This project combines anatomy
with physiology to study these issues in the unusual model auditory system of
the pallid bat. This animal uses regular hearing to detect its prey moving on
the ground in the dark, but it also uses ultrasonic hearing for echolocation
during flight, for navigation. Some of the anatomical pathways in the brain show
clear segregation of two pathways, one for the 'passive' listening for prey, and
one for the 'active' listening for the bat's own echolocation vocalizations.
However, in the auditory cortex, some single nerve cells (neurons) respond to
both the low- and the high-frequency signals. Functional mapping of the cortex,
and studies of the responses of single cells to competing inputs in this unusual
system will provide clear evidence of how well cortical organization can serve
more than one functions, and to see whether single nerve cells can shift their
function depending on the behavioral context of the incoming signal. Results of
this work will clarify some very fundamental principles in sensory processing by
the brain in general, beyond simply hearing, and could have potential importance
for developing remote sensors and hearing aids.