* 9728778
* Function of the Cofactors of Complex II from Escherichia    coli
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Gary Cecchini, Northern California Institute for Research and Education
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 270,000.00

Gary Cecchini MCB-9728778 1. Technical Abstract This study is aimed to
investigate the function of the cofactors of fumarate reductase (menaquinol-
fumarate oxidoreductase) (QFR) and succinate dehydrogenase (succinate-ubiquinone
oxidoreductase) (SQR) from Escherichia coli. These two membrane-bound enzyme
complexes, found in most prokaryotes and eukaryotes, are structurally and
genetically related and are important components of anaerobic and aerobic
respiratory chains, respectively. The cofactors of the enzyme include a
covalently bound FAD cofactor, bound to the largest membrane extrinsic subunit
of the complex which contains the substrate binding site. The iron-sulfur
containing subunit of the complex contains three distinct Fe-S clusters. The
Fe-S clusters are: Center 1, a 2Fe-2S 2+,1+ cluster; Center 2, a 4Fe-4S 2+,1+
cluster; and Center 3, a 3Fe-4S 1+,0 cluster. The membrane intrinsic domain of
the complexes contain two hydrophobic subunits which provide site(s) for the
interaction of the enzyme with quinone cofactors. In addition, the SQR complex,
(but not QFR) contains a heme prosthetic group. The enzyme complexes can
catalyze the same reactions with both SQR and QFR proficient at succinate
oxidation, however, only QFR is highly active as a fumarate reductase. The
nature of electron transfer through the highly similar enzyme complexes and
their cofactors must therefore be responsible for the inability of SQR to
efficiently reduce fumarate in catalytic assays. The reasons for this difference
will be a major focus of this proposal. Experiments are designed to use
biochemical, biophysical, and molecular biological techniques to investigate the
protein environment responsible for the functioning of the FAD, Fe-S, and heme
cofactors in the enzymes. The enzyme complexes are easily manipulated by site-
directed mutagenesis and both wild type and mutant forms of the enzyme can be
isolated in very high yield. The large amounts of highly purified enzyme complex
which is produced aids in EPR, magnetic circular dichroism (MCD), and resonance
Raman spectroscopic methods used to analyze the environment of the Fe-S clusters
and the redox potential of these important cofactors. Site-directed mutants of
both enzyme complexes will be constructed and analyzed for their effect on the
Fe-S clusters. This will be done to determine if the redox potential of the Fe-S
clusters can be manipulated in a predictable manner and if the differences in
redox potential for the Fe-S clusters of SQR and QFR are the major reason for
the differences in the catalytic activity between the two enzyme complexes.
Investigations will also be begun to determine if time resolved kinetic
measurements of electron transfer through the various cofactors of QFR and SQR
can be measured. This will be accomplished by following the photooxidation of
pyranine dyes placed specifically at the active site of SQR and QFR and
monitoring electron transfer through the FAD, heme, and quinone cofactors of the
enzymes. These studies will aid in the understanding of electron transfer
reactions through proteins. Important information will also be provided on the
differences in electron transfer through the highly similar QFR and SQR enzyme
complexes. Gary Cecchini, Ph.D. MCB-9728778 2. Non-technical abstract This study
investigates the function of the cofactors of two enzyme complexes important for
the function of respiratory function in cells in both an aerobic and anaerobic
environment. The enzyme complexes studied are fumarate reductase (menaquinol-
fumarate oxidoreductase, QFR) and succinate dehydrogenase (succinate-ubiquinone
oxidoreductase, SQR) usually from the bacterium Escherichia coli. These two
membrane-bound enzyme complexes, found in most prokaryotes and eukaryotes, are
structurally and genetically related. Both enzyme complexes contain a covalently
bound FAD cofactor, bound to the largest membrane extrinsic subunit of the
complex, which also contains t he dicarboxylate binding site. Each enzyme also
contains three distinct iron-sulfur clusters which participate in the electron
transfer function of the enzymes. The iron-sulfur clusters have distinct redox
potentials spanning a range of several hundred mV. In addition, to the iron-
sulfur cluster the SQR complex, but not the QFR complex, contains a heme
cofactor as an additional prosthetic group. The major questions being
investigated are what factors in the protein environment control the redox
potential of the various prosthetic groups in these two enzymes and thus the
path of electron flow through the complexes. Under defined conditions succinate
dehydrogenase acts as a "tunnel diode" in directing the path of electrons
through the various prosthetic groups which act as the electron wires in the
protein complex. Using the techniques of site-directed mutagenesis and electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) the protein environment will be
modified to understand how one can alter the rate and directionality of electron
flow in these enzymes by modification of the redox potential of the cofactors.
These studies will allow a more complete understanding of ways nature designs
the micro protein machinery involved in electron transfer reactions. In
addition, the studies will show how two very similar enzyme complexes can be
poised to catalyze different chemical reactions.