* 9728992
* Computerization of the Herpetology Collection at the        Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Lee Fitzgerald, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 12/31/2001
* USD 73,272.00

The aim of this project is to computerize 69,000+ catalogued specimens in the
Division of Amphibians and Reptiles, Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collection
(TCWC), and disseminate information on holdings via the WWW and the Combined
Herpetological Collections Database the Division of Amphibians and Reptiles at
Texas Cooperative Wildlife Collection houses &gt;80,000 individually numbered
specimens from throughout the world, with exceptionally strong collections from
Texas, Mexico, and the Neotropics. The collection's size ranks high among
university-based collections lacking stand-alone museums. It is the largest
collections of Texas herps by far, with more than 45,000 catalogued specimens
from all areas of the states. Holdings from Mexico and Latin America are
extensive, and make up about 50% of the collection. Areas of taxonomic strength
include Teiid lizards,Phrynosomatid lizards, and snakes. The collection contains
representative of 93% of amphibian and reptile families, 42% of existing genera,
and 22% of existing herptile species. The collection houses 37 holotypes and 868
paratypes. The growth rate is 2,200 specimens/year over the last five years and
compares well with any herpetological collection. One of the most important
outcomes of this project will be a searchable database of holdings on the TCWC
web page. The page will print searches to the level of county by species. Data
files will also be forwarded to the Combined Herpetological Collections Data
Base, maintained at the California Academy of Sciences. Use of the collection
will increase significantly after computerization and dissemination of our
holdings.