* 9728774
* RUI:  The Isolation and Characterization of Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins Associated with E2A in Plasma Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Craig Vierra, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 09/30/2001
* USD 128,630.00

Vierra

The importance of E2A proteins as potent regulators of early B cell formation is
well established, but their role in the mature B- to plasma cell transition
remains unclear. Recently, a new E2A-containing E-box binding species,
designated P-E2A, has been detected during the mature B- to plasma cell
transition. The objectives of the research include 1) investigating the
transcriptional components and role of the stage-specific E2A-containing
complex, P-E2A; 2) identifying other protein(s) that interact with E2A in plasma
cells; 3) characterizing these E2A-interacting protein(s). To accomplish these
specific goals, protein-protein interactional cloning systems will be performed
to delineate the molecular components of P-E2A and other E2A-interacting protein
complexes unique to plasma cells. The retrieval of genes encoding potential
E2A-interacting proteins will be subsequently analyzed using a broad spectrum of
genetic and biochemical techniques, including gene cloning and sequencing, RNA-
and immunoblotting, electrophoretic-mobility shift analyses, and DNA
transfections in a variety of cultured cells. Other E2A-interacting proteins
restricted to cell types distinct from plasma cells have been identified and
demonstrated to be important transcriptional regulators of processes such as
cellular differentiation and proliferation. This project will determine whether
E2A-interacting transcription factors found in plasma cells play a similar role
in processes such as plasma cell formation or cell-specific gene expression e.g.
antibody gene transcription. The results of these studies will identify
transcription factors whose pattern of expression is restricted to the plasma
cell lineage and will provide data that will help to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms that govern cell-restricted eukaryotic gene expression. E2A proteins
are critical transcriptional regulators of the immune system. In particular, E2A
gene products are required for the development of specialized cells that
synthesize antibodies. This project will enhance the knowledge of
E2A-associating proteins and provide insight into how interactions between E2A
and various regulatory proteins result in the formation of DNA-protein complexes
that regulate antibody production in plasma cells.