* 9728124
* NADH Dehydrogenase (Complex I) of the African Parasite      Trypanosoma brucei
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Diana Beattie, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* nicole peterson
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728124 Beattie and Kiaira The overall goal of this research is to characterize
the putative rotenone-sensitive NADH dehydrogenase, or complex I, that has been
shown to be present in the mitochondrion of the protozoan Trypanosoma brucei. T.
brucei has a dual life cycle in both the bloodstream of the mammalian host,
where the energy needs of the organism are met by glycolysis, and the insect
vector, where a cytochrome containing electron transport chain is present. The
observation that low activities of rotenone-sensitive NADH dehydrogenase are
present in the long slender bloodstream forms that lack cyanide-sensitive
respiration suggested the presence of NADH dehydrogenase in the bloodstream
forms; however, immunoblotting studies with specific antibodies indicated that a
subunit of complex I located in the membrane-spanning region of the complex was
not present in the mitochondria of the bloodstream forms while two of the
subunits located in the peripheral region of the complex were present. These
results have led to the novel hypothesis that an incomplete NADH dehydrogenase
with partial enzymatic activity but lacking the membrane portion with proton
pumping capability may be assembled in the bloodstream forms prior to the
formation of the complete proton-pumping complex I. To test this hypothesis the
presence of subunits localized in the peripheral and membrane arms of NADH
dehydrogenase in the long slender bloodstream and procyclic forms of T. brucei
will be established and compared. Antibodies will be generated against antigenic
synthetic peptides predicted from the gene sequence and will be used to
immunoblot mitochondrial membranes and to immunoprecipitate these subunits from
radiolabeled trypanosomes. The association of the subunits of NADH dehydrogenase
into a multimeric complex will be examined by co-immunoprecipitation of
associated subunits in the complex with an antibody against subunit 7, a protein
localized in the connecting fragment of the complex. A comparison of the number
of s ubunits present in the complex of the long slender and procyclic forms of
T. brucei will indicate whether an incomplete complex has been formed in the
long slender bloodstream form prior to the formation of the complete proton
pumping NADH dehydrogenase. A greater understanding of the metabolism, and
especially the bioenergetics of T. brucei, will permit the design of better and
more appropriate approaches for control of trupanosomiasis, a disease of cattle
with severe economic consequences to sub-Saharan Africa including Kenya.
Moreover, the results of these proposed studies may provide information about
the biogenesis of this most complicated complex of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain.