* 9728609
* RUI:  The Synthesis and Degradation of a Unique Bacterial   Polymer
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Adele Wolfson, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* nicole peterson
* 04/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9728609 Allen The objective of the research is to study the synthesis and
degradation of the only known nonprotein polymer whose function is the storage
of nitrogen, using a multidisciplinary approach involving three faculty members
and undergraduate women students in chemistry, biological chemistry and
biological sciences. The metabolism of cyanophycin (multi-L-arginyl poly
L-aspartic acid ) will be investigated by enzyme analysis and purification and
by in vivo and in vitro NMR spectroscopy after labeling cyanobacteria with 15
N-labeled nitrogen sources. Nitrogen metabolism will be studied during normal
growth and during growth under various conditions of nutrient stress.
Experiments will be designed to determine whether cyanophycin has a dynamic role
in cyanobacterial metabolism. Cyanophycin is the only known nonprotein polymer
whose function is the storage of nitrogen. Little is known about mechanisms of
its synthesis and degradation although it accumulates in large amounts during
nutrient stress and during nitrogen fixation. It is mobilized when cyanobacteria
are starved for nitrogen. If cyanophycin is an obligatory intermediate in the
flow of nitrogen into the metabolic pool, its role in cyanobacterial metabolism
will be central. It is therefore important to understand regulatory strategies
and how storage is integrated with intermediary metabolism. These studies will
also help define how macronutrient limitation and stress alter metabolic fluxes
in cells. The strategy of accumulating nitrogen when it is available and using
it later must impart an important selective advantage to the organism employing
that strategy. Studies of the mechanisms involved in specific environmental
responses will provide new information about gene regulation and pathways
leading from the sensing of environmental signals to the regulation of enzymatic
activities.