* 9728733
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Phase Change in Maize and     Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* R. Poethig, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2001
* USD 305,000.00

Leaves produced during the juvenile and adult phases of shoot development in
maize are morphologically, anatomically, and biochemically distinct. Loss-of-
function mutations of GLOSSY15 (GL15) cause the epidermis of some juvenile
leaves (leaves 3 to 6) to acquire adult characteristics, implying that GL15
normally functions both to promote the expression of juvenile epidermal traits
and to repress the expression of adult traits. GL15 is the only gene involved in
the regulation of phase-specific differences in leaf morphology that has been
cloned. As such, it is useful not only as a molecular marker for phase-specific
cell identity in maize, but also as an entry point into the molecular mechanism
of this poorly understood phenomenon. The research proposed here will provide
the basic information about GL15 necessary for understanding the function of
this gene and the way in which its expression is regulated. The expression
pattern of GL15 will be examined by in situ analysis of mRNA at different stages
of leaf development, and at different stages during the growth of the shoot.
This expression analysis will also be conducted on mutations that affect phase
change (gef, Tpl, Tp2 and Tp3, dl, vp8) to determine if the effect of these
mutations on epidermal identity is mediated by changes in the amount or
expression pattern of GL15 mRNA. Other members of this gene family will be
cloned, their genomic structure and expression pattern will be characterized,
and their function will be determined by isolating Mutator insertions that
disrupt their expression. In parallel with this analysis of GL15-1ike genes, Dr.
Poethig will conduct a screen for genes that may be functionally redundant with
GL15 by screening for mutations that affect the identity of leaves one and two
in a gll5-H mutant background. Finally, Dr. Poethig will determine the function
of GL15 in Arabidopsis by cloning the orthologue of GL15 in this species and
determining its loss-of-function phenotype.