* 9728557
* Investigation of a Meiotic Recombination Hotspot
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Robert Malone, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2002
* USD 320,000.00

9728557 Malone Meiosis is a required part of the life cycle for most eucaryotes;
it is necessary for the production of haploid gametes. It has evolutionary
importance as well, since much of the variation upon which natural selection
acts is created during meiosis. There are a number of unique steps in meiosis,
one of which is high levels of genetic recombination. Recombination is also
required for proper chromosome pairing and for a proper first meiotic chromosome
segregation. This research focuses on a region (a "hotspot") around the HIS2
gene in S. cerevisiae (baker's yeast) where recombination occurs frequently in
meiosis. Correlated with meiotic recombination at HIS2 are high levels of two
meiosis-specific double strand DNA breaks (DSBs). The distribution and
properties of such breaks in meiosis, both at specific hotspots and along whole
yeast chromosomes, is consistent with their role as intermediates in meiotic
recombination. This project has two aims: 1 To finish the analysis of the cis-
acting sequences required, and the breaks that occur, at HIS2, and 2 To define
and study the trans-factors responsible for the HIS2 hotspot. The questions
asked about the HIS2 hotspot in part of the research include: 1 How much DNA is
sufficient for a hotspot to be recognized wherever it is located? 2 Is the
transcriptional interference hypothesis correct at HIS2? 3 Is there a clear site
(not sequence) specificity for DSB sites? 3 Is there competition between natural
break sites, and does it occur in cis and/or in trans? 4 How many actual breaks
occur in the region of the DSB? 5 Are the ends of the DSBs at hotspots flush or
do they have 5' overlaps? Data from other hotspots gives two different answers.
6 Are all break sites (even those in coding regions) located in "open" chromatin
regions? The second part of this research is aimed at finding factors which
affect the HIS2 hotspot, but not recombination generally i.e., which create (or
antagonize) the recombinogenic environ ment at HIS2 . Such factors might include
at least three types of gene products: 1 Factors required for the long range
chromatin structure of the region, 2 Factors required for short range chromatin
structure at the DSB sites, and 3 Factors specific to the HIS2 locus not
involved in chromatin structure. Any of these three types might affect other
hotspots as well, and experiments will be conducted to ask that question.