* 9728240
* Thermodynamic Models for Macromolecular Crystallization
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Pui Ho, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2001
* USD 271,875.00

9728240 Ho The primary objective of the current research is to develop a
testable thermodynamic model to describe macromolecular crystallization. This
project will use a heptanucleotide crystal system that is unique, in that the
thermodynamics of crystallization can be studied using a crystallographic
titration assay. This experimental system is a series of heptanucleotides that
form duplexes. The individual strands are distinct in the lattice, and can be
accurately quantified crystallographically or chromatographically. By varying
the ratio of the two strands in the crystallization solutions, we can determine
the energies of interaction between duplexes during crystallization. Transitions
between lattice types were observed from initial studies to be highly
cooperative. Thus, the assay has led to estimates for the energies and
cooperativity for interactions between the DNA duplexes that form the initial
seed crystal. The proposed studies are to derive a model to accurately describe
this crystallization titration, accurately determine the parameters for this
model, then extend the model to be more generally applicable to other crystal
systems. The models will be validated by monitoring the effects of
concentrations on the strand compositions of the crystals. X-ray crystallography
has contributed significantly to our understanding of macromolecular structure
and function, particularly at the atomic level. However, the method is entirely
dependent on the ability to grow diffraction quality single crystals. Although a
number of recent tools have been developed to facilitate the crystallization of
macromolecules, the actual process of crystallization remains poorly understood.
The result of the proposed studies will be a thermodynamic model that should be
useful as a tool for the rational design of crystallization studies. The model
will be generally useful as a predictive tool for crystallizing nucleic acids
and proteins. The model will incorporate measurable properties of mo lecules to
predict the probabilities for seed formation versus crystal growth, and
conditions that may favor these two processes.