* 9728881
* Ciliary Neurotrophic Factor and Synaptic Components in      Developing Chick Heart
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Stanley Halvorsen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 63,016.00

9728881 HALVORSEN The secreted, biologically active molecules called cytokines
play key roles in the differentiation and maturation of a variety of tissues
during embryonic development. It is important to determine the molecular
mechanisms for these cytokine actions for a general understanding of nervous
system development. The recently described "neuropoietic" cytokines have
potential roles in the developing nervous and cardiovascular systems which are,
as yet, largely undefined. The overall goal of this study is to understand the
functional role of the cytokine ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) in
development of the heart and its innervation. The mechanisms important for
expression of CNTF receptors during development will be investigated, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate these receptors in heart tissue and in
cultured myocytes during parasympathetic synapse formation will be defined, and
the effects of CNTF on key synaptic components will be identified in the heart.
Upon completion of the project three fundamental questions will have been
addressed. (1) Does the change in CNTF receptor levels result in changes in
tissue CNTF sensitivity? (2) What is (are) the mechanism(s) of regulation of
CNTF receptors in heart? (3) Does CNTF play a role in parasympathetic synapse
formation in the developing atria? Over the long term, downstream gene and
biochemical targets of CNTF and related cytokine action in heart will be
determined. These studies represent some of the first to define the expression
and function of CNTF receptors in the cardiovascular system. With this new
information we will have a better understanding of the mechanisms that regulate
nerve-heart cell responses to cytokines during embryonic development and of
mechanisms that may be important for maintenance of these functions in the
adult.