* 9728750
* SGER:  Laboratory Studies on the Influence of Small-Scale   Turbulance on Encounter and Feeding of Aquatic Predators
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Victor Kennedy, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1999
* USD 49,991.00

Dr. Thomas Miller and associates will develop, construct and test a novel
apparatus that generates small-scale turbulence of similar characteristics to
those observed in the coastal ocean. The objective in developing the apparatus
is to provide the capability to test hypotheses regarding the role of small-
scale turbulence in regulating the feeding ecology of planktonic predators. This
capability will vastly improve out abilities to understanding the role of small-
scale physical processes as they influence life in the sea. Two versions of the
apparatus will be constructed that differ in volume. To test the efficacy of the
instrumentation, the flow fields in the apparatus will be characterized using
acoustic and laser doppler velocimeters. The ability to document the effects of
small-scale turbulence on foraging of planktonic predators depends on the
ability to quantify foraging behavior. 3-D videography will be used to quantify
predator and prey behaviors. The planned initial research that will be
facilitated by this small grant for exploratory research will focus on four
questions: a) Can we accurately measure prey concentrations from video images
alone?; b) Can we estimate rates of attack and encounter from video recordings?;
c) Can we estimate feeding rates from video recordings?; and d) Can we
accurately measure prey behavior with our video system? These questions will be
addressed in a series of controlled experiments involving striped bass larvae,
Morone saxatilis, and the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi as predators, and brine
shrimp nauplii, Artemia sp., and copepodites of Eurtemora sp. as prey. Behavior-
based estimates of encounter, attack and feeding rates will be compared with
independent estimates derived from analyzes of the functional responses of
predators within the chamber.