* 9728405
* Examination of the Biochemical and Molecular Mechanisms     Underlying the Establishment of Cnidarian-Algal Symbioses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Virginia Weis, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 12/31/2001
* USD 259,998.00

Weis 9728405 Symbiotic associations between two or more unrelated organisms are
found throughout every ecosystem. These relationships encompass a spectrum of
lifestyles, from mutualistic to parasitic, and from extracellular to
intracellular. Among the most significant marine mutualisms are those between
corals and their algal symbionts, which together form the foundation of the
entire coral reef ecosystem. A great deal is known about corals on a macroscale
level, such as their global distribution and ecology. However, microscale
processes of inter-partner communication and regulation that occur during the
initiation, establishment and maintenance of these symbioses remain largely
unexplored. A lack of basic knowledge of these processes has hampered efforts to
understand the global phenomenon of coral bleaching, which is the result of the
breakdown of the symbiosis. Widespread bleaching, which leads to coral death and
reef degradation, is considered a serious environmental threat. This study will
take a multileveled approach to the examination of the initial events
surrounding the onset of symbiosis between corals and their symbiotic algae. The
PIs will examine when and how the symbiosis is established during the natural
life cycle of corals. Secondly, the PIs will investigate the effects that the
establishment of the partnership has on the biochemistry and molecular biology
of the host coral.