* 9728695
* Mechanism Underlying Temperature Regulation of the          Drosophila Circadian Clock
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Isaac Edery, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2001
* USD 254,902.00

9728695 Edery Project Description (Mechanism underlying temperature regulation
of the Drosophila circadian clock). A wide range of organisms, from bacteria to
humans, display daily rhythms in physiological and behavioral phenomena. These
rhythms are controlled by a biological time keeping device termed the circadian
(~24 hours) 'clock'. Malfunctions in this timing mechanism are associated with
numerous disorders in humans, including manic-depression, seasonal affective
disorders (SAD), and chronic sleep problems in the elderly. In addition, modern
ailments such as increased rates of accidents during rotating work shift
schedules and symptoms associated with 'jet-lag' are manifestations of the
strong influence that circadian clocks have on human physiology and performance.
Moreover, it is well documented that the efficacy of many drugs, including those
used for chemotherapy, is highly dependent on the time of drug delivery. A major
goal in the study of daily rhythms is to try and understand how circadian clocks
function. To this end we are using the powerful genetics available in the
fruitfly as a model animal system to study the mechanism underlying circadian
rhythms. Interestingly, recent findings demonstrate that the circadian clocks in
fruit flies and humans are very similar. Funding from the National Science
Foundation (NSF) will be used to identify the individual components that are
required for the assembly of a functional biological time keeping device. A main
objective for the funding from NSF is to support graduate and undergraduate
students who will participate in the development and execution of the research
goals. As a result young scientists will be trained in the latest techniques in
biotechnology, biochemistry and genetics. Furthermore, these students will be
exposed to a wide spectrum of scientific disciplines in the life sciences, inc
luding neurobiology and behavior. By participating in NSF funded research at
Rutgers University students will also have the opportunity to attend seminars
and interact with other students and faculty. Finally, it is anticipated that
findings from the research supported by NSF will be published in peer-reviewed
science journals and as such will contribute to a better appreciation in the
general public of the important role that circadian rhythms have on human
physiology and behavior.