* 9728179
* RUI: Regulation of Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Rachel Sterne-Marr, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 194,250.00

9728179 Sterne-Marr G protein coupled receptors are membrane bound proteins
which convert light and hormonal signals into intracellular messages. Uncoupling
of the receptor from its immediate downstream signal transducer, the G protein,
occurs rapidly following exposure to a stimulus and results in cessation of
response to the hormone (desensitization). Receptor phosphorylation by the
(adrenergic receptor kinase ( ARK) is hormone-dependent and promotes G
protein/receptor uncoupling. Prior to hormone treatment ARK exists in an
inactive state. Upon activation of the receptor by hormone, the catalytic
activity of the kinase is stimulated and the receptor is phosphorylated,
resulting in desensitization. Little is known about the structure of ARK, the
molecular interactions which maintain the pre-active kinase in its basal state,
and the conformation changes which convert the pre-active kinase into an active
enzyme. The goals of this project are to understand how interactions within the
ARK protein maintain this molecule in an inactive form and how interactions
between ARK and a hormone stimulated receptor induce ARK activation. The
techniques of mass spectrometry, chemical cross-linking and random targeted
mutagenesis will be used to identify the amino acids in ARK which keep this
protein in the pre-active form. Fusion proteins, site-directed mutagenesis,
enzyme assays and ARK /receptor binding assays will be used to identify regions
that interact with the receptors. Since ARK is a member of a family of G protein
coupled receptor kinases which regulate G protein-coupled receptors, it provides
a good model to study the structure and activation of this class of proteins.
The interaction of a hormone or neurotransmitter with a specific receptor on the
surface of a target cell initiates a chemical signaling event. A molecule known
st a G protein, because it binds GTP, interacts with the receptor and downstream
signaling molecules and a specific response occurs. To terminate the signal a
specific protein, the adrenergic receptor kinase ( ARK) adds a phosphate group
to the receptors. This research is directed at the mechanisms by which this
protein becomes activated and interacts with the receptor. These studies will
provide new information about activation of this class of proteins. ***