* 9728619
* Quinate, Focal Point of Upstream Metabolism Leading to      Lignin
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,09/10/1999
* Roy Jensen, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* A Berry
* 09/10/1999
* USD 202,474.00

9728619 Jensen and Bonner Quinic acid is one of the most abundant natural
products in the biosphere. It is accumulated in some tissues of woody plants,
e.g., newly forming needles of conifers, in amounts equaling up to 10% of the
total dry weight. Quinic acid is exceedingly active as an intermediate which
possesses alternative metabolic fates. In xylem-forming cells it is mainly
transformed to phenylpropanoid precursors of lignin. In autotrophic cells, on
the other hand, quinic acid is an effective precursor of other phenolic
compounds - the most noteworthy ones being chlorogenic acid, gallic acid and
protocatechuic acid. Chlorogenic acid and gallic acid confer resistance to
herbivore predation and phytopathogenic microorganisms. Protocatechuic acid is
catabolized to central intermediates and can serve as a carbon-source reserve
during dark metabolism. Finally, quinic acid is a highly soluble, readily
transported metabolite which can serve as a versatile precursor of aromatic
amino acids in different tissue compartments. Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), the
experimental system, is under intensive study by others in order to understand
and manipulate lignin content. Therefore, many biological and molecular-genetic
resources are available to support this project, including a tissue-culture
system which is lignin-inducible. The goal of this research is to elucidate the
nature of the interfacing upstream metabolism which delivers L-phenylalanine to
the phenylpropanoid metabolic section. It will focus upon three quinate
dehydrogenase proteins: nQDH-NADP and nQDH-NAD in needle tissue and xQDH-NADP in
xylem-forming cells. NQDH-NADP appears to be trifunctional, having catalytic
domains which carry out the overall conversion of quinate to protocatechuate.
The enzymes will be purified, used to raise specific antibodies, and
characterized for physical and catalytic properties. cDNA clones corresponding
to each QDH will be obtained by immunoscreening. Specific antibody will be used
for immunogold EM cytoloca lization. Regulation will be examined by monitoring
levels of enzyme activity, amounts of protein, and transcript abundance in
response to developmental and environmental cues. The longterm objective is to
understand how this entire metabolic network is differentially regulated to
accomplish the dynamic alternative molecular fates of quinate. This is expected
to provide ultimately a rational basis for biotechnological manipulations
designed to modify lignin content by alteration of flux toward and away from
quinate in different cellular compartments and in different specialized tissues.