* 9728728
* Ca2+ Mediated Mechanisms Regulating Neuronal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Denise Figlewicz, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 154,998.00

9728728 HOLLIDAY There is much evidence indicating that the development of
undifferentiated cells into neurons is dependent both upon intrinsic patterns of
gene expression as well as on interactions with neighboring cells, including
electrical signaling. Early in neuronal differentiation, the elevation of
intracellular calcium ions carries much of the electrical signal. Calcium
elevation is one of the first steps in the activation of a large variety of
cellular signal transduction cascades in all cell types and is therefore very
likely to be involved in regulating gene expression and other "experience-
dependent" mechanisms that regulate development. There is accumulating evidence
that precisely timed changes in the cellular mechanisms that produce transient
increases in intracellular calcium may underlie the "critical periods" of
neuronal development. This project is designed to determine how the alteration
of the level of expression of specific calcium ion regulatory proteins affects
transient calcium signaling and subsequent neuronal development. Two calcium
regulatory proteins will be separately investigated: a calcium buffering protein
(calbindin) and an intracellular calcium induced calcium release channel (CICR).
The level of these proteins will be experimentally manipulated by the
introduction DNA constructs that either produce additional target protein or
specifically reduce endogenous target protein expression. The experiments will
be performed in a well- controlled and characterized culture system of rat
cerebellar granule neurons. Since intracellular calcium homeostasis is tightly
controlled by a variety of mechanisms, alteration of one target may trigger
compensatory changes in other regulatory mechanisms. Therefore, the
physiological consequences of changing protein expression will be measured with
imaging techniques that directly measure intracellular calcium ion
concentrations, both at rest and during stimulation. The developmental
consequences of changes in target protein expression will be assessed by
measuring the acquisition of several developmental markers. The results of these
studies will refine our understanding of how calcium transients regulate
neuronal development at the single cell level, and develop tools to more
definitively test hypotheses about the mechanisms regulating neuronal synaptic
organization. The long-range goal of this project is to transiently manipulate
calcium regulatory mechanisms during development in vivo to determine whether
perturbations of calcium levels, during sensitive defined in vitro, will result
in developmental delays or permanent changes in the mature central nervous
system.