* 9728140
* Pattern Formation in the Drosophila Eye Disc
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Jessica Treisman, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Treisman 9728140 The Drosophila eye consists of a highly ordered array of
identical sub-units, each containing a defined set of photoreceptors.
Photoreceptor differentiation begins at the posterior margin of the larval eye
imaginal disc and gradually progresses anteriorly, in a process which requires
the activity of hedgehog (hh) protein secreted by the differentiated
photoreceptors. The initiation of differentiation is driven by the TGF-Beta
family member decapentaplegic (dpp), which is expressed at the posterior and
lateral margins of the eye disc. The inhibitory effect of the Wnt family member
wingless (wg), present at the lateral margins, restricts initiation to the
posterior margin. The mechanisms by which wg inhibits the function of dpp
laterally and dpp prevents the expression of wg posteriorly are not understood.
Dr. Treisman proposes to determine the molecular basis for their effects on each
other by studying the effects of loss of function or ectopic activity of
components of the dpp and wg signaling pathways. She will then investigate
whether dpp and wg are regulated by, and mediate the effects of, five genes that
are required for eye formation. She has also conducted a screen for new
mutations affecting the size and shape of the eye, which may affect genes
required for eye disc specification or patterning. This screen was done by
making clones of homozygous mutant cells in the eyes of phenotypically wild type
heterozygous flies, allowing us to examine the role in eye development of genes
that are also required in the embryo. Dr. Treisman plans to characterize these
mutations and clone the novel genes that are required for cells in the eye disc
to develop as retinal tissue. The observed structural and functional homology
between the Pax-6 proteins encoded by Drosophila eyeless, mouse Small eye and
human Aniridia confirms the similarity of the basic mechanisms underlying eye
development in flies and vertebrates. This research is expected to identify
novel molecules which are li kely to function in the development of vertebrates
as well as of Drosophila.