* 9728935
* Plant Peroxisome Biogenesis:  Acquisition/Function of       Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Richard Trelease, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 11/30/2001
* USD 363,889.00

9728935 Trelease Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-enclosed compartments
(organelles) in which various cellular functions are carried out. This isolation
of various functions within physical boundaries is critical to the life of the
cell: it allows the cell to regulate the functions of each compartment
separately; and it prevents the contents of each compartment from interfering
with others. However, it does require that the cells have mechanisms for sorting
and translocating individual proteins to their proper subcellular locations. One
type of intracellular compartment is the peroxisome, which occurs in virtually
all eukaryotic cells. Peroxisomes participate in a very wide range of metabolic
pathways, depending on the cell or tissue type in which they function. The
overall goal of this project is to understand the complicated means by which
peroxisomal membrane proteins (PMPs) become selectively integrated into the
boundary membrane of peroxisomes (glyoxysomes) in oilseed seedlings, and to
understand the functions of such PMPs within the membrane as the seedlings
develop. Three specific objectives are proposed relative to the biogenesis of
plant peroxisomes. The first aim is to discover the putative membrane
peroxisomal targeting signal (mPTS) responsible for targeting peroxisomal
ascorbate peroxidase (pAPX) to glyoxysomes, and define the topographic
orientation of the protein within the membrane. This information is particularly
relevant for oilseed glyoxysomes, to understand how the membrane is protected
from abundant reactive oxygen species and to understand the pathway for
regeneration of NAD+ required for conversion of storage oils into carbohydrates.
The second aim is to test the hypothesis that a 73 kilodalton membrane-bound
polypeptide, PMP73, is a novel "peroxin" which functions at the boundary
membrane as a molecular chaperone in the uptake of proteins from the cytosol.
The third aim is to try to discover additional plant PM Ps, using polyclonal
rabbit antisera raised previously and already used successfully to discover
PMP73 and pAPX. It is likely that, in addition to the overall goal of
understanding peroxisomal biogenesis and function in developing oilseed
seedlings, the results of these studies will provide more general insight into
peroxisomal biogenesis that will be applicable to diverse species and tissues.