* 9728551
* Aggression and Amines:  The Roles of Serotonin and          Octopamine Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Edward Kravitz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Van Hartesveldt
* 01/31/2002
* USD 283,095.00

9728551 Kravitz Serotonin has been linked to aggression in a wide and diverse
range of species, including man. In vertebrates, lowered levels of this amine,
possibly coupled with elevated levels of norepinephrine, have been linked to a
particular kind of impulsive violence. While great interest is centered on this
research, it is difficult in vertebrate systems, because of the large number of
neuronal elements involved, to link amines and aggression at the level of single
neurons and the precise changes taking place in the nervous system accompanying
violent behavior. In invertebrate systems, with their limited numbers of large
identifiable neurons, the analysis of complex behavioral processes, like
aggression, can be brought to the level of the precise cells thought to be
essential for the behavior. This application continues our studies exploring the
function of identified single nerve cells from the lobster central nervous
system (cns) that contain and utilize the amines serotonin and octopamine (the
invertebrate equivalent of norepinephrine). We believe that these two amines
have opposing actions on at least the postural component important in agonistic
(fighting) behavior in lobsters. The serotonin cells that are the focus of our
studies are neurosecretory cells. These cells release serotonin at two sites:
(i) within the central nervous system, where it influences pathways having to do
with posture and escape; and (ii) directly into the haemolymph (blood) of the
lobster, where the amine changes the ways that muscles and sensory neurons
function for prolonged periods of time. Within the cns, much in the same way
that dimmer switches work on electrical circuits, the serotonin cells function
as "gain-setters" that make particular pathways function better or worse for
lengthy periods of time. The present studies will continue our investig ations
of these interesting neurons, asking how they are activated, and will begin
studies aimed at asking whether these serotonin-containing neurons show any
changes in functioning as a long-term consequence of changes in social status.
With the octopamine neurosecretory cells we plan studies aimed at defining their
physiological roles, learning how they are activated, asking how and where they
interact with the corresponding sets of serotonin-containing neurons, and asking
whether a subset of these cells that selectively innervate the claws, serve any
direct role in the switch to subordinate behavior seen when animals lose one of
their large claws. The emphasis in all of our studies is on understanding, at a
neuronal level, the short-and long-term consequences of social interactions
between animals. With its well studied biochemistry, physiology, anatomy and
behavior, the lobster model we are examining, offers many advantages in
addressing such issues.