* 9728070
* Mechanisms of Homologous Pairing in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Kent Golic, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/28/2002
* USD 375,000.00

Abstract for, "Mechanisms of Homologous Pairing in Drosophila" Kent Golic, P.I.
- 9728070 The work described here is designed to characterize the mechanism of
homologous chromosome pairing in mitotic cells of Drosophila rnelanogaster.
Pairing will be examined in different tissues at different stages of
development, in order to assemble a detailed picture of how cells manage to
efficiently pair homologous sequences. The proposed experiments will determine
whether pairing is a dynamic process that continues throughout interphase, and
whether there are specific portions of the chromosomes that act to promote
pairing. The influence of chromosome structure and the arrangement of
chromosomes in the nucleus will be examined to determine whether these factors
constrain the ability of chromosomal sequences to find and pair with homologous
sequences elsewhere in the genome. In these experiments, the FLP site-specific
recombinase and its target sites (FRTs) will be used to quantitate mitotic
pairing, and the disruption of that pairing by chromosome rearrangements. The
principal that underhes these experiments is that, in order to recombine, FRTs
must pair, and that pairing must be brought about by normal cellular functions.
By supplying the FLP recombinase to the cell in a controlled fashion, the levels
of recombination that are detected must reflect the relative pairing of FRTs in
different circumstances. Because FLP-mediated recombination is highly efficient,
large amounts of data can be obtained with relative ease. In addition, FRT
insertions can be used to assay pairing at many different sites throughout the
genome. Chromosome pairing is a fundamental feature of chromosome behavior in
many types of cells. Homologous chromosome pairing is needed for meiotic
recombination and the faithful segregation of homologs in Meiosis I. Double-
strand breaks can be repaired by using homologous sequences as a template, and
this clearly requires that the sequences be in close proximity. Ectopic pairing
and re combination has been implicated in small scale and large scale genome
rearrangemerit in evolution. Pairing of sequences at ectopic sites may also be
involved in generating the recurrent chromosome rearrangements that are
associated with some types of cancer. Ectopic pairing may also underlie
phenomena of multi-copy suppression that have been observed in many organisms.
The work to be undertaken will increase our understanding of the mechanisms that
cells use to pair homologs. It will likely be possible to generalize the results
to provide a better understanding of the mechanism that cells employ to bring
together homologous DNA sequences. In addition, the proposed work will have
practical benefits for the Drosophila community. A resource of approximately 100
insertions of specially designed FRT-bearing P elements, with locations and
orientations determined, will be produced. These P elements can be used for
making chromosome rearrangements, as targets for the FLP-mediated insertion of
genes, and for mitotic recombination. Furthermore, methods to increase the
efficiency of FLP-mediated DNA integration should result.