* 9728132
* Neural control of adrenocortical function.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* William Engeland, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/2002
* USD 275,998.00

ABSTRACT IBN-9728132 PI = ENGELAND, William C. Secretion of steroid hormones by
the adrenal cortex is required to maintain whole body homeostasis; that is, the
ability to maintain blood pressure and volume, carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism and immune and nervous system function within normal limits is
dependent on adrenocortical hormones. The primary goal of the project is to
understand the role of adrenal innervation in the control of steroid secretion.
The hypothesis to be tested is that under non- stress conditions when reduced
steroid secretion is required, neural activity is inhibitory, whereas during
stress conditions when elevated steroid secretion is necessary, neural activity
is excitatory. The capacity for innervation to produce both inhibitory and
excitatory effects suggests that neural input must be encoded differentially;
encoding could be dependent on the neurotransmitter released or on the target
affected. Experiments are designed: (1) to define the neurotransmitters that
modulate non-stress and stress- induced secretion of adrenal corticosteroids and
(2) to elucidate the adrenal site of neurotransmitter action. Rats will undergo
immunological, surgical, or pharmacological sympathectomies to remove
selectively adrenal neurotransmitter systems. The effect of adrenal denervation
on non-stress steroid secretion will be assessed using in vivo adrenal
microdialysis, a technique developed to measure adrenal secretion in awake
animals. It is proposed that circadian variation in non-stress steroidogenesis
which is reflected by differences in episodic secretion is regulated in part by
the inhibitory effects of innervation. Episodic corticosterone secretion will be
assessed by time series analysis and diurnal variations in adrenal sensitivity
to ACTH will be determined. It is proposed that adrenal neural elements interact
positively with ACTH to mediate acute stress-induced increases in steroid
secretio n. Neural input could act directly at the adrenal cell to affect
steroidogenesis or act indirectly by changing adrenal blood flow. Experiments
will assess the interaction between stress and ACTH and characterize the
neurotransmitter system(s) mediating facilitatory control. Experiments will also
measure adrenal blood flow during stress using fluorescent microspheres and
define the neurotransmitters that mediate stress-induced changes.
Neurotransmitter-specific innervation will be monitored using immunofluorescence
histochemistry and quantitated by radioimmunoassay. Effects on specific
steroidogenic enzymes will be assessed by measuring gene expression using in
situ hybridization and RNAse protection assay, by measuring enzyme content using
western analysis and by quantifying enzyme activity in adrenal cells. Results of
these experiments should delineate the role of autonomic nerves as an extra-ACTH
mechanism in the control of adrenal corticosteroid secretion and define the
neurotransmitter systems involved. Understanding the nature of the this unique
neural-endocrine interaction will provide a new perspective on physiological
regulation of corticosteroid secretion.