* 9728344
* The Role of Acidic Residues and the Electrochemical         Potential in Membrane Protein Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,11/30/1998
* Ross Dalbey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 11/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9728344 Dalbey Lay Abstract A fundamental process in cell biology is the way in
which proteins are inserted into cellular membranes and achieve their
distinctive and unique topology within the membrane. This project is based on
studies of bacteria in this laboratory and the discovery that negatively charged
residues within certain bacterial membrane proteins play an active role in
membrane insertion. This insertion apparently requires only the energy of the
electrochemical gradient across the membrane. The hypothesis is that the
electrochemical gradient promotes insertion by the direct driving force of the
membrane potential on the negatively charged amino acids in the specific regions
of the membrane protein that will be translocated. This is in contrast to other
mechanisms of insertion in other systems in which insertion of specific proteins
requires a complex set of additional proteins that must recognize and interact
with the translocated protein. The novel hypothesis will be tested by examining
the insertion of a variety of bacterial proteins and hybrid protein constructs
that are mutated at specific residues thought to play a role in translocation.
The membrane pH and potential will be changed to assess the role of these
factors on transport. This research on the mechanism of insertion into bacterial
membranes will likely be fundamentally important in the understanding of similar
processes in mitochondria of eukaryotic cells since these cell organelles are
believed to be evolutionarily derived from symbiotic bacteria. ***