* 9728386
* Regulating Stem Cell Fate and Proliferation in the          Drosophila Male Germline
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,09/28/1998
* Stephen DiNardo, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/28/1998
* USD 119,760.00

DiNardo Dr. DiNardo is investigating Drosophila spermatogenesis as a model stem
cell system. He genetically identified a novel somatic signal that restricts
proliferation of amplifying germ cells. In addition, he has shown that two known
germline overproliferation mutants act autonomously in germ cells, regulating
the same step as the somatic signal. These observations have revealed in outline
the pathways regulating progression through germline stem cell lineages, in
particular focussing on the transient amplifying cell population. He proposes to
build on the initial studies by addressing how cells count division number, and
to define further how these pathways relate to each other. Specific Aim 1
Production of the somatic signal requires function of both punt and schnurri,
two TGF-Beta-type signal transducers. Thus, activation of TGF-Beta signal
transduction is necessary to restrict germ cell proliferation. He proposes to
test whether activation of the TGF-Beta pathway in somatic cells is sufficient
to restrict germ cell proliferation. If so, this would suggest that the
production of the initial TGF-Beta type ligand triggers cell counting. If not,
this indicates that extrinsic signaling cooperates with other factors in
coordinating division and differentiation. We continue to identify such factors
next. Specific Aim 2 Dr. DiNardo will continue saturating for germline
overproliferation mutants. In addition, he will test components representing
known signaling pathways. He has found that rafis one candidate, and use it as
an example demonstrating how we follow up prospective positives identified among
other known pathways. Specific Aim 3 Dr. DiNardo has defined the stage and
lineage in which several genes are required, such as bag-of-marbles and benign
gonial cell neoplasm, which act autonomously, schnurri and punt, which regulate
a somatically-derived signal, and raf, which is dealt with in Aim #2. He will
order these activities by genetic epistasis tests, deriving a testable mo
lecular model.