* 9728122
* Dynamic Regulation of Integrin Function
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* John Weisel, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728122 Hantgan The objective of this research is to answer a central question
in cell biology: What structural changes convert "inert" integrins into
"activated" high affinity receptors? Integrins are a superfamily of membrane-
bound proteins that, when activated, regulate many essential cellular processes.
Despite major advances in molecular biology, the structural bases for integrin
activation are not well understood. This work will test the new hypothesis that
activation is a dynamic multistep process, leading to integrin clusters that
form tight multivalent links with adhesive proteins. Central to this research is
a novel positive feedback mechanism in which receptor occupancy promotes self-
association and self-association promotes high-affinity receptor
ligand:interactions. The hypotheses that follow will be tested by biophysical
studies of the prototypical integrin, the human platelet IIb-beta-3 complex.
Hypothesis 1: The IIb-beta-3 integrin is an inherently "sticky" protein; i.e.,
these receptors self-associate to form higher order (IIb-beta-3)n oligomers.
Hypothesis 2: "Activated" IIb-beta-3 complexes exhibit an even greater tendency
to oligomerize. A corollary of this hypothesis is that receptor occupancy
induces a conformational change in IIb-beta-3, one which enhances self-
association. Hypothesis 3: High molecular weight adhesive proteins, such as the
dimeric macromolecule fibrinogen, bind tightly to (IIb-beta-3)n oligomers, by
forming multiple ligand:receptor contacts. This research focuses on the
question: How do living cells recognize each other? Many mammalian cells use
large protein molecules, termed integrins, that protrude from their surface as
"molecular velcro". Smaller molecules, termed ligands, then adhere to the
integrins and cause cells to clump. This investigation's goal is to understand
the steps that control cell clumping at the molecular level, by exploring how
integrin molecules become "sticky". Optical measurements will determine what
events cau se to ligands to stick to integrins and slow down their movement.
This data will provide new insights into how integrins work as "molecular glue".