* 9728143
* Regulation of Phospholipase D1 in Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Joseph Dolan, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 05/31/2000
* USD 269,887.00

9728143 Dolan Phospholipase D (PLD) is an enzyme ubiquitously expressed among
organisms from yeast to man. In mammals, PLD is activated by many different
mechanisms in response to numerous stimuli. Activating stimuli include growth
factors which implicates PLD in the control of cellular proliferation. PLD is
also involved in the differentiation of certain mammalian cell types. In the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the PLD1 gene has been shown to code for a PLD
that is activated at both the level of the gene and of the protein. Cells that
lack this enzyme are unable to differentiate to form spores, thus implicating
PLD in the regulation of a developmental pathway that includes control of cell
proliferation. These features of PLD function in both higher and lower organisms
indicating that this enzyme plays critical roles in the control of processes
that are of paramount importance to the cell. Currently little is known
concerning the mechanisms and factors involved in the regulation of yeast PLD1.
Preliminary studies from this laboratory indicate that the product of the IME4
gene, which is required for the formation of spores, is able to stimulate PLD1
activity and therefore may be an important regulator of PLD1. Experiments will
be done to further characterize the role of IME4 in PLD1 regulation. Since
preliminary studies in other labs indicate that PLD1 transcription is induced
during sporulation, this investigator will analyze the DNA sequences that
control the transcription of the PLD1 gene in order to identify essential
regulatory elements. S. Cerevisiae has been an extremely useful model system for
the study of signal transduction. The investigation of the regulation of yeast
PLD1 and its subsequent use as a paradigm for exploring mammalian PLD action,
will facilitate the elucidation of the roles of PLD. The proposed studies will
provide strong background information pertaining to the transcriptional
regulation of PLD1. The facility of genetic analysis of trans criptional control
in yeast will expand our understanding of this aspect of PLD regulation. This
research is looking at the regulation of phospholipase D in yeast. PLD is an
enzyme which hydrolyzes membrane phospholipids to form phosphatidic acid. In
yeast, cells lacking PLD are unable to undergo meiosis and sporulation. In
mammals the enzyme is activated by agents which indicate its role in cell
proliferation. Since genetic analysis of regulatory processes can be readily
done in yeast these studies will provide important basic information about this
enzyme. ***