* 9728622
* Second World Conference on Structural Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Sami Masri, Consortium of Universities for Res in Earthquake Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 02/29/2000
* USD 75,500.00

9728622 Housner This project by the U.S. Panel on Structural Control Research
is to support U.S. participation in the Second World Conference on Structural
Control (2WCSC) which is planned for convening in Kyoto, Japan during the period
28 June - 1 July 1998. The US Panel is co-sponsoring the 2WCSC with the Japan
Panel on Structural Response Control. This project will enable the participation
of U.S. researchers and support their activities of U.S. and Japan researchers
involved in the field of structural control of smart civil infrastructure
systems in 2WCSC. These activities will include joint research studies and
meetings in the U.S. as well as Japan, by small groups of U.S. and Japan
engineers and scientists, for the purpose of coordinating and implementing
ongoing and future research activities in the U.S. and Japan. Specific areas of
joint studies include: o Developing the technical program for a jointly-
organized (the U.S. and Japan) "Second World Conference on Structural Control"
to be held in Kyoto, Japan. o Participation in joint research investigations on
structural control testbeds in the U.S. as well as Japan, particularly the
recently established test structure at the Disaster Prevention Research
Institute (DPRI) in Kyoto University under the support of Science and Technology
Agency (STA) in Japan. o Coordinating ongoing and developing future research
projects funded by the U.S. and Japan in the emerging field of smart civil
infrastructure systems. The proposed collaborative activities will be valuable
for developing new, major collaborative efforts between US and Japan. ***