* 9728356
* CISE Special Project: Understanding the Role of             International Collaboration in Computer Science and         Engineering
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Ronald Cole, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 12/31/1999
* USD 65,379.00

9728356 Cole, Ronald A. Fortes, Jose Oregon Graduate Institute and Purdue
University CISE Special Project: Understanding the Role of International
Collaboration in Computer Science and Engineering This proposal requests support
for a workshop that will examine the importance of international collaboration
in computer science and engineering. The workshop is motivated in part by the
dramatic growth of the Internet and advances in information technologies that
are causing profound changes in the way scientists learn about the world,
conduct research, and collaborate with each other. As we move toward a single
global economy and a single, integrated scientific enterprise, it is important
to assess the mechanisms, institutions and policies that support international
collaboration in computer science and engineering. The proposed workshop will
bring together members of the computer science and engineering community and
government representatives to discuss the benefits and risks of international
collaboration, identify existing opportunities, and discuss ways to serve the
needs of the computer and information science and engineering community as
globalization proceeds. The expected outcome of the workshop is a report that
will summarize these discussions, and recommend ways to advance knowledge and
technology through more effective international collaboration.