* 9728186
* Role of Heteromeric Protein - Protein Interactions in       Differential Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Donald Senear, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 12/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728186 Senear The goal of this research is to understand the combinatorial
mechanism(s) of differential gene expression in the E. coli CytR regulon, a gene
family consisting of nine unlinked transcriptional units. The transcriptional
units are regulated coordinately by the interplay of just two regulatory
proteins: ( 1 ) cyclic-AMP receptor protein (CRP) a widely used transcriptional
activator in bacteria; (2) CytR, a regulon-specific repressor and a member the
LacI family of homologous repressors. A key feature of the regulation is that
the different cistrons differ from one another in extents of activation,
repression and induction. Similar to the situation in eukaryotes, this
differential regulation is achieved by nesting levels of local repression,
mediated by CytR on the more global regulation mediated by CRP. An unusual
feature of most CytR regulated promoters is that they contain tandem CRP sites,
which are believed to activate transcription via different mechanisms. Unlike
most bacterial repressors, CytR does not repress transcription independently,
but instead modulates CRP-mediated activation by binding to arrays of DNA sites
that result in both cooperative and competitive binding interactions between
CytR and CRP. The number and arrangement of CytR sites varies substantially
among CytR regulated promoters and this appears to contribute significantly to
their differential regulation. The objectives of the research are: 1) to
understand the roles of cooperative and competitive interactions between CRP and
CytR in mediating differential activation of RNA Polymerase; 2) to determine the
role of CytR-CRP interactions in cooperative DNA binding. To accomplish the
first, a systematic comparison of the energetics of interaction among CRP, CytR
and two CytR-regulated promoters will be made. These data will be combined with
results of both steady state and pre-steady state assays of transcription
initiation to develop a comprehensive kinetic model of differential gene
regulation. To accompli sh the latter, solution interactions and the effect of
cytidine binding to CytR thereon will be investigated by analytic al
ultracentrifugation. Coordinate regulation of multiple, unlinked genes is
fundamental to genetic expression. At the transcriptional level, this is
controlled by cooperative, site-specific assembly of regulatory, protein-DNA
complexes. A common mechanism uses a combinatorial strategy, involving both
relatively common regulatory proteins and also proteins that are specific to
either the gene, the tissue or cell type, or the development stage of the
organism. By binding to variable arrays of DNA site, as are generally found in
different genes, the same regulatory proteins can form very different protein-
DNA complexes. In this manner, genes can be differentially expressed even while
controlled by a similar complement of regulatory proteins. In addition, whole
programs of gene expression are easily controlled by changing the activity of
one or a few factors. The CytR regulon is a particularly important system to
understand at a molecular level because it addresses many basic issues of both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic gene regulation, such as coordinate gene regulation,
the mechanism(s) of CRP-mediated activation, and how interactions among
different regulatory proteins control the cooperative assembly of protein-DNA
complexes.