* 9728755
* US-India Cooperative Research: The Effects of Realistic     Eurasian Snow Cover on the Indian Monsoon- A Numerical      Experiment with A Regional Model
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Anandu Vernekar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/2001
* USD 32,394.00

9728755 Vernekar Description: This award supports the US-India Cooperative
Research: The Effects of Realistic Eurasian Snow Cover on the Indian Summer
Monsoon-- A Numerical Experiment with a Regional Model. The collaborators are US
PI Anandu D. Vernekar, Department of Meteorology, University of Maryland and
Indian PI S.K. Dash, Centre for Atmospheric Sciences, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi. This research examines the effect of the Eurasian snow
cover on the interannual variability of the Indian monsoon. The hypothesis that
excessive winter Eurasian snow cover has adverse effect on the subsequent summer
monsoon rainfall over India will be studied through numerical experiments on a
high resolution regional model linked to a global general circulation model. The
results will have important predictive value about the onset and strength of the
Indian monsoon. Scope: This is a new collaboration linking the Department of
Meteorology, University of Maryland and the Center for Atmospheric Sciences,
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. This project combines the pioneering
expertise of Vernekar's group at Maryland in numerical experiments with general
and regional models with the capability of the Delhi group in modeling
atmospheric and ocean processes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) will provided Cray supercomputer facilities to support this research. ***