* 9728491
* Receptor Internalization: Endogenous Regulation             of Opioid Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,11/30/1999
* Paul Micevych, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 11/30/1999
* USD 99,993.00

Micevych, 9728491 Receptors are plasma membrane associated molecules that
recognize intercellular signals. G-protein-coupled receptors are perhaps the
most diverse family of membrane bound receptors and mediate important functions
in the nervous system such as development, timing of puberty and menopause, and
nociception. Dr. Micevych has been interested in studying the mechanisms of
cellular regulation of neuropeptide receptors that belong to a class of G-
protein coupled receptors. A new methodology, termed "receptor internalization"
presents a novel approach for the visualization of receptor activation.
Internalization is the sequestration of agonist-receptor complexes into
endosomal compartments within cells. This is important since removal of
receptors from the plasma membrane prevents further stimulation by intercellular
signals. An internalized distribution of receptors is a marker of activated
receptors while a plasma membrane distribution indicates no activation. Dr.
Micevych is developing and refining the immunocytochemical techniques that will
allow him to monitor the activation of specific receptors on individual cells or
even single dendrites. He will use this methodology to define the neurochemical
signature by which the gonadal steroids estrogen and progesterone affect brain
activity to regulate reproductive behavior. Specifically, Dr. Micevych will use
a combination of confocal fluorescence and brightfield microscopy to determine
the role of two recently discovered endogenous opioid peptides, endomorphin- 1
and orphanin FQ/nociceptin, and their receptors in the regulation of steroid-
induced reproductive behavior. This exciting and novel method for the
visualization of receptor activation of discrete neurons will provide a better
general understanding of receptor function and neural circuits as well as shed
new light on the mechanisms by which estrogen and progesterone act to stimulate
neural circuits that underlie behavior.