* 9728171
* Glial-Neuronal Metabolic Interactions in Working Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Gerald Dienel, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2002
* USD 286,850.00

IBN 97-28171 DIENEL The functions of two major classes of brain cells, neurons
and glia, are highly specialized. Neurons carry out the signaling processes,
transferring information from one cell to another to control and coordinate the
activities of the body. Glial cells surround neurons and have many important
functions, including control of the extracellular environment which can modify
neuronal activity thereby influencing behavior. Glial functions and glial-
neuronal interactions in brain are poorly understood because it is very
difficult to assay the activities of specific classes of cells in the living
brain. Brain function is often evaluated by metabolic brain imaging procedures
using radiolabeled glucose analogs because there is a close correlation between
changes in functional activity and local rate of glucose utilization to provide
energy for brain work. Functional metabolism is the breakdown of compounds to
extract energy for the working cell, and metabolic imaging is based on local
trapping of labeled products of the metabolic tracer in the cell where it is
metabolized; the quantity of trapped label reflects the magnitude of functional
activity. Because glucose is a fuel for all cells, it cannot distinguish between
the functional metabolic changes in the different cell types in brain. In the
present study, glial- specific "reporter molecules", i.e., labeled compounds
known to be metabolized mainly in glial cells, will be used to measure stimulus-
induced metabolic changes in glial cells and evaluate working relationships
between glia and neurons. Experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that
metabolic activity in glial cells increases in proportion to the activity of
neurons when neurons are stimulated by graded changes in sensory input, and that
compounds made in glial cells are transferred from glia to neurons in increased
quantities. Neurons will be activated by changing the magnitude of a visual
stimulus (flash rate or intensity of a strobe light) to cause progressive
increases in the signaling activity of neurons in the eye as the visual
information is processed in the brains of experimental rats; altered neuronal
activity is predicted to cause parallel changes in the activity of glial cells
in the visual pathway and rates of metabolism of glial reporter molecules. Some
compounds made in glial cells are exported to neurons, and the quantity of
labeled compounds transferred and incorporated into a neuron-specific marker (a
neurotransmitter called GABA) will be measured, thereby permitting assessment of
neuronal-glial metabolic interactions in working brain. The results of the
proposed experiments will increase our understanding of how glia obtain their
energy to carry out their work and how neurons and glia work together to process
visual information. Knowledge of the cellular basis of metabolic brain images
will also help to form the basis for future development of new brain imaging
techniques to visualize and quantify glial cell activity in human brain.