* 9728564
* The Bacterial Cell-Surface in Sinorhizobium-Soybean         Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Bradley Reuhs, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Reuhs&lt;br/&gt; Soybeans account for the majority of cultured legumes and the
effective nodulation of these legumes is the subject of considerable research.
Wild-type Sinorhizobium fredii USDA257 does not infect the roots of most North
American soybean cultivars. However, a mutation in the nolXWBTUV gene region
extends the host range of this bacterium and allows it to nodulate many domestic
soybean cultivars, including Williams. Interestingly, the infection of Williams
soybean by the mutants is blocked if the wild-type strain is present in the
inoculum, and preliminary results show that the nol mutations directly affect
the expression of bacterial cell surface polysaccharides. The goal of this
project, therefore, is to determine the structural changes that are associated
with the nol mutations and to identify the factor(s) produced by wild-type cells
that limit its host range. In addition, two novel polysaccharides, which are
abnormally expressed in the nol mutants and may be bacteroid-specific surface
components, will be structurally characterized. Monoclonal antibodies will be
raised against these polysaccharides and used to probe for their distribution in
bacteroids from many S. fredii host plants. These objectives are part of a
broader goal of understanding the role of the bacterial cell surface in the
infection and differentiation process, which ultimately lead to bacteroid
development and N2 fixation. This project may also provide new insights into the
function of the microbial cell surface components in plant-pathogen
interactions, as the nol gene region is homologous to the hrp genes of
Xanthomonas and Pseudomonas.&lt;br/&gt; Biological nitrogen fixation in the
legume-rhizobia symbiosis is an important part of worldwide agriculture, and the
nitrogen-enrichment of cultivated soils by microorganisms that form a symbiotic
relationship with legumes (e.g. bean, pea, soybean, and alfalfa) is a renewable
source of environmentally safe fertilizer. To exploit and improve this resource
and to reduce the requirement for potentially harmful chemical fertilizers, the
mechanisms of the infection process that allow the bacteria to form N2-fixing
nodules on the plant root must be understood. The molecular basis for infection
and nodule development determines, in part, the compatibility of a bacterial
cell with a potential host plant and, therefore, the efficiency of nitrogen
fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;