* 9728495
* Evolution of Female Mate-Choice: Field Experiments Using    Genetic Markers in The Gray Treefrog
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2001
* John Krenz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 09/30/2001
* USD 158,500.00

ID#: 9728495 Title: Evolution of female mate-choice: Field experiments using
genetic markers in the gray treefrog PI: J. D. Krenz CoPIs: R. D. Semlitsch, H.
C.Gerhardt, and P. A. Mahoney Non-Technical Summary In most biological species,
each individual's genetic constitution is a unique mixture of genes from both of
its parents. This unique combination of genes has a pervasive influence on an
individual's appearance, behavior and physiology. The choice of a mate, then,
can have a profound impact on the characteristics of an animal's offspring.
Indeed, evidence suggests that female preferences have evolved to become both
striking and instinctual. Our research directly examines the effect of female
mate-choice on offspring performance and tests the idea that a female does
prefer males that carry genes which increase the vigor of her offspring. This
will be carried out by mating each of a series of females to two males (a
preferred male and a non-preferred male) rearing the two types of offspring and
measuring the differences between them in survival, growth and maturation rates.
This work will be carried out using an ideal species for such research, the gray
treefrog, a North American species with distinct and well understood mating
preferences and behaviors. An important aspect of this research is the use of
neutral genetic markers (using modern molecular methods to directly detect
differences in differences in DNA) to identify the father of each of the
juveniles. This allows us to rear the offspring in mixed groups under natural
conditions outdoors. A demonstration of a difference in performance between
offspring of preferred versus non-preferred fathers will provide evidence that
there is a genetic mechanism that can contribute to the evolution of female mate
preferences. This result will provide evidence supporting a critical link in the
theory of how mate choice has and continues to evolve.