* 9728758
* Neural Basis of Maternal Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Michael Numan, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 179,716.00

9728758 Numan For survival of the species, the young must be cared for until
they can subsist on their own. Until recently, little research has been directed
towards the elucidation of the neural mechanisms that underlie maternal
behavior. It is now clear that the regulation of maternal behavior requires the
integration of hormonal, neural, neurochemical and behavioral factors Dr. Numan
has demonstrated that maternal behavior occurs at the end of pregnancy because
hormones act on the brain to decrease fear or avoidance of infant stimuli and to
increase attraction or approach towards the infant. He will now uncover the
neural substrate that underlies such an approach-avoidance model of maternal
responsiveness. Using a variety of state-of-the art molecular, neurochemical,
anatomical, and behavioral techniques, Dr. Numan will examine his theory that
maternal behavior is promoted when the output of the amygdala is inhibited while
the output of the medial preoptic area is facilitated. This fundamental research
will help us understand how hormones interact with limbic (amydgala) and
hypothalamic (medial preoptic area) neural circuits to control a critical
complex behavior. Moreover, understanding the normal process is the type of
basic research that will eventually lead to uncovering some of the biological
and behavioral causes of poor mothering such as child abuse and neglect, as well
as disorders such as postpartum depression.