* 9728284
* Lipid Metabolism in the Oyster Protozoan Parasite,          PERKINSUS MARINUS
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Fu-Lin Chu, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2001
* USD 248,004.00

9728284 Chu The protozoan parasite Perkinsus marinus (Dermo) is one of the two
important parasites that have been causing severe mortality in the American
(eastern) oyster, Crassostrea virginica, on the eastern and Gulf coasts of the
United States since the 1950's. Presently, no information exists on lipid
metabolism and biosynthesis in this parasite, although its host is an
ecologically and economically important aquatic species. Using radiolabeled or
"fluorescent-labeled" precursors, the investigator will characterize lipid
metabolism and biosynthesis in this parasite in relation to its growth phases
and life stages. She will also determine if temperature and salinity affect the
parasite's lipid metabolism and biosynthesis and, in addition, will investigate
the effect of P. marinus parasitism on the lipid metabolism of the host. She
will use gas liquid chromatography (GLC), thin layer chromatography/flame
ionization detector (TLC/FID) lipid analyzer (Iatroscan MK-3), high performance
TLC, argentation TLC, and high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipped
with a flow scintillation analyzer to analyze the uptake/incorporation,
distribution, metabolism and synthesis of lipids, particularly phospholipids,
and fatty acids in the parasite. The identification of fatty acids will be
confirmed with an ELQ400-2 GC/MS system. The morphological distribution of
"fluorescent labels" will be examined by epifluorescent and electron microscopy.
Parasites are the major cause of disease in oysters on the eastern and Gulf
coasts of the United States. These parasites derive their food, mainly in the
form of lipids and protein, from the oyster. This is the first study of lipid
metabolism of an internal parasite of an aquatic invertebrate species. The
results from this research will contribute to the fundamental understanding of
lipid metabolism in host-parasite relationships, especially in saltwater
systems. The study will provide important information for the establishment of a
host-parasite in vertebrate model to elucidate mechanisms involved in lipid
acquisition in parasites. This information may also serve as the basis for the
future development of a procedure to control oyster parasites.