* 9728635
* Maintaining Self-Esteem in Upward Social Comparison
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* Mark Alicke, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2001
* USD 178,824.00

Research on social comparison has shown that it is very common for people to
compare their own performance and ability with that of others. In many
situations, people engage in a spontaneous comparison with others. In other
cases, the comparisons are made by others, such as when siblings are compared by
their parents, students by their teachers, and employees by their employers. The
sheer number of social comparison opportunities that spontaneously arise ensures
that people will sometimes compare unfavorably. Comparisons with superior
performers are potentially threatening to self-esteem, especially when the
outperformance is clear and unambiguous. When defensive explanations are
difficult to maintain, people have recourse to an explanation that can protect
their self-esteem: exaggerating the outperformer's ability. This is an effective
attributional strategy because it is believable and it allows the inferior
performer to appear unselfish. This phenomenon is referred to as the `genius
effect.` By viewing the outperformer as unusually talented, inferior performers
can benefit from the outperformer's knowledge without suffering undue damage to
their own perceived competence. If the genius effect is a pervasive social
comparison strategy, it suggests a greater, and more salutary, role for upward
comparisons than has previously been recognized in social comparison theory.
Indeed, it seems more adaptive to exaggerate the ability of superior performers
than to derogate or avoid them. Furthermore, unrealistically favorable
evaluations may be more beneficial to social relationships than derogatory ones.
The genius effect also helps explain how people are able to maintain
unrealistically positive self-images. The social psychology literature indicates
that people evaluate themselves more favorably than an average peer on most
dimensions. Relatively little research has been directed, however, at
discovering how people maintain these self-images in the face of contradictory
social comparisons. The genius effect suggests what may be a pervasive strategy
for maintaining an unrealistically favorable self-image following upward
comparisons: exaggerate the talents and attributes of people who fare better on
the comparison dimension.