* 9728923
* Novel Nuclear Signaling Mechanisms in Control of FGF-2      Expression in Astrocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,09/09/1998
* Michal Stachowiak, St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence F. Kromer
* 09/09/1998
* USD 299,961.00

9728923 STACHOWIAK The two major cell types that form the nervous system are
neurons and glia. Genesis of glial and neuronal cells, and their differentiation
and maturation in the developing nervous system are thought to be controlled by
proteins (growth factors) expressed at specific developmental stages. Controlled
expression of growth factors may also underlie plasticity that occurs in the
adult nervous system during learning or regeneration of nervous tissue
(stimulation of cell division, changes in cell shape and in contacts between
cells). Aberrant expression of growth factors has been implicated in the
transformation of normal glial cells to tumorigenic glioma cells. Hence, to
understand development, adult plasticity of nervous system tissue, and
tumorigenic transformation it is essential to elucidate mechanisms that control
expression and function of growth factor proteins. Basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF or FGF-2) is one such protein that is critical for neuronal and
glial development, plasticity, and tumorigenic transformation. Elucidation of
the mechanism controlling bFGF expression and function is of the highest
priority. Studies in Dr. Stachowiak's laboratory have revealed that expression
of bFGF is transiently increased during the shift of quiescent (non-dividing)
glial cells to reactive (actively dividing) glia. Such reversible activation of
glia plays an important role in neural development and in the support of adult
neural plasticity. Dr. Stachowiak's laboratory has also shown that the
expression of the bFGF gene is permanently increased in irreversibly activated
tumorigenic glia (glioma tumors). The overall aim of this project is to
determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the above-mentioned changes in
bFGF gene expression. The investigation has indicated that there are fundamental
differences in the mechanisms by which the bFGF gene is regulated as compared to
other genes. Identification of those mechanism will lead to a better
understanding of the molecular-genetic control of the development and plasticity
of the nervous system.