* 9728162
* Enzyme Structure-Function Relationships
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Stephen Remington, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2001
* USD 345,000.00

9728162 Remington The primary focus of this investigation will be to determine
three dimensional structures of enzymes that catalyze the deprotonation of a
simple carbon acid, acetylCoenzyme A, as a first step in the overall reaction.
The enzymes are allosteric (regulated) Azotobacter citrate synthase and
Escherichia coli malate synthase, which are unrelated in amino acid sequence but
catalyze virtually identical reactions. A wide variety of acetylCoenzyme A
substrate analogs, that vary in their ability to mimic proposed reaction
intermediates, are available or are straightforward to synthesize. The
structures of complexes of these analogs with the two enzymes will be determined
by high resolution X-ray crystallography, and the results will be compared to
those already obtained for the same compounds bound to nonallosteric chicken
citrate synthase, which have been determined at up to 1.5A resolution. In
addition, some active-site mutants of chicken citrate synthase will be created
and their structures determined in order to ascertain the functional role of
certain amino acids. A minor focus of this project, the structure of yeast
serine carboxypeptidase in complex with an extremely tight binding, new class of
cytosolic proteinase inhibitor (25 kDa Ic, Ki = 10-10 M) will be determined. The
complex has been crystallized and the structure will be determined by standard
molecular replacement methods using the known structure of serine
carboxypeptidase. The significance of the major focus of the project is that it
is not understood how an enzyme can deprotonate a carbon atom without using
unusual cofactors. This reaction does not take place in solution under
physiological conditions in the absence of a catalyst. By "freezing" two
unrelated enzymes that catalyze this reaction as the first step and comparing
their structures, new insight will be generated as to the exact nature of the
intermediate(s), leading to a more complete understanding of this crucial
reaction. Compounds that are rela ted to the different proposed intermediates,
but are unable to complete subsequent steps of the reaction, are available to
make this study straightforward. The second approach will be to compare the
active site structures of regulated citrate synthases with those of unregulated
citrate synthases. Structural changes at the active site caused by the external
effector (NADH) should yield additional clues as to how the intermediate is
generated and thus how the reaction is catalyzed. Finally, mutant citrate
synthases have already been generated that are severely impaired in one or more
aspects of catalysis, and their structures, which have yet to be determined, are
expected to be very informative. The significance of the minor focus of this
project is that the serine carboxypeptidase inhibitor Ic has multiple roles in
the cell as defined by genetic analysis, but is of unknown structure. Completion
of the three dimensional structure of the complex of serine carboxypeptidase
with the inhibitor will therefore reveal a novel structure, expanding the
database of protein folds in general, and will additionally lead to a deeper
understanding of the catalytic mechanism of serine carboxypeptidases, and how
they recognize their unique substrates.