* 9728447
* Structure and Fertilization Function Studies of Egg CorticalGranule Hexosaminidase
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Jerry Hedrick, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2001
* USD 345,000.00

9728447 Hedrick The long term goal of this research is to determine the
macromolecular composition, the biosynthesis, and the fertilization function of
egg cortical granule components. The macromolecular components of the cortical
granules modify the molecular structure and the supramolecular architecture of
the egg envelope. This modification maintains the diploid state of the
fertilized egg chromosomes by preventing additional sperm from fusing with the
egg. The enzyme beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase was identified in the cortical
granules of eggs from the frog Xenopus laevis. N-acetylglucosamine residues of
the egg envelope glycoproteins may function in sperm binding to the egg. Their
enzymatic removal may prevent additional sperm from fusing with egg. The
specific objectives of the research are to provide evidence for this proposal
by: 1) determining the protein structure of the egg enzyme using recombinant DNA
cloning methods, 2) identifying egg envelope glycoproteins that are substrates
for the enzyme, 3) determining the monosaccharide structure(s) of the
carbohydrate moiety of these glycoproteins, and 4) relating this structural
information to its biological role by: a) causing the glycosidic hydrolysis of
envelope glycoproteins with exogenously added enzyme, and b) preventing the
glycosidic hydrolysis of envelope glycoprotein by endogenously released enzyme
using specific inhibitors of beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase activity. This
research will identify the molecules involved in sperm-egg binding and how
modification of the envelope glycoproteins by an enzyme released from the egg
alters the structure of the molecules outside the egg. Accomplishing this
research will provide a molecular understanding as to how an egg enzyme's
protein structure determines its specific action on its egg envelope substrate,
and how glycosidic modification of the envelope prevents sperm-egg interactions.
From this understanding of the structure-function relations of the molecules
involved in fertilization may come information relevant to regulating
fertilization and early developmental events.