* 9728636
* Spectoscopic Studies of Hydrogen Bonding in Size-and        Conformation-Selected Biomolecule-(water)n Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1997,02/28/2003
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 02/28/2003
* USD 602,000.00

Timothy Zwier of Purdue University is supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to study hydrogen bonding networks present in aromatic amino
acid-(water)n clusters, in model DNA base-(water)n clusters, and in model DNA
base pairs. A variety of experimental methods will be exploited including
resonant two-photon ionization (R2PI), UV-UV and IR-UV hole-burning
spectroscopies, resonant ion-dip infrared spectroscopy (RIDIRS) and cavity ring-
down spectroscopy (CRDS). Ab initio calculations will also be carried out for
comparison purposes and to aid in spectral assignment. It is a long step from an
isolated single hydrogen bond in the water dimer to the intricate and complex
hydrogen-bonded networks in liquid water and ice. One of the reasons is that
H-bonds are strongly cooperative. Quantitative descriptions of the H-bonding
using pairwise-additive intermolecular potentials fail to account for even the
most basic properties of small gas-phase clusters, much less the bulk condensed
phase. The strength of individual hydrogen bonds depends sensitively on the
number, strength and orientation of the hydrogen bonds in the H-bonded network.
The experimental study of such H-bonded networks is fraught with difficulty,
largely because as the cluster size grows, so does the number of species present
in the sample, masking the desired spectrum of a single species. The need for
better experimental probes is the primary motivation for these studies.