* 9728626
* Remediation and Curation of the University of California,   Riverside, Collection of Aphytis
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* John Pinto, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 04/30/2002
* USD 143,808.00

Species of Aphytis wasps are among the most important parasitoids of armored
scale insects (Homoptera: Diaspididae). Many of the species used in classical
and augmentative biological control programs around the world, including type
and important voucher material, are represented in collections of the University
of California, Riverside (UCR). Because of their minute size, these wasps are
generally ignored by collectors and are not accumulated in most insect
collections. The UCR collection includes ca. 30,000 specimens of Aphytis mounted
on ca. 5,000 slides. The majority of these specimens (28,224) are mounted in a
temporary, water soluble medium (Hoyer's) on 4,380 slides. A significant number
of these mounts are now in various stages of decay. Many specimens, including
numerous type specimens, have already been damaged. It is urgent to protect the
collection by transferring a significant portion to Canada balsam, a permanent
medium better suited for preserving specimens in taxonomically significant
collections of micro-Hymenoptera. Specimens also must be mounted individually
and properly labeled. Currently, the majority of the material is mounted with an
average of 6.67 specimens per slide. sometimes with more than one species per
slide, and labeled very poorly. This project will support the remediation, and
curation of the collection of Aphytis at UCR. The UCR collection of Aphytis
formed the basis for a world taxonomic revision of the genus by David Rosen and
Paul DeBach in 1979. The monograph was based almost entirely on the UCR
collection of Aphytis, and because of this, it is an invaluable resource for
basic and applied scientists. The UCR collection of Aphytis is almost entirely
composed of reared and slide-mounted specimens collected from 74 different
countries and territories over the last 70 years. The magnitude and scope of the
collection make it irreplaceable. Its revitalization will stabilize the existing
collection and stimulate additi onal taxonomic studies of this important genus.