* 9728911
* Molecular Mechanisms of Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF)    Actions in Fish:  Role of IGF Binding Protein-3
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Cunming Duan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2002
* USD 248,500.00

9728911 Duan The proposed project involves studying the molecular mechanisms by
which insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), peptide growth factors/hormones which
are essential for normal growth and development, act to control embryonic tissue
formation and differentiation in vivo. Recent studies utilizing cultured
mammalian cells suggest that the bioactivity of IGFs could be modulated by
specific, high-affinity IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs) in vitro. The in vivo role
of each IGFBP in controlling the availability of IGFs in specific embryonic
tissues has not been determined. Research in this area has relied heavily on
rodent models, and attempts have been hampered by the inaccessibility of the
mammalian fetus which is enclosed in the uterus. In this project, Dr. Duan
proposes to utilize a model teleost fish, the zebrafish (Danio rerio) to test
the hypothesis that the access of IGFs to specific embryonic tissues is
regulated by specific IGFBPs expressed locally and that this regulation is
crucial for normal tissue growth and differentiation. The accessible,
transparent and fast-developing embryos and the availability of numerous genetic
mutants make zebrafish particularly suited for investigating the developmental
role of IGFs/IGFBPs and the underlying mechanisms. The specific aims of the
proposal are to: 1) determine the structure and biological activities of
zebrafish IGFBP-3; 2) determine the developmental expression patterns of IGFBP-3
together with IGFs and the IGF-1 receptor; 3) determine the role of IGFBP-3 in
controlling IGF actions in developing zebrafish embryos. The expected results
should provide direct evidence for the in vivo role of IGFBP-3 in controlling
IGF actions in a vertebrate embryo and will further our understanding of how the
IGF system acts to control growth and development in vertebrates. Determination
of the structures of fish IGFBP-3 and development of the corresponding protein,
cDNA probe and antiserum will make available, for the first time, valuable tools
for investigation of IGFBP actions in a teleost fish. Information gained from
these studies may prove to be valuable to aquaculture for efficient production
of animal protein to meet the needs of a continually growing human population.