* 9728963
* TECO: The Role of Wildfire in Alaska: Experimental and  Regional Approaches to Improved Understanding of Boreal Feedbacks to Climate (FROSTFIRE)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* F. Stuart Chapin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,225,000.00

9728963 Chapin The purpose of this research submitted to the Interagency
competition on Terrestrial Ecology and Global Change (TECO) is to develop a
predictive understanding of the major classes of feedbacks from boreal fire to
climate as a basis for improved understanding of the changing role of the boreal
forest in the earth's climate system. The goal is to understand processes that
remain outside of current general circulation models (GCM's). These processes
reflect "surprises" that reduce the reliability of GCM's to predict climate
change because of limited understanding of the role of biotic and ecosystem
feedbacks to regional and global dynamics. This project involves an integrative,
large-scale field experiment in the boreal forest along with studies of
paleoecological dynamics, and fire and climate modeling. The project will
integrate measurements of forest dynamics following burning, soil processes,
trace gas fluxes, and paleoecological reconstruction of vegetation and climate.
The research will be conducted in association with the Bonanza Creek LTER
program in Alaska. Once the field experiments are established, the long-term
monitoring of field manipulation and experimental burning treatments initiated
in this TECO project will become part of the Bonanza Creek LTER program. The
project is important because it represents one of the few extensive and
integrative assessments of the feedbacks between fire in boreal forest and
global climate dynamics.