* 9728579
* The Role of Estrogen Receptor in Aggressive Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Sonoko Ogawa, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 28,000.00

97-28579 OGAWA It is well known that that the activation of androgen and
estrogen receptors is important for the regulation of sex-specific brain
organization and behavior. It is also well accepted that testosterone plays a
major role in the expression of aggressive behavior in all animals. There is a
positive correlation between plasma testosterone levels and aggressive
behaviors. Thus, it was surprising to find that knockout mice that lack the
alpha estrogen receptor rarely show male-typical aggressive behavior despite the
fact that they have normal levels of testosterone. Moreover, testosterone
restored aggressive behavior in wildtype gonadectomized mice but not in these
estrogen receptor knockout mice. In contrast, females mice that lack the alpha
estrogen receptor had enhanced levels of aggressive behavior. Dr. Ogawa will
investigate why gene disruption of the alpha-form of the estrogen receptor
greatly modifies the expression of aggressive behaviors in these male and female
mice. The results from these studies will provide novel insights into the normal
mechanisms by which estrogen mediates neural regulation of sexually-dimorphic
behaviors. The use of genetic mutations involving steroid family, such as the
Tfm mutation and this new alpha estrogen receptor knockout has been invaluable
for elucidating the molecular basis of sexual dimorphism as well as identifying
the hormones mediating sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior.