* 9728428
* Developmental Consequences of Mutations in the Steel Growth Factor of Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Mary Bedell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2002
* USD 381,407.00

Intercellular communication is essential to the development of numerous cell
types in every metazoan studied. Often, such communication is achieved through
the action of growth factors (GFs) that are expressed by cells adjacent to their
target cells, and that bind to and activate specific receptors located on the
surface of the target cell. The receptor then activates a series of downstream
signaling molecules that ultimately act to alter gene expression and cellular
functions. In lower eukaryotes, the analysis of mutants that are defective for
various signaling molecules have provided valuable information about structure-
function relationships of different signaling molecules and about interactions
between different components of signaling pathways. However, similar genetic
analyses in higher eukaryotes are usually much more limited. The proposed
research focuses on the role of mast cell growth factor (Mgf), the ligand for
the Kit receptor tyrosine kinase, in development of several cell lineages in
mice. Both Mgf and Kit are highly conserved in all vertebrates and are
structurally and functionally related to other GFs and receptors. Interestingly,
the Mgf/Kit pathway is required for development of diverse types of cells,
including erythrocytes, mast cells, melanocytes and germ cells. While many
functions of Mgf and Kit in these different cells must overlap, there is
accumulating evidence for some cell-restricted functions. A powerful genetic
resource for studying this pathway is a large collection (&gt;40) of different
mouse alleles at the locus encoding Mgf, called Steel (SI), and the locus
encoding Kit, called Dominant spotting (W). Such large allelic series are
unusual in the mouse, as only a few other loci in the mouse have more than one
or two mutant alleles. Furthermore, this is the only mammalian receptor-ligand
pair where large numbers of mutant alleles of each gene are available. The
studies described in this proposal are aimed at understanding the molecular and
developmental deficiencies in 16 different SI mutants. Based on the results of
these studies, future experiments will characterize the biochemical defect(s)
associated with each mutant. Ultimately, all of these studies should provide a
wealth of information on the functions of this important signaling molecule
during in viva development of diverse types of cells.