* 9728970
* Coordination Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Michael Turvey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 08/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Many common behaviors require coordinating two limbs rhythmically. These range
from the relatively simple coordination of two legs in walking to the very
complex coordination of two hands in juggling. These acts of coordination
require that the body's very many degrees of freedom--that is, its limbs,
joints, muscles, even motor neurons--somehow get harnessed to function as units
to accomplish a specific task. This organization displays a rather special
flexibility, however: Although stable, it must also be temporary so that those
same degrees of freedom can be reorganized, not only in order to accomplish some
other specific task (the hands that juggle are also the hands that applaud) but
also to allow the system to respond to perturbations (tripping on an uneven
sidewalk). The overarching goal of the proposed research is to identify the
physical principles that govern the formation, stability, and variability of
these kinds of rhythmic organizations or synergies. Over the past decade, our
research has contributed to the understanding that movement coordination is
usefully and most appropriately addressed as a problem in a particular approach
to physics, that of self-organizing systems. The proposed research will use
several classes of experiments to explore the idea that the physical basis of
common psychological phenomena such as learning, retention, forgetting,
attention, and adaptation can be examined using movement coordination as a
testing ground. Basic methodologies include requiring participants to swing
hand-held pendulums rhythmically, to maintain an upright posture, or to perform
cascade juggling. Manipulations (e.g., of participant expertise or handedness;
of pendulum lengths and masses, oscillation frequency or phase; the imposition
of extraneous tasks; the availability or continuity of visual structure) are
motivated by certain expectations of the physical perspective. Three-space
motion analyzers and force platforms will be used to collect the data. We pursue
the idea that the principles governing movement's coordination are the
principles of self-organizing physical systems and that the discovery and
expression of these principles will benefit from the tools of nonlinear
dynamics. Understanding the physical principles that govern movement's
coordination should provide a source of new hypotheses about rhythmic and
postural disorders as well as providing constraints on how coordination and its
acquisition might be modeled.