* 9728985
* Improvement of Long-Term Storage of The Field Museum's      Bird and Mammal Genetic Resources
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1998,01/31/2001
* John Bates, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 01/31/2001
* USD 73,927.00

The research collections of birds and mammals at The Field Museum rank among the
world's largest and most comprehensive. Both include virtually all families,
most genera and about 85% and 65% of the world's known bird and mammal species,
respectively. A century of international collecting activity has enriched these
collections with tropical taxa that are poorly represented elsewhere. Currently,
the catalogued collections include more than 420,000 bird specimens and 160,000
mammal specimens. All of these specimens have been curated, installed, and
entered into computer databases; computer records have been verified against
specimen labels and shelf-and drawercontents for all but a small fraction of
each collection. Encyclopedic coverage and high-quality modern preparations of
these collections attract heavy research use. Both Bird and Mammal collections
rank among the nation's most heavily utilized collections in terms of numbers of
scientific visitors and number and size of specimen loans; information on these
collections is now available over the Internet, and more will be made available
by the end of 1997. The impact of these collections on the scientific community
can be gauged by the number of publications appearing each year that are based
entirely or in part on the Field Museum's collections. Since 1980, the Bird and
Mammal collections and facilities have served as the basis for more than a 1200
articles. Bird and Mammal personnel continue to build the collections via active
field programs in the Neotropics, Africa, Madagascar, and Southeast Asia, as
well as in the United States. In contrast to historic collections modern
collections have attempted to accommodate the diversity of approaches to
systematic zoology by preserving a wide range of preparation types, now often
including tissues for gentic analyses. Since 1976 some 12,000 tubes of avian
tissues and 10,000 tubes of mammal tissues have been received. This project will
assist in the tra nsfer of the frozen tissue collections to new, expanded and
safer storage. The two collections, which will remain separate, will be
deposited in a newly-established storage facility, consisting of liquid nitrogen
storage vessels. The new installation will increase capacity for archival
storage from 25,000 tubes to 60,000 tubes. As tubes are transferred from one
storage system to another, the project will (1) verify existing database record
for each tissue tube, (2) determine the unique catalogue number in Bird and
Mammal catalogues that corresponds to each field number, (3) generate and affix
a bar-coded and numbered label to each tube, and (4) record its location in the
new storage system. The end result will be that these collections will be
archived at a temperature at which we can be assured no degradation will occur,
and through the use of the bar- coding label system, these collections will be
more- effectively labeled and immediately connected to the computerized
databases of our main collections. Thus, handling this valuable material will be
more efficient and less harmful to long-term preservation.