* 9728877
* Neuronal Precursor Gene Function in Neuronal Lineage Specific Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Tsonwin Hai, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

The proper execution of organogenic processes, such as neurogenesis, requires
the coordinated activities of various regulatory proteins during development.
The pan-neural expressed protein Prospero (Pros) represents a predominately
nuclear localized, atypical homeodomain protein, that is required for the proper
expression of an array of other regulatory genes during the formation of the
nervous system in Drosophila. As a consequence, loss of Prospero activity
results in severe defects in the developing nervous system and death of the
embryo during the late stages of embryogenesis. Previous work has shown that
Prospero can function as a transcription factor, and the capacity of Pros to
modulate the activities of several other homeodomain transcription factors. The
present proposal is aimed towards the molecular genetic analysis of the
structure/functional properties of the pros protein in its in vivo interactions
with homeodomain proteins during neurogenesis. High degrees of evolutionary
conservation have been observed for regulatory proteins, including Pros, between
vertebrate and invertebrate systems. The analysis of the specific functional
requirements and interactions in a model system such as Drosophila provides
information that is of direct relevance for the understanding of the functional
roles of corresponding vertebrate genes in normal development and pathological
processes.