* 9728675
* Genetics of Neurospora
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1998,06/30/2003
* David Perkins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2003
* USD 490,000.00

PERKINS 9728675 Neurospora is being used to investigate genetic problems that
are not as readily approached with yeast or other organisms: (1) In a study of
internuclear cis-trans position effects, progeny that are heterokaryotic for
deficiencies of defined chromosome segments will be obtained from crosses
heterozygous for translocations. These will be examined for impaired
complementation between haploid nuclei, with the object of identifying segments
and genes that specify nucleus-limited or nucleus-associated functions. The
study is made possible by the existence of many well characterized chromosome
rearrangements and the ability to obtain ascospores that are heterokaryotic for
different products of the same meiosis. (2) The structure and content of a
complex chromosome region that is responsible for meiotic drive will be examined
using different Spore killer haplotypes in N. crassa and in the heterokaryotic
species N. tetrasperma. New variants responsible for resistance to killing will
be sought and characterized. The study is feasible because presence of a drive
element is signaled visually by asci containing four black and four white
ascospores. (3) Strains from natural populations will be examined for genetic
polymorphisms at two molecularly sequenced vegetative incompatibility (het)
loci, which govern the ability of nuclei to coexist in the same cytoplasm in a
heterokaryon. This study of self-nonself recognition is made possible by the
availability of insertional translocations that can be used to generate partial-
diploid progeny heterozygous for each of the individual het genes. The
filamentous fungus Neurospora serves as a modal for economically important fungi
and for fungal plant and animal pathogens. It also continues to provide basic
information on processes common to many higher organisms. Neurospora strains
with cells that contain nuclei of two different genetic types, one with a
deficient chromosome segment and the other with the corresponding active
segement, will be used to identify genes whose functions are nucleus-limited or
nucleus-localized. By using a series of defined segmental deficiencies, the
experiments should reveal whether genes with completely or partially impaired
internuclear complementation are widely distributed in the chromosomes. This
noninvasive approach should provide new insights into cell organization. Make-up
of the chromosomal Spore-killer complex is being examined. The direct effects of
this selfish chromosomal DNA element are displayed visually in Neurospora in the
pigmented ascospores of sexual hybrids. Genetic resolution of the complex should
aid in understanding the evolutionary history and significance of similar
meiotic drive elements in higher organisms. Neurospora is ideal for detecting
vegetative incompatibility genes that are able to distinguish "self" from
"nonself", thus controlling the ability of genetically different fungal cells to
fuse and form a stable multinucleate heterokaryon. The frequency and nature of
differences at two such gene loci are being examined in an extensive survey of
Neurospora cultures from nature. The study is expected to increase understanding
of the molecular basis of vegetative incompatibility and the significance of
incompatibility for the organism.