* 9728518
* Regulation of Shoot Development by the Maize Meristem
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Erin Irish, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2002
* USD 325,237.00

Irish 9728518 The shoot apical meristem of higher plants is ultimately
responsible for the post-embryonic addition of new cells, tissues, and organs to
the shoot through-out the life of the plant. During vegetative development, the
meristem initiates leaves and stem tissue in a repetitive manner. As vegetative
development progresses, the manner in which newly formed organs differentiate
may vary, in a process termed phase change. Once in the reproductive phase,
shoot meristems form or become floral meristems, which initiate a predictable
and determinate sequence of floral organs. Much remains to be learned about the
functioning of the vegetative shoot apical meristem, such as how it initiates
lateral organs, to what extent it determines how those organs differentiate, and
how the vegetative meristem is convened to an inflorescence or floral meristem.
The focus of the research proposed here is to ask to what controls various
developmental processes that occur at the shoot apex. The experiments will be
conducted using the maize plant, and will take advantage of a technique, shoot
meristem culture, that we have developed for maize. Our previous experiments
using meristem culture indicated that both the change from vegetative to
reproductive development and the process of phase change are under the control
of global signaling that occurs throughout the plant. We propose a set of
experiments that are aimed at understanding how global signaling in maize is
coordinated with meristem-autonomous activities. The following questions will be
addressed: 1. How is the expression of indeterminate, a gene required for the
transition to flowering in maize, affected by the culture-induced resetting of a
shoot apex? 2. How is the meristem reorganized when it is forced to undergo a
prolonged period of vegetative development? 3. Are all phase-specific phenotypes
reset when an adult meristem is isolated and forms a complete new shoot? If
resetting occurs in a specific gene (PI-Blotched), how is the methylation state
of that locus affected? 4. In mutant backgrounds in which the juvenile phase is
prolonged and reproduction delayed, is this slower ontogeny the result of
altered (weaker) signaling from leaf primordia? Is the expression of
heterochronic mutations dependent on the phase of the plant, or on a free-
running measurement o1' time after germination? The answers to these questions
will increase our understanding of the global changes that occur during shoot
ontogeny and the role of the shoot meristem, the site of organogenesis, in
directing these changes.