* 9728202
* Affinity Labeling of Nucleotide Sites in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Roberta Colman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 01/31/2002
* USD 275,000.00

Colman 9728202 1. Technical Nucleotides have a multi-functional role in cellular
metabolism: involved in kinase reactions, participate in dehydrogenase reactions
as part of the coenzyme molecule, function as regulators of many allosteric
enzymes, engaged (through the effects of cyclic AMP) in the action of several
hormones, and contribute to the aggregation of platelets. This study is aimed to
develop tools for a systematic exploration of the amino acid residues in the
nucleotide sites of proteins. The general approach of affinity is used, with
reagents previously synthesized in this laboratory and new reagents which
incorporate, at various positions of the purine or ribose ring alkylating agents
capable of reacting covalently with the protein; the nucleotide moiety thus
provides the specificity for chemical modification of the proteins within the
binding sites. The effects of these nucleotide alkylating agents are examined on
several enzymes; adenylosuccinate synthetase and adenylosuccinate lyase, which
catalyze successive reactions in the conversion of inosine monophosphate to AMP;
and cyclic AMP phosphodiesterases, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of cAMP to
form 5' - AMP. For each protein, the kinetics of the affinity labeling reaction
is examined, the extent of reagent incorporation determined and the radioactive
peptides isolated from proteolytic digests of labeled enzyme and identified with
the modified residue. The catalytic and ligand binding properties as well as the
conformational characteristics of the modified enzymes are also evaluated. For
most of these enzymes, the results of these enzymes in solution are compared
with their determined crystal structures. The nucleotide analogs,
fluorosulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides, have been tested on more than 50 proteins;
with results promising for its general applicability to other enzymes. They are
useful for the detection of nucleotide binding proteins expressed by cloning.
The significance of this may rest with providing the k nowledge base for
rational design of specific inhibitors targeted to particular nucleotide-
requiring enzymes. 2. Non-technical Nucleotides have a multifunctional role in
cellular metabolism, such as participating in enzymatic reactions, activating
regulatory enzymes, and serving as "second messenger" like cyclic AMP. This
study is aimed to develop the tools which allow a systematic exploration of the
enzyme which binds nucleotides. A general approach of "affinity labeling" is
used to attach a nucleotide moiety of the new reagent compound to a specific
binding site on the protein, irreversibly, so that the binding site can be
isolated and characterized. The effects of nucleotide alkylating agents on two
purine nucleotide biosynthesis enzymes and on an enzyme important in the
degradation of nucleotide cyclic AMP are studied. Nucleotide analogues such as
fluorsulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides which react to proteins at specific sites are
specifically probed. For biotechnology, these molecules can be used to detect
expression of cloned proteins, and to provide the knowledge base for rational
design of inhibitors for nucleotide-requiring enzymes.