* 9728552
* The Role of the Maternal Factors in Ascidian Development andEvolution
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Billie Swalla, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 204,336.00

This proposal describes experiments done with ascidian embryos, the simplest
chordate embryos known. These embryos develop in a very similiar manner to other
chordate embryos, including humans. The patterns of early cleavage, axis
formation and gastrulation are well described in ascidians and a number of
embryological experiments have shown that maternal factors in the egg are
important in specifying tissues in the larvae. Dr. Swalla's lab has used two
closely related ascidian species with very different larval phenotypes to
isolate and characterize maternal factors necessary for normal larval
development. They have isolated three novel genes that are present in the
species that has a tailed tadpole larva and are absent in the species that has a
tailless larva. Two of these genes are likely to be transcription factors that
bind DNA and turn genes off and on, while the other is likely to be a signalling
molecule involved in cell-cell communication. The experiments described in this
proposal will investigate the role these proteins may play in development by
characterizing the localization of the proteins in the eggs and embryos with
antibodies and by examining possible protein-protein interactions. These results
will give insight into how maternal proteins may be involved in developmental
processes and cell specification during embryonic development. A long term goal
of this laboratory is to then find similiar genes in vertebrate embryos and see
what their role might be in these embryos.