* 9728403
* The Contractile Vacuole Complex of Dictyostelium discoideum
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Margaret Clarke, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 02/28/2003
* USD 440,090.00

9728403 Clarke Abstract All eukaryotic cells contain a multi-subunit enzyme
called the vacuolar proton pump or V-ATPase which transports protons across
cellular membranes. In mammals this enzyme is needed for kidney function, uptake
of neurotransmitter molecules, acidification of intracellular compartments such
as endosomes and lysosomes, and bone resorption. The present study uses a simple
amoeboid cell, Dictyostelium, to explore the functions of the V-ATPase. These
cells contain a V-ATPase similar to that in mammals. The pump is enriched in a
specialized organelle called the contractile vacuole complex, which sequesters
and then expels excess fluid from the cell, much as the kidney does in higher
organisms. Using Dictyostelium cells, it is possible to explore the functions of
the V-ATPase by altering the genes that encode its subunits. The gene for a
large transmembrane subunit of the V-ATPase, whose function is poorly
understood, has been cloned. Attempts to disrupt this gene (vatM) or to block
its function by antisense mutagenesis have not been successful and argue that
this is an essential gene. However, a conditional mutant has been created by
replacing the promotor of the gene with a different promotor to change how the
expression of the gene is regulated. Under conditions that greatly reduce the
expression of this mutant gene, cells that carry the gene grow poorly and
mislocalize other proton pump subunits. These mutant cells, deficient in active
proton pumps, will be used to determine the roles of the V-ATPase in pH
homeostasis and the acidification of the endosomal and lysosomal compartments in
Dictyostelium. Antibody probes for proton pump subunits and for other components
of the contractile vacuoles and endosomes will be used to monitor the
organization of these compartments and their interrelationships. In addition,
fluorescent versions of these proteins will be prepared as tracers to observe
the dynamics of these compartments in living cells. In other experiment s, the
redistribution of proton pumps from internal compartments to the plasma membrane
will be examined since this also occurs in mammalian cells where these pumps are
found. The studies as a whole will explore several important features and
functions of the V-ATPase in a model cell system that resembles mammalian cells
but is more amenable to molecular genetic manipulation.