* 9728400
* Identification of Proteins Affecting Assembly, Regulation,  and Function of Thylakoid Protein Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will utilize the genomic sequence of the cyanobacterium
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (accessible through
http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano.html) to functionally identify "new"
proteins involved in the regulation, assembly and function of protein complexes
that catalyze electron transfer in thylakoid membranes of this cyanobacterium.
This project involves positive selection for spontaneous mutants (1) in which
photosystem II activity is decreased or abolished, or (2) in which regulation of
expression of particular genes has been modified. Positive selection will occur
by screening for high-light tolerance of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 strain
that lacks photosystem I; this strain is sensitive to high light but can be
propagated at high light intensity if photosystem II is impaired or if rates of
electron transport processes in the thylakoid membrane or the regulation by
particular redox components have been altered.&lt;br/&gt;The availability of the
genomic DNA sequence of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 provides a powerful approach
to a rapid identification of the location of spontaneous mutations that lead to
high-light tolerance of the photosystem I-less strain. DNA from these positively
selected mutants will be fragmented by restriction enzymes; each digest (treated
with one enzyme) will be size-separated on a gel and gel slices (each reflecting
a certain size range of DNA) will be tested for functional complementation of
the original (high-light sensitive) strain from which the spontaneous mutant was
derived. A complete restriction map of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 genome has
been constructed for 16 enzymes that cut this cyanobacterial genome 300-1000
times each. For each of the 16 restriction enzymes, the resulting fragments,
identified through their genomic position, have been sorted by size and compiled
into a table. Based on the size range of the fragments that can functionally
complement for each restriction enzyme, an appropriate size range of restriction
fragments can be selected from each table. These restriction fragments (each
identified through their position on the genome) are pooled, and are then sorted
according to the genomic nucleotide number at the end of each fragment. Upon
inspection of this sorted list, clusters of nucleotide numbers can be
identified. Generally only a single cluster can be found in which there is one
representative from each of the selected size regions for each of the enzymes.
By identifying the region that is common between all sequences in this cluster,
the domain carrying the mutation of interest (generally not longer than 2 kbp)
can be determined. The domain of interest will be amplified by PCR, the mutation
will be determined, and mutations in unknown genes can thus be simply mapped and
identified, even without cloning.&lt;br/&gt;Some of the complementing secondary
mutations may be in known genes, but others will be in open reading frames for
which no function is known yet. These open reading frames will be of particular
interest as the results obtained will help to assign a role to these known
sequences with unknown function. This method already has led to the
identification of an open reading frame that is similar to ycf39 from
chloroplasts and that affects photosystem II function in mutants. The next part
of the project will be the preliminary analysis of the role of open reading
frames that were identified. The types of analysis will depend on the open
reading frame and on the phenotype of the mutant, but may involve the following:
(1) sequence homology searches, (2) functional analysis of electron transport,
(3) gene expression studies, and (4) protein synthesis and degradation
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead to the identification of currently
unknown genes whose products may be involved in photosystem II assembly, in
electron transfer out of the plastoquinone pool in thylakoid membranes, or in
control of regulatory processes in the cell. This is an open field, but rapid
progress will be made now the genomic sequencing of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
has been completed, enabling effective and comprehensive means of analysis such
as the one described here. This area of research not only is an important
complement to large-scale sequencing efforts, in that it provides information
regarding the function of open reading frames, but also is expected to provide
novel insights into the regulation mechanisms and assembly processes required
for electron transport in thylakoid membranes.&lt;br/&gt;