* 9728940
* Conference:  What They Never Taught You In Graduate School: Leadership Skills for Scientists to be held in Washington,  D.C., December 13-17, 1997.
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Carl Cohen, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 05/31/1998
* USD 2,000.00

9728940 Cohen This is a grant for partial support of the second annual offering
of a four-hour Workshop on "Management Skills for Scientists," to be held at the
37th annual meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology in Washington DC,
on December 13, 1997. While scientists receive extensive technical training in
their specific disciplines, they often find themselves at a loss when placed in
a position of leading a research team. Lacking the skills required to resolve
conflicts, understand and channel motivation and foster a team approach, many
scientists focus exclusively on the technical issues of a project. While good
science may be accomplished under such circumstances, the premise of this
proposal is that familiarity with simple management and team building skills can
improve the performance of research teams. The workshop will consist of both a
didactic and an experiential component. The principles of team building and
management will be discussed and illustrated by examples and by workshop
participant experiences. The thesis of the workshop is that the funds which are
now spent on outstanding scientific research projects might be more effectively
used if scientific work team performance were optimal. In this sense ,the
workshop directly supports the scientific mission of the NSF by providing
scientists with a new set of tools to help improve productivity, communication
and learning.