* 9728786
* 3-Ketoacyl Synthases: Modification and Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Jan Jaworski, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/2002
* USD 304,000.00

9728786 Jaworski 3-Ketoacyl synthases (KAS) catalyze Claissen condensation
reactions in a variety of areas of metabolism. The malonyl-CoA and malonyl-acy
carrier protein (ACP) dependent KASs utilized in fatty acid, polyketide and
flavanoid biosynthesis play a major role in determining the final products of
these pathways. The two enzymes to be studied in this project are
3-ketoacy1-ACPIII (KAS Ill) from spinach and fatty acid elongase KAS from
Arabidopsis. KAS III catalyzes the initial condensation reaction of plant and
bacterial fatty acid synthesis, utilizing acetyl-CoA and malonyl-ACP. The fatty
acid elongase KAS encoded for by FAE1 is a membrane-bound enzyme that utilizes
malonyl-CoA and is involved with 20:1 and 22:1 fatty acid synthesis in oil
seeds. The specific objectives of the project are: 1. Site-directed mutagenesis
of KAS III. Highly conserved amino acid residues of the spinach KAS Ill will be
substituted either by neutral amino acids, e.g. alanine, or by amino acids
similar to the conserved residue. With each substitution, the partial reactions
relating to this condensing enzyme' s mechanism will be analyzed. These
reactions include 1. acety1-CoA binding, 2. acetylation of the active site, 2.
malonyl-ACP binding, 4. malonyl decarboxylation, 5. condensation, and 6. acetyl
transacylation (Fig. 3). The objective is to determine the effect of highly
conserved residues on each part of the KAS III mechanism. 2. Engineering and
mutagenesis of fatty acid elongase KAS. The identity of the active site cys will
be confirmed by substituting conserved cys with alanine and serine. The effect
of altering residues in the C-terminus region that are conserved with KAS III
and chalcone synthase will also be determined. 3. Initiate determination of the
3-D structure of KAS III. Spinach KAS Ill has been expressed in E. coli and
purified to homogeneity. This material will be used in an attempt to grow
crystals, and, if successful, determine the 3-dimensional structure of KAS III.
Si gnificance. KAS III and the fatty acid elongase KAS belong to a class of
enzymes that have profound effects on primary and secondary metabolism. In fatty
acid, polyketide, and flavanoid synthesis, the condensing enzymes that take part
in this metabolism are one the major determinants of the products of each
pathway. For example, the composition of very long chain fatty acids in the
seeds of A. thaliana, rape and jojoba can be directly related to the substrate
specificity of the fatty acid elongase KAS found in each. Because the substrate
specificities of condensing enzymes play such a key role in metabolism, it is
important to elucidate which structural features of KASs affect this aspect of
the enzymes' activities. However, the mechanisms for the Claissen condensation
that fatty acid KASs catalyze are, in all cases, poorly understood. Limited
information has been obtained for only a small number of related enzymes that
also carry out Claissen condensations, viz. thiolases.