* 9728754
* Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial Water-Oxidation Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728754 Burnap The focus of this project is on the structure and assembly of the
catalytic site of the photosynthetic water-oxidation reaction. The work combines
molecular genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches to clarify the process
of photoactivation, which is the sequential light-dependent assembly of the
catalytic tetramer of manganese atoms that forms the core of the water-oxidation
complex. Photoactivation represents a fascinating problem of metalloprotein
assembly. It is a multi-quantum process involving a sequence of kinetically
resolvable molecular rearrangements that are stabilized by the photooxidation of
manganese and binding of calcium. The molecular events occurring during this
process remain obscure and the major object of this research is to define these
events in terms of the influence of the protein groups providing the
coordination environment for the incoming manganese and calcium ions during the
assembly sequence. The research is facilitated by the availability of numerous
partially impaired site-directed mutants of putative manganese and calcium
ligands in the intrinsic portion of the complex and mutants of the extrinsic
polypeptides, which have been shown to modulate the efficiency of the assembly
process. Polarographic and fluorescence methods of monitoring the assembly
process are utilized. Earlier studies of photoactivation using intact mutant
cyanobacterial cells are now extended to in vitro studies where analysis of the
cofactor requirements of normal and genetically modified reaction center core
complexes can be studied in greater detail. Photosynthesis is a globally
important process that has a number of crucial unresolved features. Among the
most puzzling aspects of the photosynthetic mechanism is oxygen production by
the PSII water-splitting enzyme. PSII is of critical importance from both the
agricultural and ecological perspectives because it is responsible both for
generating the vast majority of hydrogen used to fix carbon into the earth's
biosphere and for releasing oxygen necessary for respiration. The understanding
of this process takes on added importance given the recognition of
anthropomorphic changes such as global warming and ozone depletion because PSII
is potentially quite sensitive to these environmental stresses. The project is
basic research into the enzyme mechanism of PSII and because PSII is also a
membrane protein, the knowledge gained from this project should also positively
impact the field of membrane biology, which has many important applications.