* 9728361
* Analysis of Linkages Between Engineering Programs and       Teacher Education Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Susan Vernon-Gerstenfeld, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1998
* USD 9,981.00

The primary objective of this project is to build upon the work done in 1996 by
a team of WPI students who focused on the impact of NSF-funded projects in
science for elementary teacher preparation. In 1997, another team of students
would focus on related issues, but in the engineering fields. A major goal of
the 1997 work would be to make engineering students more aware of teaching as a
career. Specifically the student team will engage in a variety of activities as
follows: 1) research the projects that NSF has funded that relate K-12 teacher
education and engineering, 2) determine what has been the impact of these
projects on K-12 teachers, 3) examine, on the basis of the above activities, the
feasibility of implementing at other institutions, what has emerged as the best
practices, 4) investigate what is the role of technology and its effective uses
in teacher preparation, as recommended by the 1996 student team, The bulk of the
research for this project would be conducted at NSF headquarters, with visits to
a sample of the NSF-funded project sites. The student team would conduct
interviews with Principal Investigators and other personnel associated with the
projects. They would also conduct interviews with students who are being exposed
to the NSF-funded activities at the same sites. The interviews would be
structured particularly to address points, two, three, and four above. In
preparation for those visits, the team would prepare a full literature review of
previous studies done on teacher education in the engineering fields and related
areas. In addition, the would survey the literature relating to the use of
technology in classrooms. The primary benefit to NSF in having this information
would be an increased understanding of what constitutes "best practices" in the
field and to understand how best to use this information in promoting and
implementing collaborative links that exist between engineering programs and
teacher education.