* 9728091
* The Ecology and Development of Male Song Production and Female Song Preferences in Brown-Headed Cowbirds From Different Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Adrian O'Loghlen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jerry O. Wolff
* 12/31/2002
* USD 192,250.00

Non Technical Abstract 9728091 Rothstein, S. I. This project employs integrated
field and laboratory approaches to investigate the development of vocal behavior
in a common songbird, the Brown-headed Cowbird. Major emphases are elucidation
of the ecological conditions that limit or enhance learning processes and the
concordance between (1) the development of female recognition of male song and
(2) the development of male song production. Goals will be pursued by studying
wild birds under different ecological conditions and by bringing birds into
captivity for short periods to study song structure and function. The cowbird is
important to the study of animal behavior and ecology for several reasons. The
extensive amount of prior work on it has made it a model for studies of vocal
development in songbirds, which is remarkably similar to speech development in
humans. However, much of the prior work has been limited to captive birds and
may not reflect learning processes that occur in nature. In addition, this
species is a brood parasite whose young are raised by a host species but
nevertheless overcomes this early behavioral deprivation and learns only cow-
bird vocalizations. Besides serving as a model for behavioral development in the
face of early deprivation, the cowbird is also significant to endangered species
and to the preservation of biodiversity. Other species may divert so much of
their parental effort towards raising cowbirds that they sometimes raise too few
of their own young to ensure the persistence of host populations. The basic
knowledge gained in this study may lead to improvements to the extensive and
very costly management efforts currently employed to ameliorate the impacts of
cowbird parasitism.