* 9728719
* Reconstructing the Whole Plant Archaeopteris, A Late        Devonian Progymnosperm Tree, and its Forested Landscapes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Stephen Scheckler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kitti Williams
* 06/30/2001
* USD 79,985.00

Scheckler 9728719 Archaeopteris, a progymnosperm tree, dominated the Earth's
first forests that began in the mid Paleozoic (Late Devonian, about 360-350
million years ago). These are extinct progymnosperm plants with many
similarities to seed plants, but that reproduced by spores rather than seeds.
These first forests are peculiar for several reasons. One is that they had only
one to three species of Archaeopteris at a time. Another is that these trees
grew and branched in self-limited way. Although tall (up to 30 m/90 It) and
sometimes wide (up to 1 m/3 It), the trees were not old. The trees lived for
only 3-20 years. Archaeopteris is an important model for growth and reproduction
of potential ancestral seed plant relatives. Several buried forests are exposed
in stone quarries near Binghamton, New York. The trees show how the landscape
and vegetation of ancient floodplains changed with the emergence of this
progymnosperm tree. New fossil specimens also show how Archaeopteris grew. This
project examines the role of tree growth in production and spread of these new
forest ecosystems by reconstructing the whole plant, from crown to roots, and by
mapping the vegetation of these buried forests. At no other time in Earth's
history did one plant type so dominate the world. These ancient forests thus
provide important information about the role of species diversity or species
poverty in the stability of forests and their ability to recover following
disturbance.