* 9728259
* Self-Centering Activity of Cytoplasm
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1998,06/30/1999
* Vladimir Rodionov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1999
* USD 220,000.00

9728259 Rodionov Microtubules (MTs) are structural elements (cytoskeleton) of
the cell. They have multiple functions, including maintaining cell shape and
serving as tracks for the movement of other subcellular structures or
organelles. The movement of subcellular structures along MTs is catalyzed by
unidirectional protein "motors" that move either to the "plus-end" of the MTs
(i.e., kinesin) or to the "minus-end" (i.e., dynein). In many cell types, the
MTs are arranged in a radial array that supports traffic from the middle of the
cell to the periphery. It had generally been assumed that the organization of
this radial array of MTs is a result of nucleation at the centrosome; however,
it is now becoming clear that the MT array can self-organize, and that
alternative cellular mechanisms exist which position the focal point of radial
MTs at the center of a cell. The objective of this research is to elucidate the
mechanism of self-organization and centering of the radial array of cytoplasmic
MTs. Cytoplasmic fragments of fish melanophores (the cells in fish skin that
make it possible for fishes to change color) provide an excellent model system
for the study of the self-centering mechanism. In melanophores, thousands of
pigment granules move along radial MTs by means of molecular motors to the cell
center to form a tight aggregate (causing the skin to appear light) or to the
periphery to redisperse uniformly throughout the cytoplasm (causing the skin to
appear dark). When cytoplasmic fragments of melanophores are produced by
microsurgery, the MTs organize into a radial array of correct polarity
orientation (plus ends outwards) and the pigment aggregates in the center, even
in the absence of a centrosome. This organization of MTs into a radial array is
fast and depends on the activity of a minus end motor (dynein). These
observations allowed the development of a model for the self-centering activity
of melanophore fragments. In the model, pigment aggregation itself induces form
ation of the radial MT array. Each pigment granule during aggregation interacts
with more than one MT, and unidirectional transport of granules brings MT minus
ends together. Nucleation of MTs at the pigment aggregate contributes to self-
organization. Information about the position of the focal point of radial MTs is
derived from interaction of MT ends with the surface. The driving force for
relocation to the center is provided by MT motors at the pigment aggregate or at
the surface, coupled with the addition or loss of MT subunits. The imbalance of
forces which drives relocation of the pigment aggregate to the center is
produced by the greater effective number of MTs which connect the aggregate to
the closest edge. The major statements of the model will be tested by a
combination of cell, structural and immunochemical methodologies. The following
are the specific aims of the project: (i) to test MT transport and nucleation
models of self-organization of MTs into a radial array. Photobleaching and
photoactivation will be used to examine the behavior of MTs during formation of
radial MTs and at steady state. (ii) to test if asymmetry in effective MT number
drives relocation of the pigment aggregate to the center. Digital fluorescence
imaging will be used to test if selective stabilization of MTs at the surface
causes the increase in MT number which explains the imbalance of forces driving
centering. (iii) to determine if MT asters of reversed polarity form in
melanophore fragments with dispersed pigment after disruption of the actin
cytoskeleton and stimulation of a plus-end directed motor. Drugs which interfere
with the uniform distribution of pigment granules will be employed to test a
major statement of the model that transport of pigment granules induces self-
organization of the radial MT array. This research will increase our
understanding of general principles of self-organization and positioning of
microtubule arrays within cells.