* 9728383
* Statistical Theory of Peak Detection for Human Hearing
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Julius Goldstein, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

IBN 97-28383 GOLDSTEIN Human hearing continuously monitors the frequency
composition of sounds throughout the audio range (50-16,000 Hz). The inner ear
allows the brain to monitor about 4,000 different overlapping frequency bands
within this range. A model for how this is accomplished by the brain, the"
simple spectrogram model," has been used widely throughout this century by
scientists and engineers. The model represents auditory frequency analysis with
25 contiguous linear filters, each spanning 1/3 of an octave, with the brain
monitoring the energy within short segments (10-250 milliseconds) of the filter
responses. By assuming further that information received by the brain is limited
by internal noise, this model has served as a basic framework for predicting
human abilities to recognize speech and to discriminate changes in sounds.
Limitations of the simple model are known, including failures to predict audible
distortion tones generated by inner- ear nonlinearity, and sensitivity to signal
waveform. In recent collaborative research with Bell Laboratory scientists, Dr.
Goldstein discovered that detection of signal peaks rather than energy improves
model predictions of discrimination phenomena. This revived interest in an
earlier, "peak-detection," model of Dr. Goldstein's (1967) that was used to
explain discrimination of waveform changes produced by modulation of sinusoidal
carriers. As a result, evidence was found for two processes at each auditory
filter in the peak-detection model. Because of other recent evidence that slow
modulations within speech sounds contribute to their recognition, these newly
recognized characteristics of hearing may be particularly relevant for audio
science and engineering. In the present project, use of random signals minimizes
confounding effects of inner-ear nonlinearity on interpretations of experiments.
The project is exploiting this to develop further the model of auditory peak
detection. In addition to upgradi ng the classical spectrogram model, this
research is contributing knowledge of functions performed by neural mechanisms
beyond the inner ear.