* 9728782
* Thioredoxin Control of Transcription during the Cell Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Christopher Mathews, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

9728782 Merrill All eucaryotic cells possess a mechanism for inducing the
transcription of a specific class of genes at the G1/S boundary of the cell
cycle. In yeast, short cis-acting elements termed MCBs have been implicated in
G1/S gene induction. Similar elements, termed E2F sites, have been implicated in
higher eucaryotes. The genes are induced shortly after cells commit to the cell
cycle, and the mechanism linking gene induction to the commitment decision has
been the subject of increasingly intense research. In a genetic screen for
mutations that allow MCB reporter gene expression in yeast lacking the MCB
transcription factor Swi6, all thirty of the mutations isolated mapped to a
single gene - TRRI - encoding thioredoxin reductase. Deleting TRRI or deleting
the yeast thioredoxin genes TRXI and TRX2 also strongly activated MCB reporter
gene expression. The trrl mutations did not increase the asynchronous cell
levels or eliminate the periodicity of several endogenous MCB gene mRNAs,
however, peak mRNA levels occurred earlier in the mutants. Conditions expected
to oxidize thioredoxin (exposure to H202) induced MCB gene expression, whereas
conditions expected to conserve reduced thioredoxin (exposure to hydroxyurea)
inhibited MCB gene expression. The results indicate that thioredoxin oxidation
contributes to MCB element activation. Thioredoxin oxidation may either
inactivate a negative regulator of MCB activity, or activate a positive
regulator. One goal of the project is to test the hypothesis that a transient
episode of RNR-mediated oxidation of thioredoxin contributes to MCB gene
activation at G1/S. RNR-mediated oxidation of thioredoxin neatly explains how
gene induction could be coupled to replication initiation. The prediction that
MCB gene induction should be blccked if DNA replication is inhibited will be
tested using (-factor-synchronized dbf4 cells that cannot initiate replication
at the nonpermissive temperature. The prediction that thioredoxin should become
more oxidize d at G1/S will be tested in (-factor-synchronized dbf4 cells
incubated at the permissive and nonpermissive temperature. The in vivo redox
state of thioredoxin will be determined by a method involving immunoblotting
after differential alkylation. As asynchronous cell measurements indicate the
dNTP pool in yeast is only a small fraction of the size needed for genome
replication, increased reduction of ribonucleotides must occur near the G1/S
border. To determine whether increased ribonucleotide reduction is due to
allosteric or non-allosteric mechanisms, RNR protein, RNA activity, and dNTP
pools sizes will be measured in synchronized cells. In addition to testing a
specific model for RNR involvement in transcriptional control at G1/S, the
experiments will yield fundamental information about biochemical changes that
occur during the cell cycle. A second goal of the research is to identify
downstream mediators of the thioredoxin/MCB regulation pathway. Three specific
proteins that are potential mediators of the thioredoxin effect on MCB activity
will be evaluated by determining whether trr1 mutations activate MCB genes in
yeast lacking the SW14, SKN7, or YAP1 genes. Once genetic approaches have
identified a protein suspected of mediating the thioredoxin effect, in vitro
biochemical experiments will investigate whether the protein has oxidation-prone
thiols that are efficiently reduced by thioredoxin, and site-directed
mutagenesis experiments will evaluate the effect of modifying specific cysteines
on protein function in vivo. Several genes are preferentially expressed at about
the time that cells begin replicating their DNA. The planned experiments test
the idea that DNA replication itself is the switch that turns on gene
expression. To replace the DNA precursors consumed by the replication process,
the cell must rapidly reduce ribonucleotides to the deoxyribonucleotide form.
The probable source of electrons during ribonucleotide reduction is thioredoxin
- a protein that maintains other proteins in their reduced state. Thus, DNA
replication may trigger an episode of thioredoxin oxidation, which in turn may
oxidize control proteins that regulate transcription.