* 9728287
* Environmental Influences on Commitment of Mouse             Mid-Hindbrain Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Daniel Turnbull, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 04/30/2002
* USD 284,790.00

9728287 TURNBULL A persistent question in developmental neurobiology is when
and how neuronal cells become committed to become particular cell types.
Transplantation of cells and tissues from one region of the embryonic brain to
another provides a method to test whether neural cells take on the
characteristics of their new environment, or maintain the characteristics of
their region of origin. In the past, these methods have been used in chick
embryos, which are relatively easily accessible at embryonic stages. These
studies have shown that tissue grafts from the mid-hindbrain, or early stage
brainstem region maintain characteristics of the mid-hindbrain even after
transplantation to far removed regions of the embryonic forebrain. Testing the
commitment of mammalian neural cells through transplantation has been more
difficult, because of the inaccessibility of embryos encased in the maternal
uterus. Dr. Turnbull has recently developed a high resolution ultrasound imaging
system which allows in utero image-guided transplantation of early stage neural
cells between specific regions of the embryonic mouse brain. Using this system
to transplant cells between embryonic mid-hindbrain and forebrain regions, Dr.
Turnbull's laboratory has determined that a subpopulation of mouse mid-hindbrain
cells are capable of taking on characteristics of the forebrain after
transplantation, at embryonic stages significantly later than would have been
predicted from previous experiments in the chick. Dr. Turnbull and his coworkers
will now use this approach to characterize the embryonic stages at which cells
from the mouse midbrain and cerebellum become committed to a mid-hindbrain fate.
In addition, transplantation experiments will be conducted using neural cells
from mouse mutant strains, in which alterations in specific genes are known to
disrupt normal development of the early mid-hindbrain region. By comparing
ultimate fates of transplanted normal cells versus cells obtained from defined
mutant m ouse strains, these investigators will determine the role of several
genes in committing mid-hindbrain cells to the fate of their region of origin.
The experimental techniques being developed in this project, combining direct
embryonic manipulations with the extensive genetic information and defined
mutant strains available in the mouse, will provide a powerful new approach for
studying developmental processes and genetic interactions in the mammalian
nervous system.