* 9728365
* Ensuring Coordination and Consistency in Implementing the   Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics and       Science Teaching Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Thomas Keller, Council of State Science Supervisors
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 09/30/1999
* USD 168,050.00

9728365 Kellor Project Description Since 1983, the National Science Foundation
has administered the Presidential Awards for Excellence in Mathematics and
Science Teaching Program (PAEMST) on behalf of the White House. The Council of
State Science Supervisors (CSSS) proposes to conduct a conference for state and
jurisdictional level science and mathematics coordinators, who have as part of
their responsibilities, the implementation of the PAEMST Program at the state
level. CSSS is uniquely qualified to conduct the conference, as they are the
membership organization for the science supervisors in all fifty states. PAEMST
recognizes outstanding mathematics and science teachers K-12. Recognition begins
with the selection of state and jurisdictional finalists in the categories of
elementary science, secondary science, elementary mathematics, and secondary
mathematics. Finalists' names are forwarded to NSF where a national selection
committee, composed of outstanding mathematicians, scientists, and educators,
recommends awardees in each category. These names are then forwarded to the
White House for final approval. This is an extremely important effort, as there
are several issues that need attention by the state and jurisdictional chairs
for the PAEMST program, such as consistency and fairness in selecting state
finalists, efforts to increase the participation of underserved minority
teachers, appropriate recognition and later utilization of awardees at the state
level, connecting awardees at the state and national levels with significant
education reform efforts in mathematics and science. This conference provides
the only forum for state and jurisdictional chairs to meet and create plans to
address these issues.