* 9728134
* Excited-State Reaction Dynamics of Bacteriochlorophyll      Dimers
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/21/1999
* Warren Beck, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/21/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9728134 Beck This research project is designed to test the hypothesis that
bacteriochlorophyll dimers in asymmetric protein environments populate
intradimer charge-transfer states after optical preparation of the lower exciton
state. In order to test this hypothesis, the investigator will characterize the
excited-state coherent wavepacket motions that arise during light-induced charge
transfer in two asymmetric systems: the bacteriochlorophyll a dimer in the B820
subunit of the LH1 light-harvesting complex, as isolated from Rhodospirillum
rubrum G9, and the carbocyanine dye 3,3'-diethylthiatri-carbocyanine iodide
(DTTCI). Dynamic absorption spectroscopy will be used to characterize the
modulations of the photobleaching and stimulated-emission signals that arise
from coherent wavepacket motion on the ground and excited states, respectively.
Stimulated-photon-echo and transient-grating spectroscopy will be used to
examine the electronic dephasing of the initially prepared state. The wavepacket
motions exhibited by B820 will be compared to those exhibited by monomeric
bacteriochlorophyll a and by the intact LH1 ring system, where dimer-dimer
interactions are thought to be important, to see if the surface-crossing
dynamics observed in B820 are specific to bacteriochlorophyll dimers. The long-
term goal of the proposed work is to obtain a detailed understanding of the
dynamics of charge transfer in both target systems in terms of the potential-
energy surfaces that are involved and in terms of the vibrational modes that
promote the reaction. This research project will use laser spectroscopy with
femtosecond pulses of light to study how electrons are transferred in pairs of
bacteriochlorophyll molecules. Bacteriochlorophyll molecules are used by
photosynthetic plants and bacteria in light-harvesting structures and in
reaction centers, where some of the energy of the absorbed light is converted to
chemical energy. The structure of the reaction center from purple bacteria
contains a pair of ba cteriochlorophyll molecules that act as the trigger point
for the fast events that lead to storage of energy. The work in this research
project will study reactions in a simple bacteriochlorophyll-containing protein
and in an important type of organic dye; both systems exhibit very fast
electron-transfer reactions that occur just after absorption of light. In
addition to contributing to the understanding of the mechanism of the light
reactions of photosynthesis, this research project will contribute to the
general understanding of how solar energy can be converted by chemical systems
into stored forms of energy. In the long term, the project will help determine
how light-absorbing molecules can be physically organized in materials to obtain
energy-storing devices or novel catalysts.