* 9728463
* A Two-Component Signal Transduction Pathway in DictyosteliumDevelopment
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* William Loomis, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 02/28/2002
* USD 409,000.00

9728463 Loomis Signals are received on the surface of cells and transduced to
physiological responses within the cells. This research is analyzing a two-
component system in the soil amoeba Dictyostelium, which consists of a sensor
kinase and a response regulator. When the signal activates the sensor kinase, it
autophosphorylates one of its histidines and then relays the phosphate to the
response regulator. In Dictyostelium the sensor kinase is encoded by the dhkA
gene and the response regulator is encoded by the regA gene. Mutations that
inactivate dhkA block sporulation under all conditions while those that
inactivate regA result in rapid sporulation even in the absence of prestalk
derived signals. In these experiments the histidine kinase activity of DhkA will
be measured before and after it binds the small peptide, SDF-2, that is released
by prestalk cells. The amino acids in DhkA that are phosphorylated by the kinase
will also be determined. The results of these experiments will provide a solid
foundation for further understanding how this sensor kinase functions.
Conditions will then be established by these investigators to measure the relay
of the phosphate from DhkA to the response regulator, Reg A. These investigators
have recently found that RegA is an enzyme that hydrolyzes cAMP and thereby
prevents protein kinase A (PKA) from being active by removing cAMP from its
regulatory subunit. Genetic studies indicate that RegA is not active when it is
phosphorylated by Dhka, possibly because it can no longer associate with the
regulatory subunit of PKA. Experiments outlined here will test for the
interactions of the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of RegA with the
regulatory subunit of PKA. The specific protein domains necessary for this
interaction will be defined. Two component systems have been shown to function
in various responses of bacteria, fungi and plants, and this laboratory has
isolated a cDNA from mouse tissue that is a histidine kinase and may func tion
in signal transduction. These studies will provide further details on how these
two component systems operate. One of the important signal transduction pathways
is the two component system in which signals are received by a protein kinase,
which then autophosphorylates a histidine residue, and then transfers this
phosphate to another protein known as the response regulator, which in turn
activates other proteins ultimately resulting in a response to the signal. The
research described here is looking at the detailed mechanisms by which this
process occurs in the soil amoeba Dictyostelium Since these two component
systems operate in many bacteria and higher plants and possibly vertebrates, it
is important to understand the biochemical and genetic mechanisms of these
systems. ***