* 9728608
* Genetic, Developmental, and Environmental Determinants of   Honey Bee Foraging Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Robert Page, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* stephen vessey
* 02/28/2001
* USD 220,000.00

97-28608 Genetic, Developmental and Environmental Determinants of Honey Bee
Foraging R. E. Page, Jr. Non-Technical Summary Honeybee colonies are normally
composed of a queen and thousands of non-reproductive workers. The workers
demonstrate a division of labor for behavioral tasks resulting in the survival,
maintenance, and reproduction of the colony. One of the most interesting
examples is the division of labor between workers inside the nest raising brood,
constructing wax comb, processing honey, etc. and those that forage outside the
nest. This division of tasks is often related to a worker's age. Some foragers
specialize further in collecting nectar and others in collecting only pollen.
Honeybee colonies must respond to changing conditions in the environment, such
as the availability of food, and they must respond to changes in colony needs,
such as the amount of pollen protein needed to feed a growing colony. Genetic
make up is also important. Bees with some genetic constitutions are more likely
to forage for pollen under a specific set of environmental conditions than are
individuals of a different genotype. Building on previous research, this project
will employ molecular genetic methodology to examine the influence of identified
genes on foraging specialization, and to comprehensively examine how the
influences of these genes interact with developmental (age) effects and
environmental conditions.