* 9728767
* MCAA: Inbreeding Depression, Parental Behavior,  and Mate   Preference in Two Populations of the Prairie Vole
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Zuleyma Tang-Martinez, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/2000
* USD 45,750.00

PROPOSAL #: IBN 9728767 PI: Zyleyma Tang-Matrinez The proposed research will
examine the genetic and behavioral effects of inbreeding, using the vole,
Microtus ochrogaster as the model organism. The research will address: 1. The
effects of inbreeding (defined as mating between close relatives) on the number
of young produced per litter, as well as the weight, growth rates and survival
of the pups. 2. The effects of inbreeding on parental behaviors. 3. Preferences
of voles for related versus unrelated partners, or for inbred versus outbred
partners. Systematic, quantitative behavioral observations along with weighing
and monitoring of pups produced by inbred versus outbred matings will be
employed to address the first two objectives. Mate choice experiments will
demonstrate whether voles show preferences among four potential mates of
different degrees of genetic relatedness ofrinbreeding. Inbreeding has
detrimental effects in many species of animals, including humans. These effects
may include decreased growth, reduce vigor, and the expression of genetic
diseases of defects. Deficits in parental behaviors may cause or exacerbate some
of these effects but almost nothing is currently known about the interactions
between inbreeding and parental behavior. Similarly, little is known about the
importance of inbreeding in determining mate choices. This research is expected
to provide insights into possible behavioral effects of inbreeding in animals
that could potentially be extrapolated to humans. Moreover, the information
generated will be valuable to husbandry and conservation efforts that require
the maintenance of genetic diversity in populations.