* 9728053
* Cell Polarity and Localized Maternal Proteins in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Kimberly Mowry, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728053 Mowry

Establishment of polarity in the egg can be described as the earliest step in
embryonic patterning. A single cell, the fertilized egg, contains the
information that will ultimately specify the entire organism. As the egg divides
during the early stages of embryonic development, different cells acquire
different fates. One mechanism to account for this difference in developmental
potential among the cleavage cells is the sequestering of molecules in the egg
that could specify such potential. It is a long-standing proposal that
localization of such determinants prior to fertilization can provide the basis
for pattern formation in the early embryo. While there is evidence for the
existence of localized cytoplasmic determinants in many systems, the identities
of such determinants remain largely unknown in vertebrates, and the mechanisms
for establishment of polarity in the oocyte are poorly understood.

In eggs of the frog, Xenopus laevis, cell polarity is readily apparent along the
animal/vegetal (AV) axis, which represents an axis of developmental potential
whereby specific cell fates are assigned with respect to the AV axis. What is
not known are the identities of all the presumptive maternal determinants, and
how they come to be properly localized in the oocyte. Such determinants can be
localized as mRNA or protein; localized mRNAs are well documented in the Xenopus
oocyte, and some are thought to play roles in axial patterning. While it is
apparent that not all of the localized maternal components are RNAs, little
progress has been made on identifying localized maternal protein determinants.

The goal of the proposed research is to identify and characterize localized
maternal protein determinants in the Xenopus egg. The foundation for this work
has been laid by Dr. Mowry's success in devising a subtractive immunization
scheme to obtain monoclonal antibodies specific for proteins that are localized
in the frog egg. Focusing their efforts on two of these vegetally localized
proteins, three specific objectives are proposed: I. They will characterize the
localized proteins at both the molecular and cytological levels. II. They will
probe functions of the localized proteins in patterning and polarity. III. They
will investigate the mechanism by which these proteins are restricted to the
vegetal cortex.

These experiments are designed to investigate how developmental signals are
spatially distributed to underlie patterning in the vertebrate embryo, and may
also provide insight into how into how polarity is established in the oocyte.

