* 9728399
* The Identification and Characterization of Synthetic        Peptide Substrates and Inhibitors for Protein Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,07/08/1999
* Kit Lam, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/08/1999
* USD 96,750.00

Lam 9728399 1. Technical This study focuses on protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs),
which play an important role in signal transduction for a broad spectrum of
cellular activities, including T-cell and B-cell activation, responses to
extracellular stimuli, mitogenesis, differentiation, and oncogenesis. The
objective is to further our understanding of the range and substrate specificity
of these enzymes, particularly peptide substrates and inhibitors for p60c-src
PTK. The structure-activity relationship, kinetic parameters, physico-chemical
interaction, and biological and biochemical effects on v-src transfected cells
or cells that have constitutively elevated c-src activity are basic issues that
are studied. Experiments include: evaluation "one-bead one-compound"
combinatorial peptide libraries with p60c-src PTK for identification of
additional substrate motifs; design of potent pseudosubstrate-based peptide
inhibitors for p60c-src PTK; detailed kinetic studies on the identified
substrates and inhibitors; probing the biochemical effects of the peptide
inhibitors on the phosphorylation of cellular proteins; examining the biological
and biochemical effects of the peptide inhibitors on v-src transfected 3T3 and
other cell lines; computer modelling ( DOCK program) the interaction between the
peptide substrates or inhibitors with the known crystal structure of p60c-src
PTK; and determining the X-ray crystal structure of the co-crystal (in
collaboration with Professor Stephen Harrison and Michael Eck of Harvard
University). 2. Non-technical Protein tyrosine kinases represent a class of
enzymes that play extremely important roles in various cellular activities such
as cell division, cell death, and cancer formation. Despite their great
importance, very little is known about the mechanism of action of these enzymes.
The objective of this study is to build on what has already been discovered in
this laboratory in the last two years (NSF Grant MCB 9506217) on the p60c-src
protein tyrosine ki nase project. The peptide substrates and inhibitors that
have already been identified will be used to further study the mechanism of
action of this enzyme. Kinetic studies will also be performed with these
peptides. Additionally, Dr. Lam has established a collaboration with Drs. Eck
and Harrison of Harvard University to determine the X-ray structure of the
peptide-enzyme complex. Also planned is the use of computer modelling techniques
to understand how these peptides interact with the enzyme. Finally, different
approaches will be followed to deliver the peptide inhibitors into cells and
study their fundamental biological effect on cell lines which have an elevated
level of protein for p60c-src tyrosine kinase.