* 9728742
* Genetic Analysis of Mouse Cortical Development and          Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Yuqing Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2002
* USD 307,000.00

9728742 LI During the development of many sensory systems in vertebrates, the
sensory periphery (e.g. the body surface, or retina of the eye) must become
properly mapped in the central nervous system. Previous research has shown that
some aspects of this mapping depend on neural activity to match up the central
maps to individual differences in the sensory periphery. Dr. Li's research is to
understand how neural activity regulates the formation of specific synaptic
connections in brain maps that represent the whiskers on a mouse's face . In the
past, Dr. Li and his colleagues developed a line of transgenic mice without NMDA
receptors (a subtype of glutamate receptor in the brain) to study activity-
dependent synaptic refinement. Their work on the whisker-to-barrel, or
trigeminal, sensory system has shown that the formation of the whisker-related
neural maps in brainstem trigeminal nuclei requires NMDA receptor activity.
However, it has been unsettled whether the development of whisker-related
patterns requires NMDA receptor activation at the higher levels (thalamus and
cerebral cortex) along the trigeminal neuraxis. In order to resolve this issue,
Dr. Li and his colleagues will use the Cre/LoxP technique to delete one subtype
of NMDA receptor in the developing cortex. They have recently created a line of
transgenic mice that can inactivate tagged genes specifically in the developing
cerebral cortex by the restricted expression of a bacterial recombinase enzyme
(cre). When crossed with other transgenic mice in which the NR2B subunit of the
NMDA receptor has been inserted between two LoxP sites, the cre-mediated
recombination will delete the NR1/NR2B subtype of NMDA receptors in the cerebral
cortex. They will then study the development and plasticity of whisker-related
neuronal patterns in the cerebral cortex. In collaboration with other
researchers, Dr. Li's group uses gene targeting technology, axonal tracing,
whole-cell patch clamp and extracellular recording techniques combined wi th
histochemical detection methods to reveal the anatomical and functional
organization of the whisker-to-barrel sensory system in these genetically
altered mice. This multidisciplinary research should lead to a comprehensive
understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms of cortical development
and plasticity.