* 9728024
* Characterization of Higher Plant Phosphoinositide-specific  Phospholipase C
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2000
* Richard Crain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 09/30/2000
* USD 110,001.00

Abstract 9728024 Crain The biochemical mechanisms by which plants perceive and
respond to changes in the environment are poorly understood. This investigator
believes that the breakdown of phosphoinositide lipids brings environmental
information into the plant cell. Phosphoinositide breakdown produces inositol
phosphates and diacylglycerol, which play key roles in regulating cell
physiology. Phosphoinositide specific phospholipases C (PLC) are critical in the
transduction of hormonal and environmental signals in animal cells. Plant cells
also contain PLCs specific for phosphoinositides, and there is evidence that
these enzymes are involved in mediating plant cell response to environmental
stimuli. Although some of these enzymes have been partially purified and some
cloned, little is known about the properties or regulation of these enzymes, or
how many PLCs are present in plant cells. The experiments described here will
investigate this class of enzymes in order to understand their regulation and
role in plant responses to environmental signals. The enzymes will be identified
in oat roots and purified, sequenced and cloned, and their regulation examined.
The research described here will identify, purify and study the regulation of
phospholipase C enzymes in plants, which breakdown lipids known as
phosphoinositides, and which are thought to play an important role in the
perception of and response to environmental stimuli. ***