* 9728662
* Analysis of the Function of a Neuronal-associated FABP
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Marino De Leon, Loma Linda University
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 06/30/2001
* USD 174,262.00

9728662 DE LEON Axons are a functional and distinct extension of the cell bodies
(soma) if nerve cells. Axons transport materials that are needed to carry on the
daily cell-to-cell communications that occur distant from the soma. At times of
rapid axon growth, such as during normal development and axon regeneration, the
nerve cell's soma (where the nucleus is located) synthesizes high levels of key
proteins and phospholipids. These newly synthesized materials are efficiently
transported to the end of the axon where regenerative or developmental growth
occurs. Presumably, some of these newly synthesize proteins are important for
axon growth. This research will determine if a recently discovered neuronal
fatty acid binding protein, named DA11FABP, is required for nerve cells to grow
neurites successfully. Previous studies from the PI's laboratory have shown that
DA11FABP exhibits a robust induction during both developmental and regenerative
axonal growth. The first goal of the study will be to create a neuronal-like
cell line expressing significantly reduced levels of DA11 protein and determine
if these cell lines exhibit a deficit in producing neurites during cellular
differentiation. The next goal of the study is to determine what is the
biological ligand of DA11 in these cell lines. This part of the study includes
the production of recombinant protein and conducting binding studies to
determine the affinity of the ligand(s) for DA11. The last part of the study
will determine whether the biological action of DA11 during cellular
differentiation is directly linked to its binding of its ligand(s). The results
obtained from this study would likely increase our understanding of the
molecular and cellular mechanism of axon growth and nerve regeneration.