* 9728984
* Dissertation Research:  Modern Analog Study of Landscape    Vegetation Contexts across the Lowermost Bed II Olduvai     Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1999
* USD 11,529.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, MS Sandi Copeland will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. Her ultimate goal is the reconstruct the
vegetation patterns at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania during a time interval ca. 1.7
million years ago. A large scale archaeological project directed by Dr.
Blumenschine has focused on broadly exposed sediments which date to this time
horizon. The group has collected large samples of both faunal and artifact
remains which have the potential to provide insight into how early hominids
utilized the landscape. However to understand early human behavior it is
necessary to project these data on a detailed landscape reconstruction because
only when one understands the distributions of trees, open grassland and
potentially edible food species is it possible to reconstruct subsistence
strategy. Although some data such as soil carbonate samples are available, these
are not sufficient to accomplish the desired goal. With an innovative research
design MS Copeland will examine modern analog landscapes. Based on geological
similarity with Olduvai, she has located three regions in Tanzania which share
essential characteristics with different parts of the paleo-landscape. She shall
conduct careful vegetation analyses of these present day environments using
sampling techniques. She will focus on resources such as potential plant foods
and sleeping trees of presumed importance to early hominids to determine their
density, distribution and association. She will also collect geological data
which will allow her to `pin` the detailed modern patterns on the Olduvai
landscape. This research is important for several reasons. It will help to
develop a methodological tool which may be applied in many environments in many
parts of the world. It will shed new light on early hominid behavior at a
classic African site. It will also assist in training a promising young
scientist.