* 9728550
* Biochemical Properties of gpNu1, a Phage Lambda Protein     Required for Viral Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Carlos Catalano, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 309,646.00

Catalano 9728550 1. Technical Packaging of DNA within an empty pre-formed
capsid proceeds through an ordered progression of nucleoprotein intermediates
requires terminase, an enzyme common to all of the double-stranded DNA
bacteriophages. The enzyme subunits, gpNu1 and gpA, assemble onto a multi-
element DNA binding site generating a nucleoprotein complex, excising a single
genome from the concatamer and inserting it into the capsid. This study
examines, at the molecular level, the biochemical and biophysical properties of
the lambda phage 1 gpNu1 protein which are responsible for the cooperative
assembly and unusual stability of the nucleoprotein intermediates involved. The
aims are to understand the roles of gpNu1 self-association interactions and
gpNu1 gpA protein protein interactions in the assembly and stability of the
nucleoprotein complexes critical to the assembly. The experiments are designed
to provide a detailed understanding of the thermodynamic linkages between gpNu1
self-association and cooperative binding to DNA, and to the subsequent assembly
of gpA and a catalytically competent genome packaging complex. This study also
seeks to define functional domains within the gpNu1 polypeptide which are
responsible for the observed oligomerization of gpNu1, for gpNu1 gpA
interactions, and for cooperative binding to DNA. Since the terminase enzyme is
common to many double-stranded DNA viruses, findings from this study may be
generally applicable to the understanding of other viral assembly and packing
mechanisms. 2. Non-Technical A variety of biological processes require the
assembly of multiple proteins onto specific sites within the chromosomes of
cells and/or viruses. Many of these complexes initially assemble as stable
intermediates which are subsequently transformed into highly mobile biological
machines. Elaborate nucleoprotein (DNA and protein) complexes are responsible
for critical biological processes including the replication of chromosomes, the
synthesis of messenger RNA, and the assembly of infectious viruses. This study
is to elucidate the process of viral assembly within the cell and the complex
process of viral chromosome packaging, specifically in the involvement of the
terminase enzyme, the multi-protein machines which insert the viral chromosome
within a protective protein shell in bacteriophage lambda, a virus which infects
the bacteria E. coli. This enzyme, which is common to many double-stranded DNA
viruses, is an integral part of an ordered series of nucleoprotein complexes
which are critical to viral assembly. Experiments are carried out to examine the
biochemical and biophysical properties of gpNu1, a phage l packaging protein,
which are responsible for the assembly and unusual stability of the
nucleoprotein intermediates involved in viral chromosome packaging. Importantly,
the data derived from these studies will additionally yield insight into the
basic principles driving the assembly of stable nucleoprotein complexes involved
in a variety of biological processes critical to both viral and cellular
replication.