* 9728470
* Using Physiological Structure to Model Individual Production:  A Simulation and Test
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Steven Beaupre, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2003
* USD 217,284.00

Beaupre 9728470 Animals in nature, like people, make complex decisions about how
they use their time. These decisions influence the amount of food they obtain,
and how they use that food to grow and reproduce, which in turn, influences the
size and health of the population. If the PIs can understand how changes in an
animal's environment affect connections between time use and production (growth
and reproduction) then the PIs can make better predictions about the responses
of animals to environmental change (natural, or human-caused). Perhaps the best
way to understand how environmental change will influence animals is to
experimentally change the environment and observe their responses. In this
project, the PI will experimentally increase feeding in a small sample of free-
ranging timber rattlesnakes, and observe changes in their behavior, physiology
and production relative to an unmanipulated control group. The timber
rattlesnake is an excellent study animal because with the help of small
surgically placed radio transmitters we can observe complex behavior and
physiology in a natural setting. This project will be conducted at the Ozark
Natural Science Center, a non-profit natural science education center in
Northwest Arkansas. Project activities will directly contribute to the education
of children at the grade school and high school levels, college undergraduates,
and graduate students at the Master's and Ph.D. levels.