* 9728003
* Development of Synapses in Hippocampal Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Deanna Benson, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing grant
* Harold E. Vaessin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 309,252.00

9728003 BENSON The long term goal of this research is to understand how the
axons of neurons are guided to particular parts of their target cells, and once
there, how they assemble synaptic contacts. Several classes of adhesion
molecules, such as cadherins, integrins and members of the immunoglobulin
superfamily are known to generate junctions between cells, and recent research
has shown that these same molecules are also localized at synaptic junctions in
the central nervous system (CNS). These new data strongly suggest that the
mechanisms by which pre- and postsynaptic membranes adhere to one another in the
CNS may be substantially similar to those that generate intercellular adhesion
in other, non-neural tissues. Consistent with this hypothesis is the following
evidence: Immunolocalization of N- and E-cadherin at synaptic junctions; the
tight adhesive nature of cadherins and their resultant intermembrane distances
correlate well with biochemical properties and calculated intermembrane
distances described for synapses; and both synapse formation and targeting to
the appropriate cellular domain (somata, dendritic shafts, spines) occur in the
absence of neural activity. Synapse development and organization are well-
characterized in the rat hippocampus and in hippocampal neurons grown in
culture. Together they make an excellent model system in which to examine
interneuronal synapse formation and targeting. The first aim of Dr. Benson's
research is to test the hypothesis that cadherin incorporation is critical for
synapse formation. This will be accomplished by examining the deposition of
cadherins at synapses in cultured hippocampal neurons in relation to other well-
characterized synaptic markers, in the presence and absence of inhibitors and
antisense oligonucleotides that block the production of cadherins. The second
aim is to examine the relationship between different cadherins and functionally
distinct synapses. Co-localization of cadherins or ca tenins and transmitter-
specific synaptic markers will be assessed in vivo and in vitro. Together, data
from these aims will be used to describe the dynamics of cadherin localization
during synapse development and will have broad implications for the mechanisms
underlying synapse assembly in CNS.