* 9728932
* Dynamic Chromatin Conformation - a Direct Imaging Approach  to Structure-Function Relationships
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Christopher Woodcock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/2000
* USD 50,000.00

MCB9728932 Abstract There is now overwhelming evidence that the folding and
compaction of the linear array of nucleosomes that comprises the eukaryotic
genome plays a crucial role in transcriptional regulation. Examples range from
the precise positioning of nucleosomes on promoter and enhancer control
sequences to the large-scale compaction and hence transcriptional shutdown of
blocks of genes. In order to define the rules and mechanisms of chromatin
folding, it is important to understand the dynamic three dimensional (3D)
conformation arrays of nucleosomes. A technique based on cryo-electron
microscopy has been developed that allows the 3D hydrated conformation of
individual oligonucleosomes to be observed. Preliminary results have
demonstrated that nucleosomes array in a 3D zigzag structure that can undergo
further compaction depending on the length of linker DNA. Further studies will
determine (1) whether the DNA linker sequence as well as its length effects the
folding pattern, (2) how salt concentration influences folding, (3) what the
effect of histone H1 is and how it is positioned relative to the nucleosomes,
(4) how a novel chromatin binding protein termed MENT is involved in
heterochromatin condensation, and (5) how transcribing RNA polymerase interacts
with nucleosomes that contain DNA segments with transcriptional elements and
arrest sequences. The studies are highly significant since very little is known
about nucleosome packing and higher orders of chromatin structure even though
these features are believed to be extremely important in regulation of chromatin
function.