* 9728962
* SGER:  The Effects of Dietary Fatty Acid Sequences on       Hibernation and Lipid Mobilization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Craig Frank, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 02/28/1999
* USD 49,993.00

Frank 9728962 The ecological limitations on successful hibernation and
subsequent over-winter survival by small mammals are poorly understood. How
natural selection influences the evolution of hibernation is thus unknown.
Recent laboratory studies with 8 rodent species and 2 marsupials have revealed
that the level of unsaturated fatty acids in the diet detE:D~dne; the
hibernation ability of small mammals. In these studies, it was found that there
is an optimal level of linoleic acid (a polyunsaturated fatty acid) that must be
present in the diet for maximal hibernation ability, above or below which
hibernation performance is greatly compromised. It has also been shown that high
levels of oleic acid (a monounsaturated fatty acid) are also required in the
diet for proper hibernation. Mammals can synthesize ~K~K~nrirburabed fatty
acids, but they are incapable of synthesizing polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Although the biochemical basis of this influence of dietary fatty acids on
hibernation ability unknown, it is quite clear that these findings have strong
ecological implications which may explain the biogeographical distribution of
hibernating mammals, and the role of dietary specialization in the evolution of
hibernation. Despite this potential, there have been no studies to date
examining how the natural diets of hibernating mammals vary in fatty acid
composition, or how this affects over-winter survival under natural conditions.
The PI predicts that dietary fatty acid composition influences the over-winter
survival of free-ranging S. lateralis, and that this influence is more
pronounced in areas where the hibernation period is longer. These hypotheses
will be tested in field and laboratory studies involving S. lateralis from the
White Mountain of California. This will be the first study to examine the
relationship between dietary fatty acid composition and the over-winter survival
of a free-ranging hibernator.