* 9728731
* Stimulus Encoding and Feature Extraction in Neuronal Spike  Trains
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Walter Metzner, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2001
* USD 237,951.00

IBN 97-28731 METZNER and KOCH The long term goal of this project is to determine
how higher order nerve cells ("neurons") within the central nervous system
extract behaviorally relevant features from their sensory input, a task common
to all sensory systems. To address this question, we will focus on the question
of how information is encoded at the primary sensory neuron level and
subsequently processed by higher order neurons in the electrosensory system of
weakly electric fish. These weakly electric fish produce a sinusoidally varying
weak electric field in their environments using a specialized "electric organ."
Electrosensory receptor cells located along the body of the fish detect
modulations in the amplitude of the electrical field produced by the presence of
nearby objects. Primary sensory neurons ("P-receptor afferents") transmit this
information to the next level of the sensory pathway, the electrosensory lateral
line lobe (ELL). There, behaviorally relevant features are extracted and encoded
in the spike trains of pyramidal cells, the output neurons of the ELL. The
mechanisms underlying this feature extraction will be investigated by combining
neurophysiological, neuroanatomical and computational data analysis techniques.
Major aims are: First, to characterize the accuracy and robustness of P-receptor
afferent responses (the "nerve impulses" or "spikes" electrical fields cause) to
time- varying modulations of electric field amplitude and second to perform
simultaneous recordings from several pyramidal cells during presentation of the
same stimuli. Accuracy and robustness of the impulse firing of primary sensory
neurons will be studied using recently developed measures of "distance" between
spike trains and standard signal processing techniques. The responses of
pyramidal cells will be analyzed using signal detection techniques adapted to
multiple spike train data. The proposed project is designed as a group proposal:
experiments will be conducted in the laboratory of Dr. Metzner (UCR) and the
computational analysis in the laboratory of Dr. Koch with participation of Dr.
Gabbiani (both Caltech). This combination of neuroethological and
computational/information theoretical approaches will clarify the nature of
early sensory processing in a model sensory system ideally suited for this kind
of analysis. In particular, this work is expected to lead to a quantitative
understanding of the code used to represent and transmit sensory information
across multiple neurons.