* 9728704
* Data Analysis Tools, Techniques, and Algorithms for         Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Bruce Allen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Cook
* 02/28/2001
* USD 203,360.00

***&lt;br/&gt;9728704&lt;br/&gt;Allen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) is scheduled to begin
operation in 2001. LIGO will be able to detect gravitational radiation from
several types of sources if they are present in large enough numbers or with
great enough intensity. The detection problem is difficult because the signal
from the gravitational radiation will be buried in the noise form the detector
itself. The signal must be extracted from the noise. Instrumental artifacts that
mimic sources of gravitational radiation signals, or otherwise interfere with
the analysis must be characterized and removed from the complex data stream that
will emanate from about 100 different instrument and diagnostic signals. This
research program includes the development, implementation and optimization of
codes to search the data stream for different types of signals, and the
development of diagnostic tools which will provide real time, instantaneous
feedback about the operation of the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
existing techniques that could be used to search for different types of sources
have never been tested on data from an interferometric gravitational-wave
detector. This project will assist the LIGO project with the development and
implementation of different algorithms. These algorithms will be tested with
data from the Caltech 40m interferometer and with parts of the LIGO system as
they come on into operation. The results of this work will be a collection of
tested, documented and proven data analysis software as well as insight into how
the expected data analysis techniques can be usefully applied to the actual data
stream from LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;