* 9728212
* RUI: Developmental Regulation of Hepatic Beta2-Adrenergic   Receptor Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1998,10/31/2002
* Dennis Baeyens, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 10/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9728212 Baeyens Many hormones and drugs initiate their actions on cells by
binding to specific cell surface receptors located in the plasma membrane. For
the catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine, the receptors are known as
adrenergic receptors (ARs) and include two major types termed alpha1- and beta-
ARs. Epinephrine and norepinephrine have important effects on liver metabolism
including glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Liver cells express both alpha-
and beta2-AR subtypes that work by different second messenger systems to
transduce catecholamine stimulation into biological effects. Both alpha1- and
beta2-ARs regulate liver metabolism by promoting glycogenolysis through
increased phosphorylase activity. Catecholamine control of glucose metabolism is
age-dependent in male rat liver. In fetal and young male rats (less than 14 days
old), epinephrine works through beta2-ARs to activate phosphorylase, while in
adult male rats epinephrine acts almost exclusively through alpha1-ARs to
increase phosphorylase activity. The changes in receptor levels with development
are mirrored by changes in beta2-AR mRNA levels. There appears to be a
multilevel regulatory control of beta2-AR gene expression in the developing rat
liver since both the transcription rate of the beta2-AR gene and the stability
of beta2-AR mRNA decline during early postnatal development in male rat
hepatocytes. The working hypothesis upon which this research is based is that
beta2-AR gene expression is dynamically regulated during early liver development
at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. The goal of this
study is to determine the nature of the mechanisms responsible for controlling
beta2-AR gene expression during early hepatic development. To examine the basic
transcriptional control mechanisms regulating beta2-AR gene expression in male
rat hepatocytes during early development, key cis-element(s) will be located on
the beta2-AR gene by transfecting hepatocytes of different ages with constructs
cons isting of various parts of the regulatory region of the beta2-AR gene.
Further characterization of key cis-elements and interacting trans-factors
present in fetal and early postnatal hepatic nuclear extracts will be done using
standard molecular techniques including gel mobility shift and DNase
footprinting assays. To investigate the post-transcriptional control of beta2-AR
gene expression during development, proteins that interact with and alter
beta2-AR mRNA stability will be examined. One such protein, designated p85, is
found only in postnatal hepatic cytosol and may serve as a destabilizing
element. Using cross-linking techniques the binding site for p85 on the beta2-AR
transcript will be precisely identified. Mechanisms by which p85 regulates
transcript stability will be investigated by mutating bases on the beta2-AR gene
which give rise to the binding site of p85 on beta2-AR mRNA. Following
transfection of hepatocytes of different developmental ages with the mutated
gene, total mRNA and beta2-AR receptor numbers will be determined. The primary
purpose of this study is to determine why the liver beta2-AR gene switches off
during early postnatal development. The rate at which the information is copied
from the DNA into messenger RNA may decrease after birth or the mRNA may be less
stable after birth. This study should lead to a better understanding of the
mechanisms underlying the changes in gene expression that occur during mammalian
development.