* 9728604
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Studies of the Flora of     Metalliferous Soils of Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Arthur Kruckeberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2003
* USD 39,942.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Arthur
Kruckeberg of the University of Washington in Seattle, and three Turkish
scientists: Dr. Adil Guner of A.I. Baysal University in Bolu, and Drs. Tuna Ekim
and Nezaket Adiguzel, of Gazi University in Ankara, Turkey. The project is to
examine the ecological factors and chemical behavior of metal-rich soils. The
project has several tasks: collection of plant specimens to serve as a Herbarium
reference material, from metal-rich soils in several areas in Turkey;
establishment of species lists of plants that evidently possess a special
tolerance to soils containing high concentration of heavy metals; multielement
chemical analysis of samples of the plant species collected, identification of
cases of strong accumulation of metals; and detailed chemical analysis of soils
from the study area chosen to establish the degree of abnormal metal
concentration. The area of research has become of interest for several reasons:
1. the need to increase our knowledge, on a worldwide basis, of the naturally
occurring flora of metal-rich soils, including the identification of metal-
accumulators, 2. the desirability of rehabilitating and revegetating areas laid
waste by mining activities using metal-tolerant species, and 3. the potential
for the use of metal-accumulating plants in soil-clean-up. Scope: This project
will involve several research teams with complementary capabilities to conduct
research in an important ecological and biological research area. Dr. Kruckeberg
and his Turkish collaborators will carry out the field work. Dr. Roger Reeves, a
professor of chemistry at Massey University in New Zealand, will participate as
an expert in biogeochemical field work, and in nickel hyperaccumulation of a
number of Turkish plant species. This proposal meets the INT objective of
supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.