* 9728207
* Cytoplasmic Dynein Isoforms in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1998,07/31/2006
* David Asai, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2006
* USD 535,667.00

9728207 Asai Intracellular motility -- the ability to move subcellular
structures from place to place within a cell -- is a critical fundamental
property of organisms. Microtubules and their motors represent one of the two
major mechanisms of intracellular motility in eukaryotes. While microtubule
motors are implicated in many functions, it is not clear to what extent
intracellular motility is regulated by utilizing a specific motor (i.e.,
isoform) for a specific task. In the case of cilia or flagella, there are
approximately 12 separate dynein isoforms which each generate specific forces at
specific sites within the complex flagellar structure that together produce the
characteristic flagellar beating. Most eukaryotes also express multiple
cytoplasmic dyneins. In this case, however, a key problem is to determine the
contributions of each dynein isoform in a multi-dynein environment. This project
will test the hypothesis that cytoplasmic dyneins are functionally specialized.
If cytoplasmic dyneins are specialized, then it is anticipated that their
intracellular locations are distinct, the elimination of a single isoform will
give rise to a specific phenotype, and the biochemical and motility properties
of the individual isoforms are different. The project focuses on two cytoplasmic
dynein isoforms, DHC1a and DHC1b, which are expressed in all cells with multiple
dyneins. The ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena, in which targeted gene replacement
can be combined with large-scale protein biochemistry and immunocytochemistry,
is an exceptional system in which to study dynein isoforms. Tetrahymena
expresses more than 15 dynein heavy chains, including DHC1a and DHC1b. Dr. Asai
and his colleagues have isolated Tetrahymena transformants in which the DHC1a
and 1b genes have been separately knocked out. This provides the opportunity to
determine the in vivo activities of an individual dynein in the context of other
dyneins, then to isolate that dynein isoform and evaluate it in vitro. Th e
examination of the knockout lines demonstrates that the two cytoplasmic dyneins
are responsible for separate sets of tasks in vivo: DHC1a is required for
micronuclear segregation in vegetatively growing cells, and is also required for
phagocytosis; DNC1b participates in the normal organization of the cortical
microtubule cytoskeleton and in the distribution of intracellular membranous
organelles. Thus, the preliminary results support the hypothesis that the
cytoplasmic dyneins are functionally specialized. The present project builds on
these preliminary results and aims at defining mechanisms for specialization.
Three questions will guide the work. (1) What are the in vivo tasks performed by
DHC1a and 1b? the phenotypes of the dynein knockouts will be evaluated in a
series of experiments that focus on cellular organization, secretion,
ciliogenesis, and nuclear migrations during conjugation. (2) Where are dyneins
1a and 1b in the cell, and can one isoform substitute for the loss of the other?
(3) How do dyneins 1a and 1b compare in terms of accessory proteins and motor
activities in vitro? Utilizing the targeted gene replacement technology, tagged
dynein genes will be constructed in order to affinity-purify individual dyneins
and then examine the isolated dyneins. It is expected that functional
specialization in vivo will be based on specific properties detected in vitro.
With these three questions serving as a framework, the following specific aims
will be pursued: 1, to assemble the tools for the project (characterizing the 1a
and 1b genes and making isoform-specific peptide antibodies); 2, to determine
the in vivo functions of the 1a and 1b dyneins by evaluating dynein knockouts,
focusing on cellular architecture, secretion, nuclear movements, and
ciliogenesis; 3, to compare the expression of 1a and 1b in wildtype and in
dynein knockouts; 4, to affinity-purify individual dyneins; and 5, if time
permits, to characterize the isolated dyneins in terms of associated proteins
and in vitro motilities.