* 9728328
* Molecular Recognition by RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,09/14/1998
* Donald Burke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/14/1998
* USD 109,500.00

Donald Burke-Aguero MCB-9728328 1.Technical Abstract This project addresses
molecular recognition by RNA "aptamers," which are functional nucleic acid
molecules derived from in vitro selections. There has been an explosion of new
aptamers described in the literature in recent years. Those that have been
characterized structurally have proven to be full of elegant structural features
that would have been impossible to predict. Emphasis will be placed to study
several RNAs isolated earlier by the P.I. for the nature of their specificity in
molecular recognition of acyltransferase cofactors, substrates, and inhibitors.
Furthermore, based on previous work with aptamers to chloramphenicol--an
acetylation substrate and an inhibitor of aminoacyltransfer by bacterial
ribosomes, a refined model of the catalytic reaction center for peptide bond
formation on the ribosome, the "peptidyl transferase loop" of 23S rRNA, will be
tested. This will be achieved by comparative sequence analysis, a broad range of
solution biochemistries, and direct physical analysis with nuclear magnetic
resonance and X-ray crystallography (both in collaboration with other
laboratories) in order to analyze the RNA structures required for specific
target recognition and the binding interface between the aptamers and their
targets. This work also seeks to isolate cofactor-dependent acyltransferase
ribozymes as nucleic acid catalysis is still poorly understood, in part because
there are so few examples available for study. However, it has become possible
in recent years to select directly for catalytic activity among a diverse pool
of candidate nucleic acid molecules. Several new ribozymes have been described
that form stable self-modifications upon incubation with an appropriate
substrate. Acyltransfer is within the scope of reaction that can be catalyzed by
RNA, but there is little known about how the RNA might make use of bound
cofactors to carry out the reactions (i.e., the orientation of the bound
reactants and the relative contributions of proximity effects, substrate
activation, transition state stabilization, and other factors). The ultimate
goal of this part of the study is to analyze the relationships between catalysis
and the RNA-substrate and RNA-cofactor binding interactions. Successful
completion of this work will be significant in strengthening our understanding
of how RNA sequences fold into structures with surfaces that allow them to
interact with their environments; refining understanding of the
aminoacyltransferase catalytic reaction center of ribosomal RNA; expanding the
catalytic scope of RNA (lending support for the "RNA World" hypothesis for the
origin of life); and shedding light on how the activity of ribozymes is related
to their ability to juxtapose one or more reactants. Donald Burke-Anguero MCB
9728328 Non-Technical The molecules that carry out the processes of life must
Interact with each other to carry out their functions. Their ability to do so is
dictated by their structures, which are in turn determined by their sequences
and environments. Understanding the relationships among sequence, structure, and
function is a problem of central importance and wide-ranging significance in
molecular biology. This project addresses molecular recognition by special RNA
molecules that the P.I. isolated as a postdoctoral fellow. These RNAs bind small
molecules chosen for their role in "acyltransfers," an important class of
reactions that are at the heart of the day-to-day workings of all cells, as well
as in specialized processes ranging from gene regulation to HIV maturation to
bacterial antibiotic resistance. The primary goal of this study is to understand
how these RNAs achieve specificity in molecular recognition of various small-
molecule partners by looking at the interface between the folded RNA and the
bound target, using well-established biochemical techniques in conjunction with
collaborative magnetic resonance and X-ray crystallographic analysis. Catalysis
by nucleic a cids is still poorly understood, partly because there are few
natural examples available for study. Therefore, a second goal will be to use
recently developed techniques to assess the suitability of these RNAs in
catalyzing chemical reactions between the bound small molecules. Successful
completion of this work will be especially significant in strengthening our
understanding of how RNA sequences form surfaces that allow them to interact
with their environment, and it may expand our understanding of RNA catalysis.