* 9728855
* CRB:  Shifts in the Genetic Load in Response to Inbreeding  and Population Size in Brassica rapa
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Donald Waller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2001
* USD 153,563.00

9728855 Waller Small populations face many hazards including the loss of genetic
variation and the genetic effects of inbreeding. Most populations experience
moderate to severe inbreeding depression which occurs when accumulated
deleterious mutations are exposed via inbreeding. Populations with a prior
history of inbreeding, however, may experience less inbreeding depression if
their load of mutations has already been expressed and selected out of the
population. Some scientists argue that such selection can effectively eliminate
inbreeding depression, allowing opportunities to purge threatened populations of
their load via intentional inbreeding. Others argue from theory that purging
will be weak and ineffective under most circumstances and may actually increase
the number of mildly deleterious mutations fixed in small populations. This
project will explore just how effectively selection can purge real populations
of their inbreeding depression. To save space and allow rapid progress, the
investigator will use strains of a small plant in the cabbage family (Brassica
rapa) that has been bred to grow quickly in the laboratory. Multiple lines will
be subjected to maximal inbreeding via self-fertilization, while other
populations of various size will experience alternating selfing and outcrossing
or pure outcrossing for six generations. The investigator will then estimate how
much inbreeding depression has declined in each treatment by comparing the size
and performance of seedlings derived from self- and cross-fertilized seeds from
the first, third, and sixth generations. In addition, he will examine whether
the high fitness expected in seedlings derived from crosses among the inbred
lines is maintained over subsequent generations of random mating (a result
suggesting that purging was effective) or deteriorates (reflecting the decay of
temporary hybrid vigor). To address another controversy, the investigator will
also compar e the amount of inbreeding depression observed when plants are grown
under different growing conditions. These experiments should demonstrate how
quickly and completely inbreeding can purge populations of their genetic load.
Empirical results like these should help to resolve the controversy over how
effective purging can be and how quickly it can operate. Such results will help
us to understand how mating systems that involve a mixture of selfing and
outcrossing evolve. They will also illuminate the genetic hazards faced by small
populations and demonstrate whether intentional inbreeding can provide a useful
breeding strategy for small populations in threatened or endangered species.