* 9728084
* In Vitro and In Vivo processing of 8-Oxoguanine and Abasic  Sites Introduced Into Putative Mutagenic Hotspots by DNA    Polymerases and Base Excision Repair Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,04/07/1999
* Zafer Hatahet, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 04/07/1999
* USD 250,000.00

9728084 Hatahet Sequence context plays an important role in the generation of
spontaneous and damage-induced mutations in DNA, and is manifested in vivo by
mutagenic hot- and coldspots. An abundant product of free radical damage which
has been strongly implicated in mutagenesis is 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG). This
lesion has been shown to mispair with A in vitro and to cause G(r)T
transversions in vivo. 8-oxoG is repaired by the base excision repair pathway.
To isolate putative mutagenic hotspots in vitro, the lesion has been introduced
into an oligonucleotide where four neighbors on each side have been completely
randomized. Sequences were isolated based on their ability to increase the
miscoding frequency and/or reduce the efficiency of lesion repair. One such
sequence, 5' G(8-oxoG)A shows up to 30 fold reduction in the ability of
formamidopyrimidine DNA N-glycosylase (Fpg) to remove 8-oxoG and up to 15 fold
increase in the frequency of misincorporating A opposite the lesion as compared
to other sequence contexts. Combined, these two effects predict a significant
increase in the mutagenic potential of 8-oxoG within this sequence context. This
project has two objectives. First, to understand the mechanism by which the
nucleotides in a putative hotspot effect poor recognition of a lesion by base
excision repair enzymes and/or higher miscoding during DNA synthesis. To do
that, the mutagenic potential of 8-oxoG will be compared between the
5'G(8-oxoG)A putative hotspot and contexts where either the 5' or 3' neighbor is
changed to one of the following purine analogs: hypoxanthine, nebularine,
2-aminopurine, or 2,6-diaminopurine. The effect of each of these neighbors on
lesion repair efficiency will help define specific interactions between the
different purine exocyclic groups and Fpg. Similarly, specific interactions with
DNA polymerase will be dissected by comparing the miscoding efficiency of 8-oxoG
as a function of changing the nearest neighbors to one of these analogs. The
second o bjective of this project is to verify the above in vitro interactions
in vivo. Oligonucleotides containing 8-oxoguanine surrounded by purines or
purine analogs on both sides will be introduced into plasmids which in turn will
be transformed into E. coli strains proficient or deficient in repair of
8-oxoguanine and/or DNA polymerase proofreading. In addition to gaining
information about the role of sequence context, measurement of 8-oxoG induced
mutation frequency in the different cellular backgrounds should be very helpful
in assessing the relative contribution of inefficient lesion repair and
erroneous DNA synthesis to mutagenesis. As such, this project should yield
helpful insights into the fundamental mechanisms by which cells maintain their
genetic integrity. The goal of this research is to understand the mechanism of
oxidation damage-induced mutagenesis in E. coli. Mutations are permanent changes
in DNA, the molecule which stores the information needed by all cells to
function and reproduce. As such, mutations can be detrimental to an organism's
well-being. In turn, a key player in the development of mutations is DNA damage.
A wide range of factors contribute to DNA damage including ionizing and
ultraviolet radiation, chemical oxidants and normal cellular metabolism. It is
therefore not surprising that all organisms have evolved systems which repair
DNA, and studying such systems would positively contribute to solving problems
caused by mutations. The goal of this project is to better understand the
function of this repair system using bacteria and a cell-free system.