* 9728147
* Modulation of Neuronal Differentiation by Growth            Factor-like Phospholipids
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2004
* Gabor TIGYI, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 03/31/2004
* USD 480,272.00

9728147 TIGYI The goal of this research is to understand the fundamental
mechanisms that regulate the development of neuronal connections in the brain.
Past research by this group has led to the discovery of a novel group of
molecules (lysophosphatidates) that inhibit the outgrowth of the neuronal
processes that provide the wiring of the nervous system. Interestingly, these
molecules are generated after injury to the central nervous system and might
impair regeneration and recovery of function. Dr. Tigyi and his collaborators
will investigate the molecular signals that mediate this inhibitory effect.
Specifically, they will generate, using molecular biological techniques, special
cell lines that are deficient in one of three key molecular switches, Cdc42,
Rac, and Rho, which are presumed to be involved in the inhibitory effect. They
will then analyze the molecular mechanism that turns these switches on and off.
By using these engineered neuron-like cells, they will be able to answer which
one or more of these three switches needs to be turned on for the inhibition to
take place. Once the switches mediating the inhibitory effect are determined in
the cell culture system, it will be possible in future research to investigate
the specific role of lysophosphatidates and the switches they control in the
development, regeneration, and repair of the nervous system.