* 9728315
* Mechanisms of Spontaneous Mutation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1998,07/31/1999
* Patricia Foster, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 217,138.00

9728315 Foster When populations of cells are subjected to non-lethal selective
pressure, mutations arise even though the cells are not dividing. Because this
process appeared to produce only useful, not neutral or deleterious, mutations
it has been called "directed" or "adaptive" mutation. In a strain of Escherichia
coli that cannot utilize lactose (Lac-) but that reverts to lactose utilization
(Lac+) when lactose is its sole energy and carbon source, adaptive mutation
consists of two components. (i) A highly efficient recombination-dependent
mutational mechanism occurring on the F' episome that carries the Lac- allele;
and, (ii) a less efficient unknown mechanism giving rise to mutations elsewhere
in the genome. Both selected and nonselected mutations arise in the Lac-
population, but nonselected mutations appear to be enriched in the Lac+
population, suggesting that the Lac+ cells have passed though a transient period
of hypermutation. The research will investigate these two components of adaptive
mutation. The aims of the research are: i. To further investigate the
recombination-dependent mechanism that produces Lac+ mutations on the episome,
ii. To test if different sites on the chromosome are differentially mutable and
if a recombination-dependent mechanism produces mutations on the chromosome, and
iii., to test the transient hypermutation hypothesis and determine the genetic
and physiological requirements for hypermutation. The first project will focus
on the mutagenic mechanism occurring on the episome. Experiments will test
whether recombination functions are required to initiate a localized burst of
DNA synthesis or to initiate or sustain replication of the entire episome. Also,
whether the DNA synthesis that occurs is error-prone will be determined. The
second project will focus on mutagenic mechanisms on the chromosome. The
mutability of the Lac- allele inserted at various places on the chromosome will
be determined. Experiments will test whether proximity to sites of frequent r
ecombination is an important determinant of mutability. These two projects will
establish the general importance of the recombination-dependent mutagenic
mechanism and determine why the episome is particularly mutable. The third
project will confirm or refute the transient hypermutation hypothesis by
measuring, free of phenotypic artifacts, the frequency of nonselected mutations.
Experiments will also test whether selected and nonselected mutations are
produced by the same mutagenic mechanism. This research has several implications
for evolution. First, a recombination-dependent mechanism could be an important
source of spontaneous mutations in E. coli and other organisms. If recombination
events are accompanied by mutations, then recombination increases variation not
only by recombining existing alleles, but also by creating new ones. Second,
this mutagenic mechanism is highly active on the F episome. Because F can
recombine with the bacterial chromosome and thereby pickup and transfer
bacterial genes, this mutational mechanism may be important in the evolution of
species that carry conjugal plasmids. Third, if nutritionally deprived cells
enter into a state of hypermutation, this would provide a mechanism for adaptive
evolution under adverse conditions. Spontaneous mutations are probably the most
important source of variation upon which natural selection acts. This search
will provide new insights into the way that spontaneous mutations arise.