* 9728543
* Multidisciplinary Collaborative Research:  Behavioral       and Biological Effects of Chronic Social Stress.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2004
* Robert Blanchard, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 402,000.00

Abstract IBN-9728543 Behavioral and Biological Effects of Chronic Social Stress
Social stress is a common and enduring feature of life with important behavioral
and physiological effects. A multidisciplinary research collaboration between
the Laboratory of Behavioral Neurobiology at the University of Hawaii and the
Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology at the Rockefeller University is aimed at
description and analysis of these effects. Previous work with laboratory rodents
indicates that single, two-week stress periods can produce a variety of
potentially damaging changes, including: increased defensive behavior and
decreased social and sexual behavior; higher levels of stress hormones and
impairment of brain mechanisms that normally limit stress hormone action;
impairment of brain and peripheral mechanisms of male sex hormone production;
and widespread changes in brain neurochemical systems. Work in an initial
granting period has begun to outline the time course of these changes and to
describe their permanence or reversibility; crucial factors in understanding the
dynamics of the stress cascade. The proposed program will undertake a fine-
grained analysis of the development of stress effects by using behavioral, brain
system, and hormone measures taken at closely spaced intervals. This will enable
comparison of the relative time course of these changes, enabling the creation
of more precise hypotheses concerning the relationships among these phenomena. A
second focus will involve the role of male sex hormones in the development of
dominance-subordination relationships and in modulating the stress responses of
subordinate males. The final focus of the proposed work is on analysis of the
role of previous (early or recent) stressful experience in modulating or
exacerbating the response to subordination. These studies, using an ecologically
appropriate model, will provide detailed information in several areas that are
crucial in understanding the mammalia n stress response and its widespread
behavioral and physiological consequences.