* 9728023
* Regulation of the Reproductive and Stress Axes by the       Metabolic Signal, Leptin.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Douglas Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 05/31/2000
* USD 122,000.00

ABSTRACT IBN 97-28032 PI = THOMPSON, ROBERT C. Regulation of Reproductive and
Stress Axes by the Metabolic Signal, Leptin Food availability affects
reproductive function. Key to understanding as well as many other bodily
functions, lies in our ability to understand how the brain gathers information
on the availability of food. A major gap in our understanding of how food
availability controls reproduction was filled recently with the discovery of a
hormone called leptin. Blood leptin concentrations increase after meals in most
animals reporting to the brain a satiety signal. Exactly how the brain senses
these satiety signals like leptin is only beginning to be understood. Dr.
Thompson will determine how the brain senses leptin and more specifically,
communicates this leptin information to brain centers that control reproductive
function. One hypothesis tested in this research plan is that information about
altered food availability is relayed to the reproductive brain centers via brain
centers that are involved in sensing "stress". This idea arose when researches
from different backgrounds demonstrated two points. First, stress or stressful
experiences have negative effects upon reproductive systems. Second, during
conditions where food availability is very low, brain systems known to control
stress are activated. Thus, conditions where food is in very short supply are
stressful. However, little is known if the activation of these stress systems is
the path by which information concerning severely reduced food availability is
communicated to reproductive systems. This will be examined in this project.
Additionally, many molecules in addition to leptin serve as "food signals". One
other signal is glucose. Do different food signals communicate to the
reproductive system using the same pathways or are there unique pathways for
each food signal? Using similar logic, are all stressful situations or
conditions influence d by food signals? Dr. Thompson will explore these
questions and information developed in this work will be used to further
understand how the brain uses food information to control reproductive function.