* 9728474
* RUI: Vaccinia Virus dUTPase: Role in DNA Replication,       Regulation by Phosphorylation, and Substrate Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Nancy Roseman, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2002
* USD 266,191.00

9728474 Roseman 1. Technical Vaccinia replication occurs in the cytoplasm of
infected cells with a high degree of independence from host functions, since
virus encodes most, if not all, of the enzymes required for DNA metabolism and
replication, including the deoxyuridine triphosphatase (dUTPase). dUTPase helps
maintain the fidelity of DNA replication by lowering the dUTP pool, high levels
of dU incorporation into replicating DNA is a lethal event due to the excision
repair process which causes double-strand breaks. It provides also the precursor
for TMP production by thymidylate synthetase. dUTPase deficient viruses exhibit
reduced replication and/or pathogenicity. The vaccinia enzyme has high amino
acid identity to its human homologue (63%). This study explores the role of
phosphorylation in the regulation of both viral and human dUTPase activities.
This is achieved by identifying the phosphorylated site(s) by peptide mapping
and phosphoamino acid analysis. The effect of mutation at these sites on enzyme
activity is analyzed in vitro and in vivo. Also studied is whether the vaccinia
enzyme is a substrate for either of two virally encoded protein kinases. The
function of this enzyme in DNA synthesis and replication fidelity is assessed by
using dUTPase deficient virus with -galactosidase as a marker. The role of a
critical amino acid in the uracil binding motif that differs from that in the
vaccinia protein is assessed by mutagenesis. Nickel affinity chromatography in
conjunction with His-tagged is used in enzyme purification. 2. Non-technical
Vaccinia virus replication occurs in the cytoplasm of infected cells with a high
degree of independence from host functions. This is in part due to the fact that
the virus encodes most, if not all, of the enzymes required for DNA metabolism
and replication, including the deoxyuridine triphosphatase (dUTPase) enzyme.
This enzyme helps maintain the fidelity of DNA replication and provides a
precursor for DNA replication. It is essential in a number of organisms, and
dUTPase deficient viruses exhibit reduced replication and/or pathogenicity. The
vaccinia enzyme has a high amino acid identity to its human homologue (63%).
This study thus explores the regulation of both viral and human dUTPase
activities and the role of other viral enzymes in this regulation. Mutagenesis
approach is used to assess the role of the enzyme in viral DNA synthesis and
replication fidelity, and of critical amino acids in the uracil binding site
that differs between the human and the vaccinia UTPase.