* 9728936
* Studies on Stationary Phase Cultures of Eschericia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Roberto Kolter, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2003
* USD 485,000.00

Kolter 9728936 When nutrients are plentiful and conditions are propitious for
growth most bacteria grow exponentially. However, due to the usual limited
availability of nutrients, exponential growth periods tend be short-lived and
bacteria must cope with prolonged periods of starvation. Many gram-negative
bacteria, among them Escherichia coli, respond to starvation by developing
increased resistance to environmental stresses. For E. coli, this starvation
response is controlled in great part by a starvation-inducible sigma factor
sigma-s, the product of the rpoS gene. Soon after the entry into the stationary
phase of growth induction of the sigma-s regulon results in a homogeneous
population of highly resistant cells. However, if starvation continues for very
long what ensues is anything but stationary. Despite the induction of the rpoS
regulon, prolonged starvation inevitably leads to a heterogeneous population
with some cells dying while others survive. Most importantly, the survivors in
starving populations are not just cells identical to the initial strain but
rather the progeny of mutant subpopulations that have a Growth Advantage in
Stationary Phase (referred to as mutants that can express a GASP phenotype).
From these observations emerges the hypothesis that underlies this research: In
some instances starving bacterial populations can both survive and evolve by
repeated takeovers of GASP mutants under conditions when essential nutrients are
provided predominantly by the dead cells. This hypothesis makes many predictions
and raises many questions. The fact that mutant alleles of rpoS which result in
reduced expression of the sigma-s regulon can confer the GASP phenotype
indicates that under some starvation conditions maximal expression of the
regulon is not advantageous. Two questions arise. First, what is the range of
mutant alleles obtainable and how is the sigma-s product affected? Second, if
there are conditions where less sigma-s is better, is there allelic variation in
rpoS among wild-type isolates of E. coli? Additionally, populations that are
taken over by GASP mutants can themselves be taken over by subsequent second and
even third generation GASP mutants. Here again several questions arise. How many
cycles of GASPing can occur before a strain will no longer evolve under a
particular selective condition? Where do additional GASP-conferring mutations
lie? Finally, the physiology of the GASP phenomenon needs to be addressed in
much more detail. What are the GASP mutants utilizing as nutrients and where are
these nutrients coming from? To address these questions the following
experiments are being conducted: 1) Isolate a collection of GASP-conferring rpoS
alleles and determine the changes in the gene and analyze changes in the
expression of sigma-s activity. 2) Obtain fresh wild-type isolates of E. coli
from diverse environments and sequence their rpoS genes and characterize their
sigma-s proteins. 3) Determine how many rounds of GASP can occur under one set
of defined starvation conditions and identify genetic loci able to confer
subsequent rounds of GASP. 4) Identify nutrients that GASP mutants can obtain
from the dead cells in the population. 5) Identify genes that are required for
the expression of GASP when a cell harbors a GASP-conferring allele or alleles.