* 9728694
* Centrosomin Function in the Cell Cycle, Gametogenesis,      and in the Wingless Signaling Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Thomas Kaufman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 12/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9728694 Kaufman The complex locus, arrow (arr), which resides in the genome of
Drosophila melanogaster has been demonstrated to encode the protein, Centrosomin
(Cnn). The gene has multiple tissue-specific transcription start sites and
alternatively spliced mRNAs that produce different forms of the protein. The
gene's structure will be characterized by mapping exons, transcription start
sites and the sequencing of cDNAs from different tissues. Such information will
lead to the construction of a more effective rescue construct than is now
available. Concurrently, an expanded mutant analysis will be continued. Previous
work has demonstrated that Cnn is involved in critical roles in development,
gametogenesis and cell biology in Drosophila. The focus of the inquiry into
possible function(s) of this protein will center on its role in the
Wingless/Wnt(Wg) signal transduction pathway in the centrosome and in the
patterning of the oocyte. A set of Cnn protein deletion constructs will be
expressed in cultured Drosophila cells in order to establish the functional
domains within Cnn that are required for localization to the centrosome, to
respond to Wg signaling and to be phosphorylated. Studies have demonstrated that
Cnn is phosphorylated in a cell-cycle dependent manner. The parameters of that
phosphorylation will be determined. The ultimate goals are to position Cnn
within the Wg signaling pathway to determine its function in its various roles
in development and to determine its role in the organization of the
cytoskeleton. How messages are delivered in a synchronized manner within cells
and how they lead to the formation of a complex organism is still largely
unknown. This work will expand our insights into that process.