* 9728785
*  Compensatory Adjustments in Plant Nutrient Uptake:   Varying Responses to Rising Atmospheric CO2
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* John Lussenhop, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2001
* USD 520,901.00

BassiriRad 9728785 Nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are nutrients that most often
limit plant production in natural and agricultural ecosystems. Limited
availability of these nutrients is also a major factor influencing long-term
plant and ecosystem responses to rising atmospheric CO2 levels i.e., the
commonly observed short-term increase in plant biomass may not be sustained over
the long-term unless availability and/or acquisition capacity for nutrients
increases in concert with carbon (C) gain. Therefore, it is critical to obtain a
mechanistic understanding of whether elevated CO2 can elicit compensatory
adjustments that would circumvent nutrient limitation of plant growth.
Compensatory adjustment such as (a) increased mycorrhizal development, (b)
increased root N and P absorption capacity, and (c) root growth can enable
plants to meet increased nutrient demand under high CO2 yet the extent of these
adjustments in response to CO2 enrichment is unknown. In addressing how nutrient
availability could interact with plants and ecosystem responses to high CO2
several questions must be considered: Will plant demand for N and P increase in
response to CO2 enrichment ? (Demand as a concept requires careful definition on
temporal and spatial scales which will be addressed here.) If nutrient demand
does increase under elevated C02, what compensatory adjustment(s) will plants
make to overcome this greater demand? Will N and P uptake scale properly with
measured changes in relative growth rate (RGR) and photosynthetic N and P
utility? Does growth nutrient status affect the magnitude of the compensatory
adjustments in response to CO2? Do these compensatory mechanisms scale with
CO2-induced changes in stages of development? Do plants of various functional
groups e.g., C3 vs. C4, woody vs. herbaceous vs. grasses, or arbuscular
mycorrhizae vs. ectomycorrhizae differ in their nutrient uptake responses to
elevated CO2? Does a better plant capacity to scale up nutrient uptake at
elevated CO2 confer enhanced competitive ability? The proposed research will
address these questions with an emphasis on root and mycorrhizal N and P uptake
kinetics. The PI will use both field and laboratory approaches to test our
hypotheses under the most realistic conditions possible. The field work will be
conducted at six currently funded national FACE sites providing a comprehensive
cross comparison of different ecosystems and functional groups. At each field
site, N and P uptake capacity will be measured on intact roots of mature plants
subjected to factorial combination of two CO2 treatments in the presence or
absence of mycorrhizas. The field experiments will provide a unique opportunity
to compare the response of these compensatory adjustments to elevated CO2 levels
among different ecosystems, life forms, and functional groups of plants in a
competitive setting. Greenhouse-laboratory experiments using species similar to
those from the field will examine the more detailed questions related to
adjustments in uptake kinetics, relative changes in root vs. mycorrhizal uptake
kinetics, and plant physiological demand. The data will be integrated into a
comprehensive functional balance model which will incorporate physiological and
biomass allocation parameters.