* 9728769
* Organization and Reorganization of Pattern Generators:  A   Comparative Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Alvin Murphy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/2002
* USD 307,784.00

Organization and Reorganization of Pattern Generators: A Comparative approach.
Only in recent years have we begun to understand in reasonable detail how
specific neural circuitry mediates any given behavior. A fundamental question
that is difficult to directly address is: "How do behaviors co-evolve with the
neural circuitry that mediates the behaviors?" This comparative study will begin
to examine this general question by exploiting invertebrate feeding systems.
Many invertebrates have neurons with unique identities. These identifiable
neurons have morphological and physiological characteristics, and
interconnections with other identifiable neurons, that are replicated in each
individual of a species. As specification occurs some of the properties and
interconnections of some of these identifiable neurons will diverge, whereas
others will remain unchanged. Many distantly related gastropods (i.e. different
subclasses) have relatively similar feeding behaviors. In contrast many closely
related gastropods have radiated into diverse ecological niches with
corresponding diversification of feeding apparatuses and behaviors. This study
exploits data on the circuitry underlying similar feeding and ingestive
behaviors in the distantly related opisthobranch sea hare, Aplysia californica,
and pulmonate pond snail, Helisoma trivolvis. Similarities and differences in
the neural control of feeding in these animals will be experimentally analyzed.
These data will provide a baseline for examining the changes that have occurred
in neural circuitry devoted to oral behaviors in closely related but
ecologically diverse gastropods as the oral behaviors and morphological feeding
apparatuses have evolved.