* 9728047
* Molecular Genetics of Cell Differentiation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* John Larkin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 05/31/2002
* USD 290,000.00

The objective of the research is to understand the steps that lead from the
selection of a cell's developmental fate to the elaboration of its ultimate
differentiated phenotype. This problem is being studied using hairs (trichomes)
on the leaves of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model for understanding the
control of cell differentiation. These trichomes are highly specialized single
cells that extend out from the epidermis. Although in the field, Arabidopsis
trichomes have been shown to provide significant protection from insect
herbivores, trichomes are non-essential under laboratory conditions. In
addition, trichomes are located on the surface of the plant, and mutant
phenotypes are readily observed. These two features of trichomes have
facilitated the isolation of mutants and genetic analysis. Mutations in more
than twenty different genes have been identified that affect trichome
development and/or morphology, and three genes affecting trichome development
have been cloned. Two of the earliest-acting genes in the trichome development
pathway have turned out to be transcription factors. These genes commit an
epidermal cell to a highly specialized differentiation process involving
dramatic changes in cell shape. At present, there is little understanding of how
transcription factors can control processes such as polarized growth of a cell
in any organism. The ultimate goal of this project is to connect events occuring
during the cell fate decision and the cellular mechanisms responsible for the
mature trichome cell phenotype. This connection is poorly understood in all
organisms, and the study of trichome development is likely to produce results
with broad implications for understanding development in plants and animals.