* 9728461
* Collaborative Research: Cell Walls Resistant to Environmental Extremes: The Chlamydomonas zygospore as a Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Karen VanWinkle-Swift, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 02/28/2002
* USD 175,500.00

9728461 VanWinkle-Swift Sporopollenin, often referred to as the most resistant
biopolymer on earth, is an essential component of mature pollen grains.
Sporopollenin is also found in the spore walls of non seed plants, and in the
resting cells of diverse microorganisms. Despite the importance of this
apparently ancient compound, the routes of synthesis, secretion, and assembly of
sporopollenin remain unknown. The zygospore wall of Chlamydomonas monoica
contains sporopollenin and the availability of zygospore mutants of this
unicellular alga suggests development of C. monoica as a model for the study of
sporopollenin biosynthesis and function. The composition of the zygospore wall
will be analyzed using differential fixation and staining followed by
fluorescence or transmission electron microscopy and by electrophoresis of
proteins solubilized during wall morphogenesis in wildtype and mutant strains. A
nuclear transformation procedure will be developed and wildtype alleles of genes
responsible for zygospore defects will be isolated by their ability to
complement mutant phenotypes, using an indexed cosmid library for
transformation. Alternatively, insertional maturation mutants will be generated
by nuclear transformation and the molecular tag will then be used to clone the
defective gene. The expression of genes cloned by these approaches will be
compared in wildtype and maturation mutants.