* 9728261
* Neurosteroids:  Synthesis and Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Vassilios Papadopoulos, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2002
* USD 255,000.00

97-28261 Papadopoulos The specific interactions of steroids with binding sites
in the brain together with the rapid effects of various steroids on neuronal
function has prompted the investigation of the steroidogenic potential of
central nervous system structures. Indeed recent evidence indicates that the
brain could function as an independent endocrine organ similar to the steroid
synthesizing organs of the body (e.g. gonads, adrenals, placenta). These
steroids hormones produced by the brain are termed "neurosteroids".
Neurosteroids, such as pregnenolone and DHEA (dehyroepiandrosterone) have been
shown to control neuronal development, aging, communication, and regulate
numerous neuroendocrine and behavioral functions, including learning and memory.
While there is strong evidence that pregnenolone is indeed synthesized by
specific cells in the brain, there is little data on local synthesis of DHEA .
Dr. Papadopoulos has found that glial cells are capable of synthesizing DHEA,
the actual mechanism is different than reported in peripheral tissues. Dr.
Papadoupoulos will now fully examine the local synthesis of DHEA in the brain.
He will look for changes of the brain levels of both DHEA and pregnenolone over
development and aging, and determine how gender affects the levels. In addition,
he will identify how these two neurosteroids are distributed in the brain and
the factors that regulate their synthesis. DHEA and pregnenolone are used today
as over the counter medications and food supplements for enhancing the brain
performance and prevent the onset of aging-related diseases such as Alzheimer's
disease and other types of dementia. More specifically, DHEA has been termed the
"fountain of youth". Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of DHEA and
pregnenolone formation in the brain is paramount to all further speculation and
hypotheses about DHEA and pregnenolone and their role in normal and pathologic
brain function.