* 9728996
* Computerization of Mollusk Collections at the Academy of    Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Gary Rosenberg, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

This project will support completion of computerization of the recent mollusk
collection at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP). This is
the oldest mollusk collections in the country, and the and the second largest
catalogued one in the world. It currently has about 440,000 catalogued lots
containing about 12 million specimens, including about 40,000 lots preserved in
alcohol that provide excellent material for anatomical and DNA studies. ANSP has
specimens from virtually all parts of the world; it is unrivaled for shallow-
water marine mollusks from the tropical Indo-Pacific. Other strengths are
shallow-water Western Atlantic mollusks, and worldwide freshwater and land
molluasks. Many of the land and freshwater mollusks represent species now
threatened, endangered or extinct. Perhaps the most important part of the
collection is the12,000 lots of type specimens from more than 400 researchers.
These are the specimens used in the naming of species; they serve as standards
of comparison for confirming the species identities. ANSP through the research
activities of staff and purchase and trade over more than 150 years has
assembled one of the world's largest collections of molluscan type specimens.
The collection is used by scientists throughout the world. In the past five
years, almost 300 loans totaling more than 28,000 specimens have been made, and
more than 200 scientific article have acknowledged use of collection resources.
Mollusks are excellent indicators for studying the health of ecosystems. They
comprise the most diverse animal phylum after the arthropods, with more than
100,000 species, and are abundant in terrestrial, freshwater and marine
habitats. Although less diverse than arthropods, mollusks have three advantages
over them for environmental studies. 1) Mollusk shells have accretionary growth,
and incorporate isotopes and chemicals from the environment into their shells
thereby providing a direct record of environmenta l change. Arthropods shed the
exoskeleton, losing this record of change 2) Adult mollusks are generally poor
at dispersing, so their shells reflect local environmental conditions. 3)
Mollusk shells persist after the death of the animal, showing what species
previously occurred at a site, unlike arthropod exoskeletons which rapidly
decay. High diversity, accretionary growth, low dispersal, and persistence of
shells combine to make mollusks premier organisms for monitoring environmental
health. Mollusk shells themselves provide the materials for chemical and
isotopic analyses that can determine causes of faunal change. Computerization of
the collections will help in determining changes in the historical distribution
patterns of mollusk species. Little such information is currently available, but
is needed not only by scientists conducting basic systematic and ecological
research on mollusks, but to provide baseline data for monitoring the health of
ecosystems.