* 9728776
* RUI:  New Components of Notch-Mediated Cell-Cell            Interactions in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Caroline Goutte, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/2002
* USD 305,229.00

During the development of a multi-cellular organism, communication between
cells influences the pattem of development. A great deal of research has focused
on deciphering the molecular mechanisms responsible for such communication.
Studies with model systems such as Drosophila and C. elegans show that a variety
of cell-cell interactions involve evolutionarily conserved proteins of the Notch
family. The Notch proteins function as cell-surface receptors that respond to
specific cell-surface ligands. Although Notch proteins and their associated
ligands are used by interacting cells in many different systems, including
humans, very little is known about other molecules involved in these events. A
genetic approach to identifying new components of Notch-mediated interactions
has proven successful in C. elegans where two new genes, aph-1 and aph-2, have
been identified. The aph-1 and aph-2 gene products appear to be necessary, along
with the conserved Notch receptor and its ligand, to mediate cellular induction
in at least two specific incidences in early embryogenesis. The general goal of
this proposal is to determine what role these two gene products have in
facilitating cellular communication. Three specific approaches will be used:
First, biochemeical and molecular analysis will be used to further our
understanding of the aph-2 gene product. Previous work showed that the aph-2
gene encodes a novel extracellular protein associated with the cell surface. The
work presented here aims at analyzing the molecular interactions between the
APH-2 protein, the cell surface, the Notch receptor protein, and its associated
ligand. Second, molecular characterization of the aph-1 gene product will begin
with its cloning and sequencing to determine the nature of the aph=l product.
Third, a genetic approach will be used to search for additional gene products
that interact with the aph=l and aph=2 gene products. Genetic screens are
described that are specifically designed to isolate genes that participate with
aph -1 or aph-2 in mediating cell-cell interactions. Together these experiments
represent straightforward molecular and genetic approaches to learning about new
components of the Notch-mediated mechanism of cell-cell interactions that occur
throughout the animal kingdom.