* 9728809
* Vibrational Potential Energy Surfaces and Molecular         Structures In Electronic Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,10/31/2002
* Jaan Laane, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 10/31/2002
* USD 541,931.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Prof. Jaan Laane of Texas
A&amp;M University in his continuing studies of molecules with large-amplitude
vibrations. He will use fluorescence excitation spectroscopy, sensitized
phosphorescence excitation spectroscopy and two-photon spectroscopy with photon
or ionization detection to map the energy levels of the excited states. He will
focus on cyclic and multicyclic carbonyl compounds and aromatic molecules,
especially those molecules with two chromophores and closely lying electronic
states or those molecules exhibiting interesting structural changes such as
photoracemization or photoisomerization. Laane will also use dispersed
fluorescence and far-IR and Raman spectroscopies to obtain complementary
information on the ground state surfaces, and molecular mechanics (MM3) and ab
initio calculations to predict potential energy surfaces and structures. An
improved understanding of electronic excited states is important for providing a
better perspective of photochemical and other important chemical processes as
well as on chemical bonding and structure in general. Determination of the
potential energy surfaces for the excited states will provide detailed insight
into the energetics and interactions associated with these states. The
experimental work to be carried out here will provide the data necessary for
calculating the potential energy surfaces and will also further help improve our
experimental procedures for collecting this type of spectroscopic information.
Results on molecules in triplet states or on molecules that undergo interesting
structural changes upon absorption should provide fundamental information that
has not been readily attained in the past.