* 9728805
* Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2004
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward John Jaselskis
* 12/31/2004
* USD 5,052,575.00

Title: CMS 97-28805 P.I.: Rae Zimmerman and Roy Sparrow, New York University
"Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems" The current state of infrastructure
services and facilities relative to public expectations underscores the need for
an institutional mechanism to bring together diverse groups to provide an
integrative framework for infrastructure. New York University, with three
collaborators - Cornell University, the University of Southern California, and
the Polytechnic University of New York - will establish an Institute for Civil
Infrastructure Systems (ICIS) within NYU's Wagner School of Public Service. This
Institute builds on partnering institution expertise in infrastructure
engineering, management, and social science, and incorporates a diverse set of
participating organizations and individuals. The Institute's vision is to
facilitate, build partnerships and networks, supported by a strong educational
initiative and information technology to organize and transfer information to
the CIS community. The ICIS will be an incubator for ideas and a marketplace for
information to promote connectivity. It is a new approach, combining technical
and social science expertise critical to the future direction of American's
infrastructure. The ICIS strategic plan is organized around sustainability and
coordinated renewal, education and learning, community awareness and
participation, performance measurement assessments, and research needs
assessment programs. Sustainability is central to other program operations. ICIS
outputs include white papers, and electronic information system to support
connectivity; conferences/forums to set ICIS agendas; and demonstration/pilot
projects for education and community outreach. Self-evaluation and development
functions are included. The organization includes a director, and executive
committee coordinating program work and technical advisory, management
oversight, and development boards. The ICIS is chartered by NSF to function for
up to five years with NSF support. ***