* 9728720
* Thermodynamic Origins of Sequence-Recognition in Ligand-DNA Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* David Graves, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2001
* USD 245,000.00

9728720 Graves The focus of this research is to gain insight into the mechanisms
through which small molecules and proteins exert sequence-selective binding to
nucleic acids. Efforts will be directed towards correlating the thermodynamic
properties associated with these interactions with both DNA sequence and ligand
structure. Recent studies have demonstrated the DNA binding enthalpies and
entropies observed for actinomycin D-DNA interactions to be markedly influenced
not only by the base-sequence at the intercalation site but also by the bases
that flank the intercalation site. These observations will be extended to
explore the effects of subtle changes in the DNA base sequences that flank the
ligand binding site and their relationship to changes in the thermodynamic
binding mechanism(s). Analyses of thermodynamic binding properties will be
coupled to examination of the concomitant ligand-DNA structures resulting from
interactions of ligands with specific DNA base sequences providing linkage
between the thermodynamic mechanisms associated with complex formation and the
structural geometry of the ligand-DNA complex. Various biophysical methods
including absorption spectroscopy and isothermal microtitration calorimetry will
be used to examine the interactions of actinomycin D with oligonucleotides that
have been designed specifically to harbor a single centrally located actinomycin
D binding site and varied neighboring and next-neighboring flanking base
sequences. The binding site sequence and bases which flank the binding site will
be systematically changed to determine their influence on the thermodynamic
mechanism of complex formation. From these studies, insight into the
thermodynamic origins of DNA sequence-recognition will be discerned. Structural
details of the ligand-DNA complex will be examined by high-resolution nuclear
magnetic resonance methods and correlated with the thermodynamic data to provide
a novel paradigm for the "thermodynamic origins" of sequence-recognition. Mol
ecular recognition is one of the central problems in understanding the
mechanistic processes that govern a wide variety of biochemical and molecular
biological events that take place in the cell. Hence, an understanding of the
forces that govern the sequence specific interactions of small molecules and
proteins with DNA is pivotal towards an overall comprehension of basic
biochemical processes such as replication, transcription, recombination, and DNA
repair. The focus of this research is to determine and characterize the chemical
and/or structural determinants on both the target DNA and ligand responsible for
sequence-selective interactions.