* 9728965
* Preparation of Preservice Mathematics and Science Teachers: Completion of TEAMS-BC Reform Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Irwin Shapiro, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dorothy L. Stout
* 09/30/1999
* USD 57,964.00

The course is designed to develop the distinction between evidence and inference
as a conceptual framework in the context of mastering a few science concepts.
Since precollege science teachers are increasingly held responsible for teaching
to the Standards, examples are explicitly drawn from the Standards and
conclusions are linked to the Standards. The first three weeks of the course
explore the distinction between evidence and inference using a few common
exemplars, e.g., the heliocentric view of the solar system and the nature of
floating and sinking. The method of teaching is based on the constructionist
approach developed by the Epistemology and Learning Group at the MIT Media Lab
(http://lcs.www.media.mit.edu/groups/el/), among others. This approach is
characterized in the following way: (1) the intended outcome must be clearly
understood by the students; (2) achieving the outcome must require the students
to act; and (3) students must be able to tell whether their actions are taking
them closer to or further from the intended outcome. This approach provides
feedback from the task, not from the teacher. For example, students asked to
develop a procedure to measure the volume of an object must be able to determine
the volume by some other process so that they can determine if the method they
devise agrees. They also use a variety of objects upon which to test their
proposed solution to the problem.