* 9728155
* Evolution of Telencephalic Neuronal Architecture:           Anatomical Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Ann Butler, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 03/31/2003
* USD 238,795.00

Butler IBN-9728155 In mammals, the neocortex which receives diverse sensory
inputs and include sites of higher cognitive functions, forms from the
telencephalic pallium. The highly laminar, or layered, arrangement of the
neurons in neocortex is an exception to the way in which this brain area
develops in most of the major radiations of vertebrates. Among the latter,
elaboration and expansion of the telencephalic pallium has occurred
independently over evolution and is characterized by the presence of various
nuclear groups, i.e., the neurons are arranged in a nonlaminar manner. One
current hypothesis (proposed by Karten) is that these nuclei in the elaborated
pallia of nonmammals represent equivalent cell populations to the cell
populations that form the respective laminae in mammalian neocortex. A large
body of data on neuronal connections and histochemistry supports this hypothesis
for the nuclear pallial groups present in birds. This proposal seeks to
determine--by the study of the connections of pallial regions with anatomical
tracing techniques--whether the "equivalent cell hypothesis" can be extended to
aminote vertebrates, i.e., whether similar nuclear groups with similar
connections can be identified in systems with elaborated telencephali pallia.
Specifically, it is predicted that in very simple unelaborated pallia, only one
cell population dedicated to the visual system is present. Whereas in elaborated
and expanded pallia, two or more separate cell populations dedicated to visual
processing are present. Such a result would support Karten's equivalent cell
hypothesis. Further, this result would support the hypothesis that such multiple
cell groups evolved by the process of parcellation (as proposed by Ebbesson),
which states that a single cell group can divide over evolution into two or more
daughter cell groups with parceled connections and functions.