* 9728503
* Molecular Structure and Function of Fruit Cuticle Polyesters
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Ruth Stark, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2003
* USD 465,000.00

9728503 Stark The cuticle of higher plants functions primarily as a protective
barrier for the leaves and fruit, controlling microbial attack as well as the
diffusion of water and chemicals. Its major chemical constituents are waxes that
provide waterproofing and either of two insoluble structural polymers, cutin and
suberin. This project aims to understand how the monomer units are linked
together and to cell-wall matrices, how stresses alter the membrane's
supramolecular architecture and surface microstructure, and how the suberin
polymer is synthesized during wound healing. Several biophysical approaches will
be taken to these problems. (1) Oligomeric fragments of lime cutin and potato
suberin will be produced chemically and identified using high-performance liquid
chromatography, mass spectrometry, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). (2) The
flexibility and phase segregation of intact tomato cuticles will be assessed in
response to wind, temperature, and hydration stress using solid-state 13C and 2H
NMR. (3) The response of tomato cuticle surface topography and micromechanical
properties to dewaxing, swelling, and application of aqueous detergents will be
examined using atomic force microscopy (AFM). (4) The biosynthesis of suberin in
wound-healing potato tissues, including feeding with 13C-enriched precursors,
will be monitored through spectroscopic analysis of soluble phenolic
metabolities and insoluble cell-wall bound materials. The overall objectives of
this project include understanding how the monomer units of the protective cutin
and suberin biopolymers are linked together and to supporting cell-wall
matrices, how environmental stresses such as wind abrasion, high humidity, and
temperature shock alter the architecture of the cuticular membrane, and how the
suberin polymer is synthesized by the plant tissue during wound healing.
Ultimately, this research should have both agricultural and economic impact,
aiding in the design of essential crop protection strategies. More b roadly, the
microstructural and molecular insights developed from this work may assist the
development of synthetic waterproofing materials for industrial or cosmetic use.
Finally, this project will serve to introduce methods such as solid-state NMR
and AFM to the community of plant scientists. ***