* 9728045
* Cell Wall Associated, Receptor Protein Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Bruce Kohorn, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 02/28/2001
* USD 370,000.00

MCB9728045 Lay Abstract The interactions between the extracellular and
intracellular compartments of cells play important roles in controlling growth
and development. These interactions are essential for such basic cell functions
as establishment of cell polarity and regulation of cell division, cell
differentiation, cell migration and cell death. The extracellular compartment
contains molecular components arranged in a complex architecture termed the
extracellular matrix (ECM). It is well established that in animal cells a basic
way in which the ECM can regulate cell processes is through its interaction with
cell surface proteins (receptors) that bind to specific adhesive components of
the ECM. By contrast, in plant cells, despite their overwhelming importance on
earth, little is known about the communication between the ECM (the plant cell
wall) and the cell interior. This proposal concerns a family of four cell
surface receptors called Waks (short for wall-associated kinases), discovered in
the cells of the flowering plant, Arabidopsis, which appear to be adhesion
proteins that transmit signals between the extracellular and intracellular
compartments. Using genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, and microscopy,
we will determine the tissue location of these receptors and the molecular
mechanism by which they mediate communication between the inside and outside of
the plant cell. We propose that the Waks generate a signal inside the cell by
their ability to interact with and to modify (phosphorylate) specific target
proteins which then initiate a cascade of molecular events within the cytoplasm.
This proposal describes experiments to dissect these interactions and events.
The analysis is likely to elucidate general principles of how eukaryotic cells
interact with their immediate environment and perceive changes in the
architecture of their ECM.