* 9728868
* Functional Studies of Flightin, a Thick Filament Protein of Drosophila Flight Muscles
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Jim Vigoreaux, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 03/31/2003
* USD 311,345.00

9728868 Vigoreaux Lay Abstract The goal of this project is to determine the
functional properties of flightin, a protein associated with the thick filaments
of insect flight muscle. This protein is interesting because it may be involved
in some of the special properties of this muscle, namely its very rapid beating.
Unlike a typical vertebrate muscle cell which contracts and relaxes in a cycle
coordinated with a rise and then fall in the concentration of intracellular
calcium, insect flight muscle undergoes continuing rapid cycles of contraction
and relaxation while the calcium concentration remains high. Flightin is found
tightly associated with the myosin thick filaments of the insect cells. Flightin
may simply stabilize the highly organized filament architecture in the cells or
may be involved in a fundamentally different type of contraction control during
the interaction of actin and myosin. Flightin or a relative may also be found in
other muscle cell types where it may have very different or related functional
properties. The project will address three specific questions to understand
flightin function in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, chosen for its many
advantages as a powerful model system. (1) Are mutant flight muscle cells that
lack flightin less stable than normal cells when these cells contract? This
would be expected if flightin plays a basic structural role to stabilize the
highly ordered arrays of actin and myosin filament assemblies? (2) What is the
precise way flightin interacts with the myosin filament? Detailed analysis of
binding should elucidate how flightin might stabilize filament structure or
control actin-myosin interaction since many details of the actin and myosin
structures are already known. (3) What role does phosphorylation of the flightin
molecule play in controlling its activity? Since the molecule can exist in
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated states, by analogy to other phosphorylated
proteins whose state of phosphorylation c an be enzymatically controlled, it is
very likely that these different states are also functionally different. The
principal investigator, who was instrumental in the discovery of flightin, will
purify flightin to study its binding properties, sites of phosphorylation, and
other biochemical properties. He and his co-principal investigator will
integrate results from a variety of other techniques and approaches, including
electron microscopy, molecular and classical genetics, and physiological
techniques, to provide clear and coherent answers to these questions. ***