* 9728890
* Collaborative Research: Genetic and Developmental Analysis  Hybrid Sterility Rescue between Drosophila Melanogaster     and Drosophila Simulans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Hope Hollocher, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/2002
* USD 176,403.00

Hollocher/Davis 9728890 One striking and very common pattern that results when
different species are crossed together is the production of hybrid offspring
that are unable to reproduce (i.e. the offspring are completely sterile). This
research focuses on understanding the genetic and developmental basis of hybrid
sterility in offspring that result from crosses between Drosophila melanogaster
and Drosophila simulans. Earlier analyses of hybrid sterility had been hampered
by the fact that all crosses using these two species yielded offspring that were
completely sterile, making simple genetic analyses beyond the initial F1 hybrid
impossible. Recently, a naturally occurring strain of D. simulans has been
discovered which rescues the sterility defect of hybrid females in crosses with
D. melanogaster. With the ability to produce both fertile and sterile hybrid
females, we are now in a position to use the vast repertoire of molecular and
genetic tools available in these Drosophila species to make advances in
understanding the underlying genetic and developmental causes of hybrid
sterility. The first aim of this research is to use a comparative developmental
approach to characterize the specific defects in gametogenesis that are
associated with hybrid sterility. Using this comparative approach we can answer
the following questions: What is the developmental basis of female hybrid
sterility and its rescue? Do sterile, unrescued hybrid females have any
functional germline tissue at all? If so, what appears to be the primary defect
in germline development? Is hybrid female sterility rescue complete? Is hybrid
sterility rescue sex-specific? Our second aim is to map the genetic factors
responsible for hybrid female sterility and its rescue. The generation of
recombinants between D. simulans lines that produce either sterile or fertile
hybrid females when crossed with D. melanogaster will be used to determine which
gene regions are associated with the specific hybrid sterility defects
characterized in t he first aim of the proposal. In conjunction with the mapping
studies, a survey of additional Drosophila lines will be conducted to isolate
new sterility rescue factors, paying particular attention to complementary
strains of D. melanogaster which show hybrid sterility rescue. Our final aim is
then to take advantage of hybrid sterility rescue in crosses between D.
melanogaster and D. simulans to introduce genetic material from one species into
the other to test specific hypotheses about how genes affecting gametogenesis
have diverged between these two species.