* 9728363
* TECO: Carbon Monoxide Consumption by Forest and             Agroecosystem Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Carol Johnston
* 08/31/2001
* USD 305,000.00

9728363 King Carbon monoxide is a more dynamic component of the atmosphere than
methane, occurring at a lower concentration but substantially higher flux. CO
and hydroxyl radical interact rapidly, affecting a number of atmospheric
parameters: the oxidative state of the troposphere; the fate and residence times
of methane, non-methane organics and inorganics; tropospheric ozone; and the
extent of thermal forcing. Soils consume atmospheric CO, accounting for 10-25%
of the global carbon budget, depending on the source estimate. Some of the
controls of soil CO uptake and production have been described generally, but
much remains unknown. Details of CO uptake in agroecosystems are particularly
sketchy, in spite of the fact that they occupy about 10% of terrestrial surface
area, and have a disproportionate impact on a number of important trace gases.
Limited field results have suggested that CO uptake in agroecosystems may be
equivalent to or greater than uptake in undisturbed systems. Stimulation of CO
consumption in agroecosystems could partially ameliorate the inhibition of
methane uptake that accompanies agriculture by enhancing the availability of
tropospheric OH. Since CO uptake is as much as 10-fold greater than methane
uptake on a global basis, small changes in soil CO dynamics (positive or
negative) can have a significant impact on the fate of methane. This study will
determine specifically the extent to which agricultural practices affect
atmospheric CO consumption by soils. Agricultural soils will be compared with
similar non-agricultural soils across a gradient of texture using sites in Maine
and Georgia. This study will focus on gas exchange, water regimes, temperature,
and various agricultural disturbances (fertilization, pesticide use, tilling,
no-till), as controls of CO fluxes. The extent to which several microbial groups
of CO oxidizers vary as a function of land use will also be determined. The
results of this study will establish both rates and the major controls of soil
CO dyn amics, as well as the sensitivity of CO uptake to climate change and
other anthropogenic perturbations.