* 9728332
* RUI:  Why Can
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Jennifer Punt, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 03/31/2001
* USD 317,552.00

MCB9728332 Punt, Jennifer RUI: Why Can't CD4+ CD8+ Thymocytes be Stimulated to
Proliferate? Lay Summary A basic question in immunology is why immature T
lymphocytes respond so differently to stimulation compared to their mature
descendants. Mature T lymphocytes are important participants in the immune
response because they protect the body from viruses and tumors by (a)
recognizing and attacking abnormal or infected cells and (b) alerting other
parts of the immune system to their presence. T cells recognize threatening
cells by binding foreign protein (antigen) to receptors, called T cell
receptors, on their surfaces. Every T lymphocyte expresses a different T cell
receptor. Therefore the large population of T cells in the body can collectively
defend the body against a large range of threatening cells. New T cells with new
receptors are generated every day as T cells develop from immature precursors in
an organ called the thymus. The receptors expressed by the immature cells
(called thymocytes) are randomly generated. Because each new thymocyte expresses
a brand new receptor, the cell must be tested for its suitability before being
released into the body. The screening for suitable cells occurs at a pivotal
stage of development, the "double positive" (DP) stage, so-called because these
cells express two key proteins, CD4 and CD8. DP thymocytes are the immediate
precursors of mature T cells. However, the vast majority of DP thymocytes are
never selected to become mature thymocytes because their receptors are deemed
useless or directed against a normal antigen of the body. The fate of the DP
cells during this screening process is governed almost entirely by the signals
they receive from their new receptors. Interestingly, DP thymocytes interpret
receptor signals very differently from mature T cells. When mature T cells
receive a strong signal through their receptor, they become activated and start
to divide. When immature DP thymocytes receive the same signal, they also b
ecome activated but do not divide. Nothing, in fact, seems to induce cells at
this early stage of development to multiply. The reason for this is not yet
known. To determine why DP thymocytes fail to divide in response to T cell
receptor signals, these studies will compare the molecular machinery responsible
for cell division in immature DP and mature T cells. These studies will also
test the possibility that the inability of a DP thymocyte to divide may be
critical to the success of this screening process which fundamentally shapes the
immune response.