* 9728555
* Biochemistry and Endocrine Regulation of Aggregation        Pheromone Production in Dendroctonus spp. Pine Bark Beetles
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1998,01/07/1999
* Steven Seybold, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/07/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9728555 Seybold Bark beetles, which aggregate in large numbers and feed in the
living, sugar-transporting tissue of many of our most valued tree species, are
the predominant insect pests of conifers in western North America. These insects
use odor attractants (pheromones) to gather on and infest the trees. In this
project the PIs propose to study how two economically important species of bark
beetles, the mountain pine beetle, Dendroctonus ponderosae, and the Jeffrey pine
beetle, Dendroctonus jeffreyi, synthesize the mixtures of relatively small lipid
molecules that they use as pheromones. The research will utilize a variety of
standard biochemical and physiological techniques to reveal the pathways that
these insects use as well as how these pathways are hormonally regulated. Key
objectives of the study are to determine when in the life cycle the chemicals
are biosynthesized and in what region of the body the synthesis occurs.
Furthermore, the relationship of pheromone synthesis to the olcorcsin chemistry
of the host pines will be examined. Ultimately, this fundamental research on the
origin of bark beetle pheromones may identify unique susceptible target points
in projection or regulation that could be used for insect control techniques.
While it is impossible to predict with any accuracy practical outcomes of this
research, it should be emphasized that the only time that the beetles leave
their galleries beneath the bark is for the short-duration, pheromone-mediated
flight to new hosts.