* 9728587
* Molecular Genetic Mechanisms of Gonad Development in        Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* John Postlethwait, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2001
* USD 360,000.00

The long-term objective of this project is to understand the genetic mechanisms
that control gonad development in animals with backbones. The general morphology
and endocrinology of gonad development are well conserved among vertebrates, but
the genetic pathway that determines whether a gonad becomes an ovary or a testis
is not well understood in any vertebrate. Understanding the mechanisms that
regulate gonad growth and differentiation takes on increasing significance as
environmental pollutants, such as some polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), may
disturb gonad development and endocrine function in fish, birds, and mammals,
including humans. The resulting effects on the physiology of reproduction are
significant for the preservation of wildlife populations and for human
reproductive health. Although the underlying pathway of gonad development may be
shared among vertebrates, different vertebrate lineages have different ways of
diverting the pathway towards an ovary or a testis. Some species have strong
genotypic sex determination, such as mammals in which a specific gene called SRY
on the Y-chromosome specifies gonad development. Other species have strong
environmental sex determination, such as some turtles in which the temperature
of embryo incubation regulates gonad sex. Investigations on zebrafish suggest
the hypothesis that multiple genotypic factors, with a minor influence from the
environment, cause an individual's gonads to express either genes for androgen
synthesizing enzymes and androgen receptor, or express genes for estrogen
synthesizing enzymes and estrogen receptor; these endocrine factors may then
control the sex of the gonad, primary germ cells, and secondary sex
characteristics. This hypothesis will be tested in three ways: Specific Aim 1.
The proposed experiments will investigate the expression patterns of genes
predicted by the model to play a role in early gonadal development of the
zebrafish. Specific Aim 2: The proposed experiments will perturb gonad
development using sex steroids and their inhibitors, and various mutations, and
investigate whether gene expression patterns change in ways predicted by the
model. Specific Aim 3: The proposed experiments will identify quantitative trait
loci (QTLs) associated with sex differentiation in zebrafish. Map locations will
be compared to those of genes isolated in Specific Aim 1 and with mammalian
genomes to suggest candidate genes for gonad differentiation in zebrafish.
Achieving the specific aims will result in a more robust understanding of the
control mechanisms of gonad development in zebrafish, and will point to genetic
loci that influence sex determination in this species. The resulting firmer
understanding of the basic nature of sex determination in zebrafish will permit
the future design of mutagenesis protocols to isolate novel genes important for
vertebrate sex determination.