* 9728628
* Visual Attention and Perception:  Locations, Objects, and   Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Cathleen Moore, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 06/30/2002
* USD 199,912.00

Seeing and acting upon the visual world requires more than the passive
registration of visual information. Also required is intentional knowledge-based
control over that incoming information. The goal of this research is to
investigate the coordination between the relatively passive processes of visual
perception and the more active processes of visual attention. Past research has
shed light on many aspects of the perceptual organization of incoming
information, including the separation of figure from ground, the completion of
objects behind occluding surfaces, and the compensation for spurious information
such as shadows. The present project concerns when and how the active selection
of information occurs relative to when and how the processes of perceptual
organization come into play. These issues will be addressed by introducing into
traditional visual-attention paradigms manipulations for probing the state of
perceptual processes. For example, one such paradigm is visual search, which is
a laboratory analogue for real-life visual tasks in which an organism searches
its environment for interesting objects, such as mates, predators, and food. To
perform this task the participant must guide his or her attention through the
scene in an active search for the desired item. The interaction between this
guidance of attention and the discounting of spurious changes in illumination
will be probed by casting shadows across the display. The results will tell us
whether and how the guidance of attention is disrupted by spurious information
like shadows, thereby informing us about when compensation for shadows occurs
relative to attentional guidance. Enhanced understanding of the coordination
between perceptual processing and intentional control over that processing will
be useful in a number of domains. First, any situation in which a person must
engage in multiple subtasks simultaneously (e.g., during driving, flight-
control, and sports) requires this coordination. Basing the development of tools
for use in these situations on knowledge of the strengths and weaknesses of the
human system will increase the probability of their success. Similarly,
knowledge of how humans naturally coordinate perception and attention will be
useful for deciding how to present information most effectively (e.g., for
medical imaging and other complex data sets).