* 9728215
* Role of the HEMR Receptor in Utilization of Heme-Protein    Complexes by Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Igor Stojiljkovic, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 02/28/2001
* USD 299,976.00

9728215 Stojiljkovic Biosynthesis of heme in bacteria requires a significant
amount of cell energy and uses 1 to 10% of the total cell iron content. The high
energy costs of heme biosynthesis coupled with the constant famine which
bacteria face in their natural environments has favored the development of heme
scavenging systems. Gram-negative bacteria express heme-specific outer membrane
receptors that allow usage of heme compounds as sources of iron and porphyrin.
Protein domains and amino acid residues involved in binding, extraction, and
transport of heme by any heme receptor are currently unknown. The Y.
enterocolitica HemR receptor will be studied as the model of a heme-specific
outer membrane receptor. HemR is unique among Gram-negative receptors since it
enables usage of a wide variety of heme-protein complexes. In aim 1 of the
project the role of conserved histidine residues and "FRAP" and "NPNL" boxes in
HemR function will be studied by site-directed mutagenesis and epitope tagging.
In aim 2 of the project the molecular basis for the extraordinarily broad
spectrum of usable HemR ligands will be studied using PCR mutagenesis and toxic
compounds that specifically inhibit growth of HemR+ cells. Research described
under aim 3 of the project will quantify defects in ligand and TonB binding by
the mutant HemR receptors and will study the mechanism by which the HemR
receptor releases heme from heme-protein complexes in vitro. These studies will,
for the first time for any heme receptor, identify and characterize receptor
domains that are involved in binding and utilization of different heme-protein
complexes and determine the mechanism by which heme receptors extract heme from
different protein complexes. The heme molecule is one of the most important
enzyme cofactors in nature. Heme is an essential cofactor in oxygen transport,
oxygen metabolism, and electron transfer in the majority of living beings.
Because of the importance of the heme molecule, the majority of organisms have
develo ped systems for heme scavenging from the environment. Although ubiquitous
in nature, these systems are poorly understood. The goal of this project is to
understand the mechanism of action and identify functionally important protein
domains of the first bacterial heme receptor to be characterized, the HemR of Y.
enterocolitica.