* 9728505
* Regulation of Pathogenicity Factors in Erwinia carotovora
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* David Emerich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2003
* USD 336,956.00

Chatterjee 9728505 Erwinia carotovora subspecies carotovora (Ecc), a gram-
negative bacterial plant pathogen, produces various extracellular enzymes (=
exoenzymes) such as pectate lyase (Pel), polygalacturonase (Peh), pecin lyase
(Pnl), cellulase (Cel) and protease (Prt) as well as HarpinEcc, an elicitor of
the hypersensitive reaction. A long term goal of this research is to elucidate
the genetic and molecular mechanisms that, by controlling the production of such
exoenzymes and HarpinEcc, affect the outcome of bacterial plant interactions.
Based upon recent findings with Ecc strain 71, it is thought that rsmA, aepH and
kdgR specify the key components of a regulatory circuit which controls the
production of exoenzymes, HarpinEcc and secondary metabolites as well as the
cell density (quorum) sensing signal, N-acyl-L-homoserine lactone (AHL). The
current model for regulation postulates the following events: RsmA (Regulator of
secondary metabolism), a RNA-binding protein, promotes message decay. KdgR
(repressor of genes for Pel as well as pectate catabolism) binds aepH (activator
of exoenzyme and secondary metabolite production) DNA and negatively controls
aepH RNA levels. In the absence of aepH RNA, RsmA remains fully active,
promoting message decay. As the level of active KdgR drops, aepH transcription
is stimulated, producing a 479 base RNA species which bind RsmA, thereby
depleting the pool of free RsmA. The formation of RsmA:aepH RNA complex creates
a favorable ribonucleoprotein conformation that facilitates RNA processing.
AepH' RNA, the 259 base processed product, negatively controls RsmA levels by
affecting translation or turnover of RsmA. Thus, aepH' RNA is postulated to
primarily act via RsmA. The major thrust of this project is to produce
fundamental knowledge of this novel regulatory system controlling exoenzyme
production. The specific objectives are to: examine the effects of RsmA on
transcripts of exoenzyme genes and their regulator genes; elucidate the role of
KdgR i n aepH expression; examine processing of aepH RNA; and elucidate the role
of the processed aepH' RNA on RsmA production. Since RsmA and aepH play pivotal
roles in the production of exoenzymes and secondary metabolites (i.e.,
antibiotics, pigments, polysaccharides) in several other bacteria, this research
has broad ramifications. From a practical perspective, the emerging knowledge
could be exploited to manipulate the levels of bacterial products useful in
various biotechnological applications, including biological control of plant
diseases.