* 9728338
* Molecular and Cellular Structure of Gap Junctions
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Gina Sosinsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 04/30/2002
* USD 489,043.00

9728338 Sosinsky This project is to study the detailed structure of gap
junctions and their role in intercellular communication. Gap junctions are
formed between the plasma membrane of apposed epithelial cells and other animal
cell types. The junctions provide a direct aqueous channel through which ions
and small molecules can pass between the cells. A gap junction is composed of
paired connexons (one from each cell) each of which is a homohexamer made up of
protein subunits called connexins. There are several connexin isoforms (16 in
human cells) that constitute the connexin family. All connexin isoforms share a
basic conformation when assembled in a connexon. However, not all connexons can
pair and form functional channels with all the other connexons composed of
dissimilar connexin subunits. This may allow different cell types expressing
specific isoforms to form junctions selectively with only cells of the same
type. Studies that are proposed will test an hypothesis for the molecular basis
of connexon pairing that could account for this selectivity. Preliminary
evidence from cryo-electron microscopy and three-dimensional reconstructions
using two isoforms indicates that the surface contours of the extracellular face
of different connexons are different for the two isoforms. The hypothesis is
that during pairing there is a reciprocal fit of the apposed faces that accounts
for the specificity of pairing. To test the hypothesis, the high-resolution
connexon structures that result from four other isoforms will be analyzed. In
addition, correlative light and electron microscopy will be used to detail the
steps of gap junction assembly and disassembly. A final portion of the project
will involve the characterization of specialized intracellular gap junctions
("reflexive junctions") that form within Schwann cells of the nervous system.
The studies are highly significant in that they would likely provide important
insights into the structural and functional differences among the g ap junctions
that form in different tissues. ***