* 9728885
* Crystallographic Study of a Quinoprotein Electron Transfer  System:  Methylamine Dehydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* F. Mathews, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2001
* USD 405,000.00

9728885 Mathews Structural studies will be carried out on the quinoprotein-
electron transfer systems methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH) from Paracoccus
denitrificans and aromatic amine dehydrogenase (AADH) by the methods of x-ray
diffraction. Three proteins are involved in the first system, MADH, amicyanin
and cytochrome c551i. MADH is an H2L2 dimer of 124 kDa and contains the unusual
cofactor tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ). Amicyanin is a blue copper protein
of 12.5 kDa which interacts specifically with MADH. Cytochrome c551i is a 17.5
kDa protein which can accept electrons from amicyanin and transfer them via
another cytochrome to a terminal oxidase. The structures of MADH, amicyanin, the
binary complex of MADH with amicyanin and the ternary complex of MADH, amicyanin
and cytochrome c551i have been determined. AADH is an H2L2 heterotetramer of 114
kDa and also contains TTQ. Its electron acceptor is azurin, a blue copper
protein of 15 kDa. Structures of the native complexes will be refined at high
resolution and those of several redox variants of the binary and ternary
complexes will be analyzed. Mutants of amicyanin and of MADH in the complexes
will be studied to analyze the structural changes caused by these mutations.
Studies of MADH and its electron transfer complexes will also be carried out
after reaction with substrates and inhibitors and in different redox states. The
refinement of two native and of two inhibited forms of MADH from Methylophilus
W3A1, which uses a cytochrome rather than amicyanin as the primary electron
acceptor, will be completed. A series of studies of MADH from two other
organisms, Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 and Methylobacillus flagellatum KT
will also be studied. Finally, the structure of AADH and its putative complex
with azurin will be determined and compared with the Paracoccus enzyme. Electron
transfer is fundamental to many biological processes, but is difficult to study
structurally since the components are usually insoluble and cannot b e
crystallized. The proposed studies of the MADH and AADH enzyme systems will
provide valuable information about this process. The interaction of the various
components of this soluble electron transport system define molecular features
important for recognition and control of electron transfer and define likely
pathways for electron flow. The proposed mutational and ligand-induced
perturbations of the MADH system will further probe this complex process. In
addition, the molecular details of substrate oxidation by the TTQ cofactor will
shed light on how this cofactor functions in vivo and how it differs from other,
more common redox cofactors. TTQ is unusual because it is obtained directly from
the fusion of two amino acid side chains coded by genomic DNA rather than from a
separate biosynthetic pathway. The MADH and AADH systems are well suited to
provide an understanding of these important processes at the molecular level.