* 9728116
* Protein Translational Mobility and Concentration Near       Membrane Surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Nancy Thompson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9728116 Thompson Total internal reflection with fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy will be used to determine the factors which govern the
translational mobilities and concentrations of fluorescent proteins adjacent to
single phospholipid bilayers deposited on transparent planar substrates. An
argon ion laser beam will be internally reflected at the substrate/solution
interface, creating an evanescent field that extends only a small distance into
the adjacent solution. Along with the evanescent depth, an aperture placed at an
intermediate image plane of an optical microscope will define a small volume
next to the membrane surface. The fluorescence arising from molecules within
this small volume, collected with a high aperture objective and detected with a
fast silicon avalanche photodiode, will fluctuate with time as individual
fluorescent proteins move in and out of the observed volume. The normalized
fluorescence fluctuation autocorrelation function will provide information about
solute translational mobility and concentration. A large variety of biological
processes involve the interactions of molecules in solution, such as proteins,
with receptor molecules present on the surfaces of biological cells. The details
of these interactions, which result in specific biological behavior, are
predicted to depend strongly on the concentrations and movements of the proteins
in solution directly adjacent to the cell surfaces. These two properties,
concentration and translational mobility, will be measured for fluorescent
proteins next to models of cell surfaces constructed on transparent planar
surfaces, by using newly developed methods that employ laser excitation and
optical microscopy. The results will be used to expand the current level of
general knowledge about how cells detect and respond to their environments,
giving rise to biological function.