* 9728032
* Visual Control of Prey Pursuit
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Cole Gilbert, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2000
* USD 95,575.00

IBN 97-28032 GILBERT Detection of targets while moving is difficult for systems
that track targets visually, because the observer's own movements degrade the
target image by blurring it. The blur causes a decrease in visual contrast
between the target image and the background that makes it difficult to localize
the target. Such motion-induced problems in target detection exist for moving
animals, such as visually-hunting predators, and also for man-made systems, such
as optically-guided robots. Predatory animals have evolved various strategies
for coping with degradation of target images during pursuit. Tiger beetles are
diurnal, visually-hunting predators that pursue their moving prey by running
discontinuously, i.e., after initially localizing its prey, a beetle runs very
fast (over 0.5 meter per second), then stops briefly (a few hundred
milliseconds), then runs fast again toward the prey. This pattern of stop-and-go
is repeated three or four times until the continuously moving prey is caught. In
preliminary experiments, Dr. Cole Gilbert filmed beetles pursuing live prey or
experimenter-controlled prey dummies. Frame-by-frame analysis indicated that a
beetle stops only long enough to relocalize the prey. While a beetle is stopped,
the image of the prey is not degraded and thus may be easier to see and
localize. Subsequently, while the beetle is quickly running toward the prey, its
image is degraded, perhaps so much so that the beetle loses track of it and must
stop again. This hypothesis is supported by results from experiments in which
beetles pursued prey dummies of very high contrast. In such pursuits, beetles
were able to run continuously after the prey without stopping, suggesting that
the visual contrast of the target image determines the type of pursuit the
beetle can afford. Dr. Gilbert will investigate visually-guided pursuit by tiger
beetles using a newly acquired digital camera capable of much higher speeds than
his previous equipment . In particular, he will more rigorously test the
hypothesis that viewing conditions determine whether the beetle performs
continuous or stop-and-go pursuit. In short, is the beetle's switch in behavior
an adaptive response to the amount of degradation of the target image? Various
levels of target contrast and velocity will be used to produce different amounts
of degradation and the dynamic properties of the resulting pursuits will be
analyzed. The results from the project will elucidate the strategy used by the
tiger beetle to cope with degradation of target images caused by the beetle's
own high velocity. Moreover, the results may suggest useful strategies for man-
made exploratory machines that often need to efficiently survey large areas
quickly. The project may reveal that in some situations, the beetle's strategy
of moving quickly then stopping to gather visual information may be more
efficient than moving slowly enough to avoid image blur so that visual
information can be gathered continuously.