* 9728707
* Muscle Mechanics in Squid:  An Integrated Analysis of       Muscle Fiber Specialization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* William Kier, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2002
* USD 243,000.00

9728707 Kier Comparison of striated muscle cells from a diversity of animals
reveals a remarkable range of performance. This specialization depends both on
variation in the chemical composition of the cells and on variation in the
arrangement and dimensions of the components of the cells. Much of the previous
research on this topic has been focused on vertebrate muscle, in which muscle
fiber specialization occurs primarily through variation in chemical composition.
Little research has been done, however, on muscle specialization in
invertebrates, in spite of the fact that a much greater range of striated muscle
structure and performance is observed in these animals. The muscle cells to be
studied in this investigation are the obliquely striated cells of the arms and
the cross striated cells of the tentacles of the squid Loligo pealei. Previous
research has shown remarkable differences in the ultrastructure of the two cell
types and the physiological implications of these differences have been
hypothesized, yet the actual physiological performance of these cells has not
been studied. Recent studies also suggest that the cross striated muscle cells
of the tentacle are derived, both through ontogeny and phylogeny, from an
obliquely striated muscle fiber type. This study will offer the opportunity to
explore and to document the physiological implications of the structural
specializations of the cross striated fibers. This will be the first measurement
of the basic physiological parameters of the two muscle types. These data will
be used to test and refine a forward-dynamics model of the tentacle strike.