* 9728748
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Growth and Characterization of (Ba,Sr)Tio3/(Ba,Sr)Ru03 Thin Film Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Fumio Ohuchi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/2001
* USD 14,601.00

9728748 Ohuchi This award provides funds to permit Dr. Fumio S. Ohuchi,
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, to
pursue with Dr. Duck-Kyun Choi, Department of Inorganic Materials Engineering,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, for 36 months, a program of cooperative
research on the growth and characterization of perovskite based thin film
heterosystems for use in future Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM)
applications. The heterosystems to be grown and characterized consist of (Ba,
Sr)TiO3 as ferroelectric dielectric and (Ba, Sr)Ru O3 as conductive material.
Elucidation of the roles of chemical, kinetic, and structural constraints
controlling the growth and properties of the heterosystem is a major objective.
The collaborators will determine the feasibility of using these structures in
novel DRAM structures. This will be accomplished through studies of the (1)
fabrication of thin film heterostructures by magnetron sputtering, (2)
characterization of thin film microstructure, and (3) properties of the
resultant thin film systems, with emphasis on exploitation in device
applications. The cooperating scientists and their laboratories have
complementary expertise and equipment, respectively, for their roles in pursuing
this research.. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***