* 9728404
* The IrrI Protein of Deinococcus radiodurans
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* John Battista, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 353,196.00

Battista 9728404 The bacterial species Deinococcus radiodurans displays an
extraordinary ability to withstand the lethal effects of DNA damaging agents,
especially ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation. The capacity of these
bacteria to survive massive damage to their genetic material suggests that the
bacteria have evolved distinctive mechanisms of DNA damage tolerance. The
mechanism for the radiation repair properties of this organism is unknown,
however, genetic inactivation of the so far uncharacterized IrrI gene of the
bacterium renders this organism extremely sensitive to ionizing radiation. This
implies that the IrrI protein plays a pivotal role in the ionizing radiation
resistance of the deinococci. Evidence has been obtained that indicates that
IrrI is an inhibitor of a exonucleolytic activity that causes an immediate
breakdown of chromosomal DNA following the cell's exposure to UV and gamma
radiation. The putative exonuclease seems to act at strand breaks introduced
either directly by the incident radiation or indirectly by DNA repair proteins,
removing base damage caused by the incident radiation. IrrI null mutants appear
unable to stop this DNA degradation and, as a consequence, the chromosome is
destroyed. The putative exonuclease and the IrrI protein appear to be
constituitively expressed, suggesting that the exonuclease is inhibited in the
resting cell, and that radiation induced damage alleviates that inhibition,
possibly by reversibly modifying IrrI. In this study, which builds on these
previous findings, the phenomenon of DNA damage-induced DNA degradation in D.
radiodurans will be better defined by verifying Irr's regulatory role in the
process, by identifying the protein(s) that mediate degradation, and by
evaluating the significance of this process in DNA repair in this organism.
Since all organisms face damage do their DNA from the environment, a better
understanding of how this organism manages to efficiently repair its DNA could
eventually lead to making oth er organisms more resistant to radiation (for
example plants to solar radiation).