* 9728218
* Characterization of Signal-transduction Mechanisms          Controlling the Yeast Cell Polarity Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Douglas Johnson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 07/31/2001
* USD 231,937.00

MCB-9728218 Johnson, Douglas The long-term objective of this project is to
understand the signal transduction mechanisms that control cell morphogenesis
during the eukaryotic cell cycle. The goal of this study is to decipher the
signaling pathways that control cell polarity in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Polarized growth in response to normal or aberrant signals during
the yeast cell cycle can result in several different morphological structures.
We have previously characterized two proteins that are integral components of
the cell polarity pathway in yeast: a Cdc42p GTPase and a Cdc24p, its guanine
nucleotide exchange factor. The observation that both have counterparts in other
eukaryotes suggests that common signal transduction mechanisms control cell
polarity in different cell types. The specific aims of this study are to
understand the molecular interactions of Cdc42p with its upstream regulators,
including Cdc24p, and several downstream effectors. Also to be addressed is how
the subcellular localization of these proteins is regulated. To study these
interactions and their role in control of cell polarity, studies are proposed
that combine several genetic, cell biological and biochemical approaches.