* 9728120
* Neurotransmitter Synthesis and Signalling: Proenkephalin
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Cynthia McMurray, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

IBN 97-28120 McMURRAY Dr. McMurray and colleagues will investigate a novel
mechanism by which DNA secondary structure within the control region of the
neurotransmitter gene controls both the timing and the level of neurotransmitter
synthesis. The control region of the neurotransmitter, proenkephalin, switches
between two conformations that control high or low synthesis states. Dr.
McMurray and colleagues focus on the mechanism by which switching occurs.
Preliminary results suggest that an important transcription factor called CREB
stabilizes the high activity state of synthesis and that CREB degradation
facilitates switching to the low activity state. Experiments are designed to
test this hypothesis. The loss of CREB in proenkephalin A complexes will be
monitored after receptor stimulation before and after inhibition of the
degrading enzyme. This will establish a role for CREB degradation in control of
neurotransmitter synthesis. The proteins bound to each form of the control
region will be determined, paying particular attention to the presence of CREB.
Finally, we will identify the composition of protein factors that control high
and low synthesis. Protein binding and conformation at the mutant enhancers will
be correlated with their ability to support either low or high expression. CREB
is a major transcription factor that controls memory and adaptation in the
brain. Through a degradation mechanism, CREB (with other proteins) appears to
control switching and neurotransmitter synthesis. Such a mechanism provides a
direct path through a gene control region by which CREB controls the adaptive
response of proenkephalin. The switching mechanism allows the economical use of
gene control element such that a single site may be utilized in two different
ways by the neuron. We believe that such a switch mechanism is a "rapid
response" system by which neurotransmitter synthesis can quickly adapt to meet a
demand of the cell. A responsive switch that is s ensitive to phosphorylation
may represent a novel, but general pathway to assemble efficient transcriptional
complexes that optimize the level and timing of neurotransmitter synthesis.