* 9728697
* Organization and Development of Circadian Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Gregory Cahill, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2002
* USD 265,013.00

LAY ABSTRACT Principal Investigator: Cahill, Gregory Proposal Number: IBN
9728697 In all organisms, internal biological clocks drive daily (or circadian)
rhythms in physiological states, resulting in sleep-wake cycles and other
behavioral rhythms. Genetic studies of insects and non-animal organisms have
identified genes that code for many of these molecular gears, but very few clock
genes have been identified in vertebrate animals. The goal of this project is to
understand how the components of the circadian system interact to produce daily
rhythms, and to determine how the clock is assembled during embryonic
development. Recent work in this laboratory has demonstrated that clock cells
are located in the pineal gland and retina, and that these cells release a
hormone, melatonin, in a circadian rhythm. Behavioral activity levels are also
controlled by a biological clock. The first major objective of this project is
to determine the causal relationships among these phenomena. Is behavioral
rhythmicity driven by melatonin rhythms, and is behavior regulated by clocks in
the pineal gland, the retinas or some other clock7 The second objective is to
determine when and how rhythms of melatonin and behavior are initiated during
development from a single cell embryo to a fully formed vertebrate animal. Fish
embryos are fertilized and develop external to the mother. This allows
manipulation of physiological and environmental conditions to test hypotheses
about how the biological clocks that control melatonin and behavior are
initiated and set. This initial characterization of the zebrafish circadian
system will provide the baseline information necessary to fully exploit emerging
zebrafish genetic information and technology in future studies of vertebrate
circadian clock mechanisms.