* 9728374
* The Psychological Dynamics of Radical Social Change:  A     Longitudinal Analysis of Employed and Unemployed Ukrainian  Men and Women
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Melvin Kohn, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2002
* USD 67,041.00

This is a study of the psychological dynamics of people in a society undergoing
radical social change, analyzing longitudinal data from Ukraine. The data
consist of face-to-face interviews conducted with a representative sample of men
and women in the urban labor force of that country, initially surveyed in
1992-1993, then re-interviewed during the spring and summer of 1996. The initial
survey, conducted with representative samples of the adult populations of the
urban areas of Poland and Ukraine, was designed to learn whether the
relationships between social structure and personality found in earlier studies
of Poland (when it was socialist), the United States, and Japan still obtained
in Poland, and obtained in Ukraine, under the conditions of radical social
change then being experienced in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. By
1992, a dramatic change had already taken place in Poland in the relationship
between social structure and a sense of well-being or distress. Much the same
process appeared to be underway in Ukraine at that time, but was not nearly so
far along. The Ukrainian collaborators in this research conducted a full-scale
follow-up survey of those respondents who in 1992-1993 were in the labor force,
i.e., were either employed 15 or more hours per week or were unemployed and
seeking employment. These data will make it possible to do a thoroughgoing
longitudinal analysis of the psychological dynamics of radical social change
from an early period of the transformation of the Ukrainian economy well into
that transformation. Ukraine is an interesting case not merely because it is the
second most populous fragment of the former Soviet Union, but also because the
changes observed in Poland may be occurring at a different pace and possibly
with different outcomes in Ukraine.