* 9728382
* Structure of Fibronectin Fibrils
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Donna Peters, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9728382 Peters The aim of this research is to determine how the macromolecular
organization of fibronectin fibrils and its biological activities are regulated.
As one of the major proteins found in the extracellular matrix, fibronectin in
organized into an insoluble fibril where it plays a major role in promoting cell
adhesion, migration, and growth in vertebrates during embryogenesis. At least
twenty different isoforms of fibronectin are expressed during different
developmental stages. Although the functional significance of these isoforms are
unknown, it is speculated that they regulate the conformation and assembly of
fibronectin fibrils so as to favor, or discourage, certain biological
activities. The PI recently found that fibronectin fibrils have at least two
different conformations, suggesting that the conformation of the fibrils may
regulate its biological activity. She plans to study 1) the conformation of
fibronectin isoforms and how they affect the assembly of fibrils; 2) the
macromolecular organization of the fibrils; and 3) whether the fibrils are
flexible structures that undergo conformational changes that regulate the
expression of biological domains on their surface. High resolution
immunoelectron microscopy, protein biochemistry, and molecular biology will be
applied to this problem. Fibronectin is one of the major proteins found in the
extracellular matrix, where it forms fibrils that play a vital role in
regulating cell adhesion, migration, and growth in vertebrates during
embryogenesis. This project addresses the hypothesis that regulation of these
diverse biological activities by fibronectin varies with different forms of
fibronectin as well as with different conformations of the fibrils. Electron
microscopy as well as biochemical and molecular biological techniques will be
employed.