* 9728490
* Molecular Characterization of Novel Rp1 Alleles
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Scot Hulbert, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 12/31/2001
* USD 367,000.00

9728490 Hulbert Rp1 is a complex rust resistance locus of Maize which has been
extensively characterized genetically. Recent success in transposon tagging the
Rp1-D allele will now allow molecular characterization of the complex and the
mechanism(s) which act(s) to generate allelic diversity. It is known that
meiotic instability of most Rp1 genes is caused by unequal crossing-over which
indicates that the Rp1 genes are carried on duplications which retain synaptic
homology and frequently mispair. The unequal recombination events reshuffle the
Rp1 genes into new combinations, creating allelic diversity. Experiments will be
done to determine the mechanism in which novel alleles are generated by the
frequent recombination events which occur in the complex. This will be done by
characterizing several unique recombinant alleles and comparing them to the
parental alleles. The recombinant alleles that will be examined include three
which condition rapid necrotic reactions when challenged with any Puccinia
species and also cause lesion mimic phenotypes. A second class of alleles that
will be examined are those with non-parental race specificities. This class
includes five alleles with novel race specificities from a single cross with
Rp1-K. The proposed research is designed to determine the mechanism in which
novel alleles are generated by frequent recombination events which occur in this
rust resistant complex of corn. Several unique recombinant alleles will be
compared to parental alleles. The mechanism whereby race nonspecific adult plant
resistance is generated will also be investigated.