* 9728995
* Curatorial Upgrade of the Zoology Section of the University of Colorado Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Shi-Kuei Wu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 03/31/2000
* USD 63,583.00

The Zoology Section of the University of Colorado Museum (UCM) contains the
largest vertebrate and non-entomological invertebrate collections in Colorado,
with geographical strengths in the Rocky Mountains and Great Plains regions, and
particular taxonomic strengths in molluscs, amphibians, and reptiles. The
university's increased commitment to the Zoology Section (and the UCM as a
whole) is evidenced by the creation of new positions for a Curator of
Vertebrates and a Collection Manager, both of which were filled within the last
four years. The current project will continue enhancements of the Zoology
Section's research and teaching functions by augmenting the current inadequate
specimen storage facilitaties, and eliminating the remaining specimen backlog.
Specifically, the project will (1) obtain 46 museum cabinets and 25 shelving
units to house the backlog and inadequately housed catalogued specimens, and
account for collections growth over the next decade; (2) increase the Collection
Manager position from 75% to fulltime in order to process the backlog in the
next two years. A permanent fulltime Collection Manager will allow the
collections to be maintained properly, speed computerization of the specimen
database, and increase access to the collections. This project will maintain the
physical integrity of the Zoology Section's holdings, provide access for
researchers and educators to the currently inaccessible backlog, facilitate
access to specimens already catalogued, and, through dissemination of the
results of the project, increase awareness of the Zoology Section in the
research community. The proposed enhancements of the section are in accord with
the recommendations of a recent Institute of Museum Studies Collections
Assessment Program review. In addition, the curators of the various Sections
within the UCM have recommended that priority be given to the Zoology and
Paleobiology Section. Finally the project is especially timely because of the up
coming move of the Zoology Section to a newly renovated building, planned for
the year 2001; the move will be facilitated by the presence of appropriate
storage facilities for all specimens, and by elimination of the specimen
backlog.