* 9729111
* Adaptation from Childhood to Adulthood: A Longitudinal Study of Competence and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Ann Masten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2002
* USD 280,000.00

It is essential to societies that their children become competent adults. To
facilitate the development of competence, it is important to understand the
processes that drive successful development and transitions to adult life. This
study has the goal of contributing to the fundamental knowledge needed for
building theory, designing policies, and guiding programs focused on promoting
successful pathways to competence, particularly for individuals who grow up with
adversity. Understanding resilience, how children overcome risks and negative
life experience to become competent, is particularly important in our time
because many American children are growing up in hazardous situations. This
project is a 20-year follow-up of a school sample of 205 urban children and
their families who joined `Project Competence` in 1978 and 1979 when they were
in elementary school. They were followed up 7 and 10 years later. Extensive data
are available on the development and life histories of these children through
adolescence. In this new follow-up, the cohort will be contacted again to assess
their adult success in multiple domains of competence from multiple informants,
including the young adults themselves, parents, peers, and employers. These data
will make it possible to identify the predictors of adult success in life for
children and adolescents who have faced great hardship and to test hypotheses
that adult competence in work, family and community roles has roots earlier in
development and that children with good social capital will weather adversity,
become competent adults and providers of social capital for society and the next
generation. This study will enhance our understanding of the risk and protective
factors that jeopardize and promote the development of social competence from
childhood to adulthood. Results could inform efforts to foster resilience in
children and youth at risk due to psychosocial disadvantage or adversity.