* 9729053
* Computational Modeling of Strain Localization in Frictional Granular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1999,12/31/2003
* Sia Nemat-Nasser, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2003
* USD 247,741.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses fundamental processes associated with
the deformation and failure of granular materials; specifically strain
localization, and the role that it plays in earthquake-induced ground failures.
Experimental observations suggest that strain localization is an integral part
of the ground failure mechanism, even in soil that has liquefied as result of
strong ground shaking. The goal is to quantify this, based on existing
experimental data, in order to develop a micromechanically-based unified
computational constitutive model to analyze and quantify experimental
observations. The model has broad application to many problems in granular
materials, in particular to ground failure in
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program involves the creation of a
science-based computational model through the following
steps:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Starting with the micro-scale and grain-to-grain
interaction, to&lt;br/&gt;explicitly relate fabric and its evolution to
macroscopic backstress and its evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Based on
grain-to-grain contact forces and the distribution density function of the
contact normals (which characterizes the fabric), obtain explicit expressions
for the resistance to the dilatant shearing observed and quantitatively
documented in photoelasic experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Based on the
dilatant sliding model at the meso-scale, develop explicit constitutive
relations involving just a few well-defined constitutive
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Using an existing extensive experimental
database, relate the constitutive parameters to test
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Develop computational algorithms based on the
plastic predictor-elastic corrector concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6. Using the
constitutive algorithm in DYNA3D, quantify experimental results on shearbanding.
This also will verify the effectiveness of the model for application to other
problems.&lt;br/&gt;