* 9729204
* SGER:  Submembrane Cytoskeleton in Bacillus Subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Alexander Neyfakh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 12/31/2000
* USD 77,902.00

9729204 Neyfakh This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER). It has
long been known that bacterial membranes are organized, in that certain regions
of these membranes have different protein compositions than other regions. This
organization is what makes possible the orderly cell division of bacteria, as
well as placement of organelles such as flagella at specific predictable places
on the bacteria. The mechanism by which bacteria "know" where to place flagella,
or where to divide, is unknown. The non-uniform spatial distribution of many
proteins in the bacterial membrane has sometimes been explained by the existence
of a hypothetical submembrane structure, perhaps analogous to the cytoskeletal
system of higher organisms, but to date there is no real evidence for such a
structure. This exploratory project is directed toward testing the possibility
that two newly discovered proteins, IbmA and IbmB, form such a structure in the
bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Genetic inactivation of either of these proteins
has pleiotropic effects on the bacterium, impairing sporulation and cell
division, reducing bacterial resistance to lysis, and altering morphology. IbmA
and B are relatively small, alpha-helical polypeptides (149 and 143 residues,
respectively) with a strong tendency to exist in a coiled-coil conformation;
such coiled-coils are frequently found in cytoskeletal proteins of higher
organisms. Studies using the "yeast two-hybrid system" indicate that IbmA and
IbmB each interact with themselves in vivo and even more strongly with each
other. Also, IbmA interacts with a number of B. subtilis proteins that are
either known or very likely to be associated with the inner side of the
bacterial membrane. These intriguing preliminary findings suggest that IbmA and
B are plausible candidates for components of a bacterial cytoskeletal structure.
However, before initiating detailed analyses of such a putative structure, it is
necessary to determine whether such a structure actually exists. The goals of
this Small Grant for Exploratory Research project are to express IbmA and B in
Escherichia coli, purify the proteins, obtain specific antibodies, and use the
antibodies to determine subcellular localization of the IbmA and B proteins in
intact B. subtilis cells and in subcellular fractions. Experiments will also be
done to determine whether IbmA-IbmB complexes can be formed in vitro from the
purified proteins. The results of this exploratory work will determine whether
or not IbmA and B are plausible candidates for components of bacterial
cytoskeletal structure, and if so will form the basis for a full-scale
investigation of these proteins and their function in the bacteria.