* 9729956
* Geoarchaeology of the Built Middle Woodland Landscape       at 11-GE-7, Lower Illinois River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Jane Buikstra, Center For American Archeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1999
* USD 29,984.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Julieann Van Nest will conduct one
season of geoarchaeological research at the Mound House site which is located in
the Illinois River floodplain in Greene Country Illinois. The site itself
documents a time span of over 10,000 years of human prehistory beginning during
the Early Archaic period (ca. 8500 B.C.) and extending through 19th and 20th
Century Euroamerican settlement. The most extensive occupation appears to have
been made by Middle Woodland peoples (ca. 50 B.C. - A.D. 250) who built at least
two and perhaps as many as five earthworks. The `moundbuilder phenomenon` is
widespread during this time period in the Southeastern and Midwest United States
and indicates a surprisingly advanced level of social organization which
permitted relatively large numbers of individuals to work together under
centralized control for extended periods of time to construct such monuments.
Based on archeological evidence, the functions of the mounds varied serving as
burial structures in some instances and as house/temple platforms in others.
Although it has not been the focus of intense study, archaeologists have noted
that various construction techniques were employed and it some cases it is even
possible to note individual piles or basketfulls of earth served to form the
structure. Because the sides of mounds are severely eroded, it is difficult to
reconstruct the original shape. Dr. Van Nest will pursue geological research to
shed light on the construction process. She will extract a series of cores from
both the mounds themselves and the surrounding region. She will also examine
excavated sections within the mound and with these data work to separate human
construction from the complex natural geological processes which occur on an
active floodplain. Dr. Van Nest hopes to locate the specific sources for the sod
and earth which was used. Preliminary research indicates that some materials
were transported considerable distances. With such information it is possible to
gauge the amount of person power which construction entailed. This research will
shed new light on prehistoric Native American social organization. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the career
development of a very promising young scientist.