* 9729878
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Large-Scale Data             Visualization and Management
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Matthew Ward, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/2000
* USD 68,000.00

CISE Research Instrumentation: Large-Scale Data Visualization and Management
9729878 Ward, Matthew O. Worcester Polytechnic Institute This research
instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of several low-end and one
high-end graphics workstations, a high -end file server, several licenses, and a
database Web-application server which will enable the following projects:-
Hierarchical Visualization of Large Databases,- MultiMedia Visual Information
Seeking (MMVIS) Technology for Temporal and Spatial Applications, - Virtual
Document Generation and Visualizations Multimedia Repositories, and - Real-Time
Visualization of Fire Simulation Databases. supporting efforts exploring aspects
related to the storage, processing, and visualization of large multimedia data
sets. The projects will address:- Extension of current methods for visualizing
multivariate data to support hierarchical views of very large data sets, with
emphasis on interactive focusing and drill-down using N-dimensional brushes.-
Incorporation of a visual direct-manipulation language for temporal and spatial
query specification, and dynamic spatio-temporal visualizations of results, to
make effective use of video and other multimedia resources.- Selection of needed
information from distributed sources including the Web, and the presentation
style that is meaningful to a particular application. The DelaunayMM project
allows users to specify virtual documents through this selection.- Development
of a database for building-specific fire simulations to help predict the path of
actual fires, with sensor-driven queries and visualization of matching fire
futures guiding fire suppression efforts. The computational resources made
possible by this grant are essential for supporting the storage and analysis of
the large-scale multimedia data sets and for achieving the necessary level of
interactivity required by the visualization front-ends of all four projects.