* 9729989
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:        Understanding Democratization Successes and Failures        at the Subnational Level
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Zvi Gitelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1999
* USD 8,450.00

The primary objective of this Doctoral Dissertation is to generate hypotheses
indicating why levels of democracy vary within democratizing countries. Scholars
have largely ignored this empirical puzzle. Secondary objectives of this project
include preliminary testing of the hypotheses generated and an illumination of
broader questions regarding a) different determinants of democracy at national
and subnational levels, b) the relationship between democratic development at
national and subnational levels, c) weaknesses in current conceptualizations of
democracy, and d) the importance of subnational democracy. To meet the
objectives, the student collects data through interviews and printed material
from four oblasts (provinces) in Russia and Kyrgyzstan. To explain subnational
variation in democracy, the project compares two `more` democratic oblasts and
contrasts them with two less `democratic` oblasts. Based on an expert survey and
background data, a more democratic and a less democratic oblast have been chosen
from each country. This dissertation research promises to contribute to the
theoretical literature on democratization and to understand the factors which
promote democracy in provinces or states where it is weak.