* 9729660
* Development of Ultrafast Optical Instrumentation to         Measure Photon Lifetime in Leaves and Other Biological      Tissues
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1998,05/07/1999
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia J. Moore
* 05/07/1999
* USD 141,715.00

Light-harvesting for photosynthesis within leaves depends on pigment
concentrations as well as the light transport properties of mesophyll cells.
Despite the fact that the light transport properties of leaves are an integral
part of their form and function, there is little quantitative information about
the biophysics of light transport through leaf tissue. One of the most important
biophysical parameters is the average pathlength that a photon travels within a
leaf, which indicates the time over which a photon resides inside that leaf. The
longer the lifetime, the greater the probability of absorption for
photosynthesis. The wide variety of leaf anatomy and the striking changes that
occur when leaves develop under high vs. low light may be adaptations that are
directed toward the control of light capture by modification of light scattering
properties of the leaf tissues. This project proposes to construct
instrumentation that utilizes ultrashort laser pulses to measure the average
transit time and transit time distribution of the light scattered and
transmitted through thin leaves of various plant species and through leaves
grown under different light environments. The average transit time represents
the average lifetime a photon resides in the leaf. This instrumentation uses a
wavelength of light not absorbed by photosynthetic pigments so that the light
scattering effect can be measured exclusively. The proposed instrumentation will
allow sensitive photon transit time measurements with femtosecond (10-15 second)
temporal resolution; thus allowing measurements on typical leaves.