* 9729578
* Measurements and Prediction of Nitrogen Oxide Formation     in Flickering Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Catherine Mavriplis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/2001
* USD 289,315.00

Abstract - Miller CTS - 9729578 A numerical model for a flickering, or time-
varying, flame is developed; this model is intended to accurately and
efficiently predict emission levels for nitrogen oxides. The model consists of
three sections: (1) prediction of flame structure through solution of
conservation equations in mass, momentum, energy, and mixture fraction; (2)
application of a flamelet library approach to predict concentrations of carbon,
hydrogen, and oxygen species; and (3) post-processing nitrogen chemistry to
predict local levels and emissions of nitrogen oxide species. The unsteady flame
structure is predicted using an adaptive spectral element discretization of the
conservation equations on both serial and parallel machines. The existing
incompressible spectral element code is revised to permit variable density. At
each step in the process, model predictions are compared with measurements of
concentration from tunable-diode laser absorption spectroscopy (TDLAS) on a
methane-fueled flame, including in situ measurements of carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, and methane and conditional sampling of the flame using a pulsed quartz
microprobe to determine concentrations of trace nitrogen species including
nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, ammonia, and hydrogen cyanide. This effort
introduces a new computational approach for the modelling of pollutant formation
and flame behavior.