* 9729705
* Dissertation Research: Infant Nutritional Intake in Esmeraldas City, Ecuador: A Biocultural Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Sara Stinson, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

While it is widely recognized that breastfeeding is best for infants, many women
stop breastfeeding their infants earlier than recommended because they believe
they are producing insufficient milk. There is a debate about whether women who
report insufficient milk actually produce less breastmilk, or whether the
perception of milk insufficiency results from factors such as lack of knowledge
about how to breastfeed and inadequate social support. This study will
investigate insufficient milk in women in Esmeraldas City, Ecuador. A
combination of data on breastfeeding behavior and beliefs, infant growth,
maternal nutritional status, and milk quantity and quality will be collected
from a sample of 72 breastfeeding women over a period of 10 months. The project
aims to understand breastmilk insufficiency by 1) a thorough investigation of
women's cultural understanding of breastfeeding practices, 2) a longitudinal
investigation of biological factors such as maternal and infant nutritional
status, fat concentration of breastmilk, and volume of milk intake by infants,
and 3) a careful weighing of both cultural and biological variables in relation
to milk insufficiency. This will be the first study of milk insufficiency to
combine measures of infant milk intake, milk fat content, and structured
observations of breastfeeding to be carried out in a developing country. Á¥/╣%¢
?Â ©?┴ ¢┐▓¢¥╣¥┐¥╣?&gt; ?││┐╝¢ ╣&gt; ¥©Á ▓?╝/&gt;Á¢ ¼©╣¢ %/¥¥Á╝ ?▓ÕÁ│¥╣└Á ╣¢
╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ ¥? ║╝Á║/╝╣&gt;À &gt;Á┴ _Á¥/%%/▓?╝/&gt;Á¢ ?Â ¢║Á│╣Â╣│ ¢©/║Á /&gt;┤
│?_║?¢╣¥╣?&gt; ¿&gt; /┤┤╣¥╣?&gt; ¥? ¥©Á &gt;Á┴ │©Á_╣¢¥╝` ¥©/¥ ┴╣%% ▓Á
┐&gt;│?└Á╝Á┤ ╣&gt; ¥©╣¢ ║╝?ÕÁ│¥ ║?¢¥┤?│¥?╝/% À╝/┤┐/¥Á /&gt;┤ ┐&gt;┤Á╝À╝/┤┐/¥Á
¢¥┐┤Á&gt;¥¢ ┴╣%% ▓Á Á┤┐│/¥Á┤ ╣&gt; ¥©Á └Á╝` ║╝Á│╣¢Á Á┬║Á╝╣_Á&gt;¥/%
¥Á│©&gt;╣╗┐Á¢ ╝Á╗┐╣╝Á┤ Â?╝ ¥©Á ╣&gt;└Á¢¥╣À/¥╣?&gt; ?Â ▓?╝?&gt; ©`┤╝╣┤Á¢