* 9729908
* Basic Principles of Design of Manufacturing Processes,      Equipment, and Systems: Workshop for Teaching Axiomatic     Design; Cambridge, MA; June 1-5, 1998
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/1999
* Nam Suh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 02/28/1999
* USD 60,110.00

DMI-9729908 Suh The one-week workshop is for teaching and facilitating the
discussion of axiomatic design and its applications to manufacturing processes,
equipment and systems. The goals of the workshop are: to review the basic
principles and methodologies of axiomatic design, to share the knowledge,
results and course materials developed in the field of axiomatic design, and to
provide a means of networking and exchange of ideas between professors and
university instructors involved in design education. The workshop is to be
arranged with seven instructional sessions, and one breakout session for each
afternoon to provide ample opportunity for review of materials and follow-up
discussions. The workshop proposal was sent out for mail review by three
reviewers. It was rated excellent by all three reviewers. The reviewers feel
that since axiomatic design is one of major design paradigms used in engineering
colleges, such a workshop could have a great impact if it could have the right
attendance. Axiomatic design is one of major design paradigms used in
engineering colleges, and it has important applications to design of
manufacturing processes, equipment and systems. Such a workshop could have a
great impact if it could have the right attendance and lively discussions.