* 9729644
* Dynamic Light Scattering, Calorimeter and Fluorometer for   Structure/Function Studies of Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1998,02/28/1999
* David Thomas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1999
* USD 148,545.00

Six major and four minor users at the University of Minnesota are requesting
instrumentation needed to study the structure and function of enzymes, muscle
proteins, apolipoproteins, bacterial toxins, and metalloproteins. These
instruments will be used to provide a vital linkage of thermodynamic and dynamic
properties to ongoing structural analyses. The investigators are studying
biological function through mutagenesis and protein design, using the shared
facilities of a recently established Structural Biology Core Laboratory at the
University of Minnesota. A dynamic light scattering instrument will be employed
by all of the users to analyze the aggregation state of proteins that are being
designed and produced. Understanding the oligomeric state of a protein or
protein complex is essential to NMR studies, to the preparation of crystals for
X-ray diffraction, and to a variety of spectroscopic analyses. A titration
calorimeter will be used by three major and three minor users to determine the
energetics of protein ligand binding, which is often required for the functional
characterization of mutant or covalently modified proteins in structural
studies. A multifrequency phase fluorometer will be used by three major and
three minor users to analyze protein dynamics, structure, and protein-protein
interactions. This particular emphasis will be placed on the use of mutagenesis
to engineer labeling sites for fluorescent probes in proteins, providing site-
specific structural and dynamic information to complement x-ray and NMR
structural studies.