* 9729425
* RUI:  Temporal Variability of Iron Speciation in Rain
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Robert Kieber, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2002
* USD 297,833.00

The specific objective of this research is to determine the speciation of iron
in various types of rain events. Speciation is the precise chemical form of the
iron in rain, including free and complexed ferrous and ferric iron. This
information is crucial to the understanding of several important chemical
processes in the atmosphere which depend on the concentration and speciation of
iron, as well as the impacts of rainwater iron on aquatic ecosystems. Any change
in iron speciation in rain may alter the rate of marine primary productivity,
because speciation affects the bioavailability of iron as a nutrient, as well as
the residence time for iron in seawater. Marine primary productivity plays a
significant role in carbon removal from the atmosphere, and hence impacts global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data indicate that approximately half of the iron
in rain passes through a fine filter (nominally dissolved), with the remaining
fraction in the larger particulate phase. Data from a June thunderstorm in
Wilmington, NC, suggest that part of the dissolved iron occurred as an organic
complex. Data from an early summer rain suggest that photochemical reduction of
iron proceeds as the day progresses, and changes are large enough and rapid
enough to be observed in rainwater.&lt;br/&gt;The presence of organically bound
iron in rain, and of large variations in Fe(II) concentration, indicate that
iron speciation is highly variable in rain. This research will assess how the
relative abundance of iron species vary both temporally with time of day, season
and storm history, and as a function of concentrations of ligands capable of
complexation. Ligands to be investigated include oxalate, formate, sulfate,
amino acids, and soil humics. This will be accomplished by careful sampling,
analysis and laboratory experiments. The variability of Fe(II) in rain suggests
that controlled photochemical experiments will give a useful indication of the
potential for generation of Fe(II) in rain, which concentration analyses alone
cannot provide.&lt;br/&gt;The sampling site in Wilmington, NC, a coastal
location, is ideal for this study because continental and maritime storms bring
rain with a wide range in rainwater composition. A twelve year record of
rainwater composition exists for this site; and supporting rain data essential
for a study of iron speciation (pH, hydrogen peroxide, organic acids, amino
acids, aldehydes, nitrite and inorganic anions) are currently being collected by
the same laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program and will involve, among other
participants, undergraduate and Master's students.&lt;br/&gt;