* 9729003
* Studies of the Effect of Electron Exchange Coupling on the  Photophysics and Photochemistry of Transition Metal         Complexes: Discrete Molecules to Magneto-Optical Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* James McCusker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

James McCusker CHE-9729003

Title: Studies of the Effect of Electron Exchange Coupling on the Photophysics
and Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes: Discrete Molecules to Magneto-
Optical Polymers

Abstract

Dr. McCusker is supported by the Inorganic Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program to examine how the presence of exchange coupling affects
photo-induced excited-state properties of metal complexes. McCusker has proposed
to study intramolecular exchange coupling, between the radical ligand and the
metal ion, via the systematic variation of semiquinone ligands coordinated to
paramagnetic metal centers. Having demonstrated the effect of electron exchange
on ground-state characteristics of chromium-semiquinone complexes, effects upon
the excited-state will be examined using low-temperature time-resolved
adsorption and time-resolved resonance Raman spectroscopy. Additional goals of
the proposed work are to 1) measure the effect of exchange coupling upon inter-
ligand electron-exchange dynamics and 2) examine the wavelength dependence of
photoredox activity. Extension studies will include the synthesis and
characterization of magneto-optical dimers.

While the impact of spin coupling of paramagnetic centers on the physical
properties of molecules has received considerable attention, there is a paucity
of information on how the photophysical characteristics of molecules are
affected by this phenomenon. An increased understanding of exchange coupling may
lead to the development of molecular-based magneto-optical materials.