* 9729877
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Application Oriented Parallel Computing &amp; Scientific Computing Research on a Commodity   Parallel System
* CSE,EIA
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Steven Castillo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 11/30/1999
* USD 75,150.00

9729877 Aluru, Srinivas New Mexico State University CISE Research
Instrumentation: Application Oriented Parallel Computing and Scientific
Computing Research on a Commodity Parallel System This research instrumentation
serves primarily as an experimental testbed for the following research
projects:- Scalable Parallelization of Spatial Data Structures and Applications,
- Parallel Methods for Protein Accessible Surface Area Calculations,-
Development of Parallel Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) Methods for
Simulating Transient Electromagnetic Problems,- Direct Solution of Large Sparse
Irregular Systems of Equations on Massively Parallel Computers, and- Performance
Measurement in Distributed Systems. The instrumentation grant funds the purchase
of a 32-processor workstation cluster built from commodity microprocessors and
networking components. The equipment is to be used to set up a Parallel
Computing Laboratory in the Department of Computer Science at New Mexico State
University. The workstation cluster will be used as a distributed memory
parallel computer dedicated to support application-driven parallel computing and
high-performance scientific computing research on low-cost commodity-based
systems. Results from this research are to be made available in the form of
libraries, tools and applications software for researchers interested in low-
cost commodity-based parallel computing. The equipment also supports an
interdisciplinary educational program in computational science.