* 9729720
* GOALI: Microscopic Basis of Polymer-Supercritical Fluid     Phase Behavior: Polymer-Solvent Interactions and Chain      Stiffness
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Mark McHugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2001
* USD 346,140.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9729720 McHugh, M./Johns Hopkins U. This is a GOALI Collaboration
project between industry and Johns Hopkins. The long-term objective of the
research proposed here is to develop a new generation of supercritical fluid
(SCF)-based technologies for polymer processing. However, rigorous models for
SCF solvent-polymer solution behavior, both at the macroscopic and the
microscopic levels, are still in the nascent stages of development. It is,
therefore, exceptionally difficult to design reliably efficiently chemical
processes that utilize the unique characteristics and capabilities of SCF
solvents. Hence, the immediate research objective is to address the physics and
chemistry of SCF-polymer solutions. In addition to high-pressure phase behavior
measurements, a variety of scattering techniques will be utilized to investigate
SCF-polymer solutions at elevated pressures and temperatures.. For each polymer-
SCF pair, the cloud-point curve will be measured over a broad range of P-T space
to modulate energetic interactions relative to entropic contributions to the
Gibbs free energy of mixing. A coarse-grain indication of the balance of SCF-
polymer interactions relative to SCF-SCF and polymer segment-segment
interactions can be gleaned from an examination of the characteristics of the
cloud-point curve in P-T space. Light scattering techniques will then be used to
probe polymer dimensions and interactions in the single-phase region. Static
light scattering will be used to determine polymer radii of gyration and second
osmotic varial coefficients. The measured second osmotic virial coefficient
defines an equivalent hard sphere radius for the polymers in solution. Dynamic
light scattering will be used to measure the polymer hydrodynamics radius. A
comparison of the hard sphere and hydrodynamic radii yields insight into the
interactions that occur in the solution at submacromolecular length scales.
Small angle neutron scattering will be used to determine the polymer persistence
and contour lengths in an SCF solvent environment. Perrsistence length values
are particularly useful for determining the influence of polymer conformational
entropy on phase behavior and polymer segment-solvent interactions. This
supremolecular to macromolecular length scale approach will enable us to develop
a more detailed understanding of the molecular thermodynamic principles that
govern the observed solution behavior. The phase behavior and scattering studies
will focus on several different molecularly simple SCF solvents and two
different classes of homopolymers: nonpolar poly(olefins) and polar polymers.
The polymers will vary in backbone architecture to reveal the influence of
polymer crystallinity, chain branching, polarity, and hydrogen bonding on the
phase behavior and the chain dimensions in the single-phase region. We will also
investigate the impact of chain "stiffiness" by focusing on polymers that have
similar intermolecular potential functions, but different statistical segment
lengths, such as poly(acrylates) and poly(methacrylates). The polymer-SCF
solvent systems are chosen to isolate particular phenomena and, thus, allow a
systematic exploration of the factors that govern polymer solubility and
behavior in SCF solvents.