* 9729323
* National Bioethics Institute
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Courtney Campbell, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/29/2000
* USD 106,445.00

Students in the life sciences face a variety of important ethical issues about
professional practice and the societal impacts of their science. The students'
mentors, science faculty members, generally desire to be resources for them but,
unfortunately, there is little institutional training, support, or reward for
faculty who lead ethics discussions. The National Bioethics Institute (NBI)
addresses this problem by expanding on a very successful effort that is lending
critical assistance to life science faculty members. The project takes to a new
national level, a regional effort that since 1991 has continuously sponsored
workshops designed to integrate ethics into science courses and labs. A team of
ethicists and life scientists plans each summer Institute. The training occurs
over 40+ hours in a week of pedagogical sessions on how to teach ethics to
science students, and lecture/discussion sessions on moral theory, ethics and
science, ethics and religion, and public policy. During the week, each
participant constructs a case study, role-playing exercise, or other pedagogical
resource. After the Institute, on-campus participants continue to meet once a
semester for three years, forming a critical mass of scientists at each campus
formally engaged in ongoing discussion of ethical issues. Reunions for all
participants occur for several years following the training program. This
project will train 60 life scientists from across the U.S.: 30 at Oregon State
University (OSU) in 1998, and 30 at Iowa State University (ISU) in 1999. These
scientists will join approximately 250 `graduates` of prior and concurrent
Bioethics Institutes held at ISU, the University of Illinois, Michigan State
University, Purdue University, and North Carolina State University. The combined
Institutes will train more than 300 scientists by the year 2000, forming a
significant biological curricular reform movement in contemporary higher
education. The NBI will be held once at OSU (the Western site) in May 1998 and
once at ISU (the Midwestern site) in May 1999. North Carolina State University
is preparing to join these two institutions as the Eastern site of future
Bioethics Institutes. NCSU will be hosting Institutes in 1998 and 1999 funded by
a grant from the National Agricultural Biotechnology Council (NABC). The NBI
will also partner with an historically African American institution, Tuskegee
University (TU) and a strong majority Hispanic American institution, Florida
International University (FIU). Teams consisting of one philosopher and one life
scientist from each institution will attend the OSU or NCSU Institutes. They
will also supply names of life scientists who are potential Institute applicants
from historically Hispanic and African American institutions, and explore with
their administrators the possibility of making TU and FIU sites of future
Bioethics Institutes. Assuming successful completion of this two year project,
OSU, ISU, and NCSU will be positioned to host a permanent National Bioethics
Institute, designed to rotate annually among the three schools. The present
project provides essential experience at OSU and starts a national Institute at
ISU (where previous Institutes have been open only to ISU faculty). The amount
requested from NSF is heavily leveraged by funds from OSU, ISU, NCSU, the NABC,
and universities sending participants.