* 9729843
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Use of Groupware to Enhance Team Decisions and Achieve Organizational Learning
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* William Wright, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/2001
* USD 39,631.00

9729843 Wright, William F. University of California - Irvine CISE Research
Instrumentation :Use of Groupware to Enhance Team Decisions and Achieve
Organizational Learning This research instrumentation grant contributes to
enable the following projects:- Better Collaborative User of Information Using
Groupware: Use of Considerable Information and Use of Multimedia Information,-
When will Team Members Collaborate Effectively?: The Impact of Team Leadership
and Team Cohesion on Collaborative Use of Groupware, and- Use of Groupware to
Acquire Organizational Memory: Framing of Case Descriptions and Incentives for
Teams to Contribute. The most important asset of a professional organization is
its people: more specifically, their accumulated knowledge and potential
insights. When these knowledge workers collaborate, they are achieving learning
for themselves and their organization. Groupware (including Intranets) is used
to facilitate their collaborative work. The proposed research addresses first
how use of groupware will improve both the decision effectiveness and efficiency
of collaboration by geographically distributed professionals and second under
what conditions will teams make available their decisions and decision processes
to permit an organization to acquire, manage and distribute their knowledge.
Members of teams of knowledge workers will communicate, exchange information,
and make decisions, in the to-be-established Groupware Laboratory for which the
networking, workstation and videoconferencing instrumentation is needed. The
instrumentation, to be installed in soundproof cubicles, will permit simulation
and study of how professionals "interact" using only digital (and voice)
interaction when they are geographically distributed. This use of a "digital
communication" laboratory permits control of extraneous variables (e.g., access
to unknown parties and information) and concentrates on discovery of new causal
effects.