* 9729450
* Testing the Effects of Technological Distortions in         Political Spots
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Lynda Lee Kaid, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* SIEBER,JOAN E.
* 12/31/2001
* USD 296,608.00

This project will advance work on ethical issues raised by technological
distortions in political television ads. This project is important to the
understanding of how video and computer technology raise ethical concerns in our
political system. Audiovisual manipulations are powerful social phenomena that
influence perceptions and information. This research provides data that can help
to understand the implications of accelerating developments in communication
technology that can affect political life. The underpinnings of democracy may be
threatened, if information provided by the most pervasive electoral
communication format is distorted and misleading. Earlier phases of the research
have documented, through content analysis, that a substantial and growing
percentage of ads, particularly negative ads, contain distortions created by
video and computer technology. These may include editing, computer and digital
alterations, special effects, sound effects, dramatizations, and other visual
manipulations. Such distortions can mislead voters and interfere with the
rational decision making process in the selection of candidates. Preliminary
research, under the previous NSF support, has provided evidence that these
distortions may affect voters' responses to candidates and their opponents. This
project will extend the testing of spot distortions with the following
objectives: (1) to test experimentally the effects of technological distortions
in political spots on voters; (2) to determine in the experimental testing if
any identified effects are dependent upon the valence of the spots (positive,
negative); and (3) to determine in the experimental testing what receiver/voter
characteristics (such as gender and visual literacy level) may be related to the
effects of technological distortions in political spots. The project will employ
experimental testing of distorted versus non-distorted spots. In addition to
traditional measurement techniques, the study will use computer automated dials
to assess viewer responses. To enhance dissemination of information about
ethical concerns in technological distortion in political spots, the
investigator will produce and distribute project results to academic, public and
media audiences.