* 9729871
* Openness/Secrecy, Authorship, Ownership:  Studies in the    Technical, Practical, and Knowledge Traditions of           Premodern and Early Modern Europe
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Pamela Long, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 05/31/2000
* USD 80,300.00

Contemporary scientific and technical cultures include beliefs and practices
concerning how knowledge is transmitted, who owns the knowledge, and at what
point it should be openly disseminated (or whether it should be kept secret).
Science is often presumed to be open, while technology is secret. Such
understandings and the practices related to them are shaped by a complex system
of intellectual property law as well as by institutional and tacit, individual
practices. Yet the historical foundations of such values, laws and practices are
not well understood. The purpose of this project is to complete a book-length
history of the values of openness, secrecy, authorship and ownership of
intellectual property as these pertain to premodern traditions of knowledge,
practice and technology. The study will examine technical and practical writings
from antiquity through the early seventeenth century. In method the study will
first examine particular texts, then explore how those texts were appropriated,
understood or misunderstood, and utilized by later cultures. The study will also
examine how attitudes toward the transmission of knolwedge and towards
authorship were influenced by changes in the conceptualization of knowledge
itself and by changes in the relationships among the ancient categories of
knowledge (episteme), technical production (techne), and military action
(praxis). The book will demonstrate how values concerning the ownership and
transmission of knowledge are widely variable and depend on particular cultures
and societies rather than on universal structures of thought.