* 9729074
* Synthesizing Optimal Batch Distillation Column Configuration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Urmila Diwekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 07/31/2002
* USD 269,670.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9729074 Proposal Type: GOALI Principal Investigator:
Urmila Diweker Affiliation: Carnegie Mellon University This grant is awarded
through the chemical and Transport Systems Division of the Directorate for
Engineering. The principal investigator is Dr. Urmila Diwekar at Carnegie-Mellon
University. The principal objective of the research is the synthesis of optimal
batch distillation column configurations. Batch distillation optimization is
considerably more complex than continuous distillation optimization, since the
process is inherently dynamic. At the same time the dynamics of the process
provides flexibility to operate and configure columns in numerous ways. This
research will set up a systematic framework for synthesizing optical column
configurations rapidly and economically. The proposed project is of considerable
fundamental and practical significance. The studies will lead to a systematic
method to define a parameter window which will not only facilitate the
optimization, but will also be useful for plant operations. Batch distillation
is a ubiquitous process in the manufacture of specialty chemicals and
pharmaceuticals. The outcome of the study will enable batch processing
industries involved in the manufacture of these chemicals to better design and
synthesize their batch distillation sequences to produce cost effective and
purer separations.