* 9729631
* Dryline Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Peter Bannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2002
* USD 290,214.00

9729631 Bannon The dryline is the surface boundary between two distinct air
masses that frequently inhabit the south central United States in Spring and
early Summer. To the east of the line lies a relatively shallow cool moist
maritime air mass and to the west a deeper warm dry continental air mass. This
mesoscale phenomenon is significant because it is often linked to the occurrence
of severe weather (damaging winds, hail and tornadoes). Thunderstorms tend to
develop along and to the east of the dryline. The dryline often migrates several
hundred kilometers to the east during the day and then retrogrades westward
during the night. This diurnal evolution of the dryline helps make the
forecasting of severe weather a major challenge. The purpose of this research is
to model the diurnal evolution in structure and position of the dryline. The
fundamental approach is to treat the dryline as the western edge of a shallow
layer maritime air mass. The dynamics of this air mass will first be studied
using a simplified numerical model know as the shallow water model. The
sensitivity of the model dryline to mass, momentum, and thermal forcings will be
ascertained and compared with existing theories. A slab mixed- layer model of
the air mass will then be developed to more accurately represent the major
thermodynamic processes. Refinements of the modeling effort include two
dimensional studies and an extension to multiple air masses. This theoretical
approach of using models of intermediate complexity between analytic theory and
sophisticated mesoscale numerical models should be able to capture the essential
physics and provide insight into the dynamics of the dryline. The results of the
research should provide a better understanding of the dryline and help the
forecasting of severe weather. ***