* 9729016
* Computerization of the Vascular Plant Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Margaret Bolick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Poston Muriel
* 04/30/2003
* USD 165,417.00

This project is a computerization effort that will capture data for $140,000 of
the 200,000 vascular plant specimens in the C.E. Bessey Herbarium (herbarium
acronym: NEB) of the University of Nebraska State Museum (UNSM). In detail, this
project will comprise data capture and barcoding of the vascular plant specimens
from the United States and Canada, beginning with the 13 angiosperm families
that are most numerous in this collection and in the northern Great Plains and
continuing until all of the North American vascular plants are entered. The
herbarium project will also provide a model for all the collections of the UNSM
as the Museum strives to convert its records to an interoperable database that
will be central to research, collection management, service, exhibits, and
education. The database will conform to current standards for the discipline and
follow future developments available from the IUBS Commission of Taxonomic
Databases (TDWG) and the US Organization for Biodiversity Information through
their respective web sites. This effort, which is fully coordinated with those
at the R. L. McGregor Herbarium (herbarium acronym: KANU) of the University of
Kansas Natural History Museum (KUNHM), will result in a plant database for the
central and northern Great Plains that is both regionally and historically
complete. The NEB database will follow the KANU protocol in using the botany
module of Zoe, a museum-specific and flexible data model developed by Julian
Humphries in Microsoft's relational database Access. Computerization of data for
the remaining vascular plant specimens (60,000 sheets), the non-vascular plant
specimens (80,000 packets), and the paleobotanical specimens (10,000
fossils)will be the focus of efforts after the completion of this project. The
other long-term goals of this proposed project are (1)georeferencing the
collection records for compatibility with GIS databases;(2) insuring
interoperability with other units of the UNSM and oth er natural history
collections, especially KUNHM; and (3) developing a parallel taxon-based
database to facilitate educational and public use of this specimen-based
database. Because these long term goals are best accomplished with regional
efforts, the procedures to be followed and the database structure are based on
those of the KANU Collections Information Management System (CIMS) so that it
will be easier for both institutions to coordinate future developments to
optimize the research, educational, and outreach uses of each museum's database.