* 9729763
* Human Ecology of the Rio Verde Drainage Basin,              Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1998,10/13/1999
* Arthur Joyce, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/13/1999
* USD 125,068.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Arthur Joyce and his collaborators
will conduct one field season of archaeological and paleoecological research in
the Rio Verde drainage in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico. The upper watershed of
the river is situated in the Oaxaca highlands and derive from valleys which
witnessed the rise of Monte Alban, one of the largest and most complex
prehistoric Mesoamerican states. In its lower reaches the Rio Verde crosses the
coastal plain and empties into the Pacific Ocean. In prior research in the
lowland region, Dr. Joyce has noted that before 500 B.C. habitation is extremely
scarce in contrast to many other areas along the Pacific coast of Mexico. After
500 B.C. population density and degree of land utilization increase
dramatically. Dr. Joyce has suggested an environmental explanation for this
phenomenon. He has noted an apparent period of heavy upland erosion just prior
to the lowland expansion and believes it was caused by deforestation as
burgeoning highland groups cleared extensive areas for agricultural production.
Upstream sediments were deposited, he believes, downstream thereby increasing
the fertility of the coastal plain. This in turn fostered an increase in lowland
population density. Although archaeologists and paleoecologists have recognized
for many years that prehistoric Mesoamerican agriculture had major negative
environmental impacts, this Rio Verde case is particularly interesting because
of its broad regional scale and the possibility that upland degradation had just
the opposite effect at lower altitudes. The region provides an excellent case
study into the complexity of human environment interaction. Dr. Joyce and his
colleagues will conduct coordinated environmental and archaeological studies. In
the Rio Verde headwaters the archaeological sequence is well known and the team
will focus on the collection of geological and ecological data. They will
examine river cuts to construct a geological sequence. They will also collect
pollen to monitor vegetation change. With these data it should be possible to
reconstruct erosional timing and sequence and determine the relative inputs of
climatically and humanly induced factors. In the coastal area the research
includes both archaeological and environmental components. Through a series of
cores, soil formation will be studied and paloecoastline reconstructed.
Archaeological surface survey combined with settlement excavation will provide
insight into the changes in population size and social complexity over time.
This research is important because it with provide an excellent case study in
prehistoric human-environmental interaction. The timing of population growth and
increase (and decrease) in complexity varies from region to region in Middle
America and Dr. Joyce's research should provide insight into potential causes.