* 9729581
* Factors Regulating Programmed Cell Death in an Insect
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Ronald Booker, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 08/31/2003
* USD 226,500.00

9729581 BOOKER During development of an organism, more cells are formed than are
needed for the final body plan. This excess cell formation is particularly
noteworthy in the nervous system, where individual cells have unique roles.
Programmed cell death (PCD) plays a central role in the elimination of excess
cells and in sculpting developing systems. The goal of this project is to
improve our understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying PCD, using the
central nervous system of the moth Manduca sexta as a model system. Programmed
cell death is a common feature of Manduca's postembryonic development. During
the larval stage, thousands of adult-specific neurons are added to the ganglia
of the central nervous system, and throughout this period of cell addition, cell
death is also observed. In addition, the transition between the larval and adult
stages is characterized by the death of obsolete larval muscles and neurons that
are not required by the adult. Previous research has shown that the pattern of
cell death observed in Manduca depends on such things as the cell's lineage,
segmental identity, and time of birth. This complex pattern of cell death most
likely results from differences in the mechanisms underlying PCD in different
cells. Dr. Booker will carry out a series of experiments that are designed to
investigate these mechanisms. A series of endocrine manipulations will be used
to determine whether the steroid hormone ecdysone plays a role in regulating the
neuronal PCD observed in the larval stage, and after the onset of metamorphosis.
During postembryonic development, the level of cell death is higher in the
abdominal compared to the thoracic ganglia. To learn more about the role of
segmental identity in the regulation of PCD, a moth homeotic mutant, in which
one thoracic segment is duplicated, will be examined to determine if its pattern
of cell death is altered. A biochemical characterization of PCD within the
nervous system will be done using a series of specific inhibitors of the
ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic pathway, because preliminary evidence suggests
that this pathway plays a key role in PCD in the moth. Dr. Booker's group has
found that application of potent inhibitors of the ubiquitin-dependent pathway
can selectively block the PCD of muscles in the developing moth. This finding
will allow them to directly test which cell types, at which developmental
stages, utilize this mechanism of PCD. The results obtained from this series of
experiments will improve our understanding of the biochemical mechanisms
involved in PCD, and how PCD can selectively occur in different cell types at
different times.