* 9729523
* Portable Flow-Through Amperometric Immunosensor Device      for Fast Field Immunoanalysis of Rodent Viruses
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/2002
* USD 240,000.00

The main objective of the proposed research is to develop a prototype of a
sensor device based on immuno-interactions or rapid, automated, quantitative
determination of viral infections in small mammals. As a result of this
development several functioning immunoassay devices will be tested in
environmental biology field studies of Hantavirus (Sin Nombre Virus) infection
in mice populations in the wild. The work initially will be focused on the
optimization of an immunosensor for fast (10-20) min. determination of virus and
will be extended towards the development of an semi-automated portable
immunoassay system to be used in field stations or other remote sites. The
proposed immunosensor utilizes highly dispersed carbon material. The
conductivity of carbon materials permits its use as electrode materials for
electrochemical detection and at the same time as carrier for the immuno-
chemicals. The immunosensors proposed will be developed using disposable flow
electrodes and offer a means to conduct fast ELISA (Enzyme Labeled Immunosorbent
Assay) with an electrochemical detection. The proposed research will result in
prototype portable immunoassay system consisting of miniaturized, automated and
electronically controlled and self-contained hand-held devices to be used in
environmental biology studies. A combination of descriptive and analytic studies
of environmental characteristics associated with rodent Hantavirus prevalence
will be used as the initial test of the immunoassay system. These analyses
require fast and reliable instrumentation suitable for operation in field
conditions or in a remote setting. The immunosensors can also be used for rapid
analyses in conventional conditions of biological, physiological and analytical
practices.