* 9729061
* Conference on Mechanisms of Cognitive Development:          Behavioral and Neural Perspectives, Pittsburgh, PA,         October 1998
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1998,08/31/1999
* James McClelland, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1999
* USD 31,765.00

This grant will support a conference to bring together researchers from a
variety of backgrounds to consider how children's thinking evolves during
development, with a particular focus on the role of experience in causing
change. This is a fundamental topic related both to the processes by which
children learn and those that make children ready and able to learn from
experience. Both behavioral and neural approaches to these issues will be
considered. The behavioral approaches will include research on the
'microgenesis' of cognitive change---that is, research that considers
development as it occurs over relatively short periods of time (e.g., several
hour-long sessions) in specific task situations such as solving arithmetic
problems. Research on cognitive change over longer time scales (months and
years) will also be considered, as will research that uses computational
modeling and dynamical systems approaches to processes by which change in
thinking ability occur. Neural approaches will include the study of the way in
which neuronal responses, and the connections among neurons, change in response
to experience, particularly as these changes are expressed during the actual
process of acquiring new thinking skills in children and adults. Other neural
approaches include studies of the possible basis of the emergence of cognitive
abilities through the progressive maturation of various brain structures, and
studies of the effects of experience on the organization of and internal
representations in various brain regions. The conference will also consider
developmental anomalies such as autism and attention deficit disorder as windows
on normal function. The following questions will be examined in the course of
the workshop: 1) Why do cognitive abilities emerge when they do during
development? 2) What are the sources of developmental and individual
differences, and of developmental anomalies in learning? 3) What happens in the
brain when people learn? 4) How can experiences be ordered and timed so as to
optimize learning? The answers to these questions have strong implications for
how we educate children and remediate deficits that impede development of
thinking abilities. These implications will be drawn out in discussions among
the participants. The proceedings of the symposium will be published as a volume
in the Carnegie Symposium series.