* 9729539
* Peptide Dynamics Investigated by 13C and 15N-NMR Relaxation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Vladimir Daragan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2000
* USD 362,509.00

9729539 Mayo Characterizing partially-folded and particularly unfolded states of
proteins and peptides has been problematic given their transient nature. 13C/15N
NMR relaxation is particularly well suited for investigating these states. This
project will study backbone and side-chain motions of amino acid residues in
unfolded, partially-folded and well-structured peptides by using 13C and 15N NMR
relaxation and motional model analyses. The peptides for study are three
partially-folded peptides which show conformational preferences in water:
(-hairpin (12mer), (-sheet (20mer) and helix (18mer), and a zinc finger peptide
(31 residues) Sp1f2 which can be examined in a well-structured native state (1:1
complex with zinc) having both (-sheet and helical structure and in an
"unfolded" state (apopeptide without zinc). The relatively small size of these
peptides makes them ideal in terms of synthesis, selective 13C/15N isotopic
enrichment, and experimental investigation. This project stands apart from
previous NMR dynamics studies in that it will use both auto- and cross-
correlation parameters from all available motional vectors (backbone and side-
chain) and various rotational models and model free approaches to provide a
detailed description of motional dynamics in terms of bond rotational
restrictions and correlations and motional geometry. The significance of this
research lies in characterizing the internal motions in unfolded, partially-
folded and well-structured peptides. This information will provide a better
understanding of changes which occur on transition from the unfolded to the
folded state of a protein and is crucial to solving the protein folding problem.
In addition, this research will increase general knowledge of protein dynamics
and contribute to the development of better motional models for analysis of NMR
relaxation and structural data. ***