* 9729325
* The Role of Acoustic Behavioral Changes in Speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1998,11/30/2000
* Kerry Shaw, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2000
* USD 62,000.00

Shaw 9729325 Communication signals often change quickly and can be the first to
distinguish closely related species in animals. This study examines the
historical relationships of populations of Laupala cerasina, a Hawaiian cricket
species that shows variation in male singing behavior and female acoustic
attraction, two important communication signals. Acoustic behaviors such as
these mediate reproductive coordination between males and females in crickets.
It is hypothesized that these changes in acoustic signals are a prerequisite to
the formation of new species. Prior investigations have suggested that different
geographic populations of L. cerasina differ significantly in male song and in
female acoustic preference but nonetheless share a similar acoustic rank in
their respective communities and are members of the same species. Preliminary
data also suggests that these different geographic populations can interbreed.
These observations lead to the prediction that the different geographic
populations of L. cerasina are closely related. However, from previous work with
mtDNA sequences, L. cerasina populations appear to be relatively distantly
related. DNA sequences from additional genes will allow this contradiction to be
resolved. The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that populations of
L. cerasina are closely related as predicted by the taxonomy, and that changing
acoustic signals indicate that new species are in the process of forming. To
address this question, nuclear DNA sequences will be collected from one gene
from each of 10 populations of L. cerasina and several closely related species.
This will ascertain whether the different geographic populations of L. cerasina
exhibiting a similar acoustic rank in their respective communities represent
products of a common history or a striking example of similarity by other
processes. A better understanding of the striking diversity of form, behavior
and function in the biological world is vital for projecting the importance of
that diversity in stable ecosystems, conservation efforts and human welfare.
Tremendous strides have been made toward an understanding of developmental and
behavioral diversity in animals and plants. But how does the process begin? We
know relatively little about how and why new species arise. The efficacy of
communication signaling in animal courtship is a prerequisite to the continued
flow of genes within and between populations. The hypothesis that changes in
communication signals occur rapidly is gaining support; such changes may provide
the early catalyst for the remarkable diversification that follows. Recovering a
system where communication signals are actively changing is rare, perhaps
because this process occurs so rapidly. Establishing the historical
relationships among the component populations that differ in communication
signals (such as Laupala cerasina) is a critical first step.