* 9729110
* An Isotopic Approach for Determining the Industrial Fraction of the Total Methyl Bromide Source to the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Allen Goldstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/2003
* USD 215,438.00

9729110 Goldstein Methyl bromide (CH3Br) is a trace gas that constitutes the
largest source of bromine atoms to the stratosphere. While the role of bromine
in stratospheric ozone loss has been well documented, the current understanding
of methyl bromide sources suffers from major uncertainties. Unlike
chlorofluorocarbons, methyl bromide is released by both industrial and non-
industrial processes. The industrial source is dominated by agricultural
fumigation while the largest non-industrial sources appear to be biological
production in the oceans and inorganic production during biomass burning. The
magnitude of the industrial source is known to within 50%, but the magnitudes of
the non-industrial sources are highly uncertain. The industrial source fraction
of methyl bromide is thus highly uncertain. A mass balance method based on
carbon isotopes for determining the industrial source fraction will be developed
in this project. Preliminary work has shown the isotopic signature of
industrially produced methyl bromide to be very different from that expected for
non-industrial sources of methyl bromide, which are likely to reflect the
signature of their carbon source. Isotopic fractionations associated with the
main sink mechanisms (OH oxidation, ocean degradation, and soil degradation) are
likely to be small, because of the high molecular mass of methyl bromide. If
these predictions are verified, it will be possible to exploit the large
difference in source signatures to determine the industrial fraction of the
total methyl bromide source to approximately 10%. New sampling protocols will be
developed to preconcentrate methyl bromide, which occurs at very low (10 pptv)
concentrations in the atmosphere. Gas Chromatography - Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometry (GC-IRMS) will be used to measure the carbon isotope ratio of
atmospheric methyl bromide. In the course of this project, the isotopic
fractionation associated with the major sources (oceans, biomass burning,
industrial) and sinks (OH oxi dation, ocean, and soil degradation) will be
determined in collaboration with other research groups. If the assumptions on
source and sink signatures can be verified, measurements of ambient air samples
can be undertaken. If successful, these measurements will provide powerful new
constraints on the methyl bromide budget, which are independent of the methods
used to date.