* 9729317
* Dissertation Research:  Cotaxtla Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/1999
* Barbara Stark, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 11,977.00

Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Stark, Mr. Michael Ohnersorgen will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will examine the changes which resulted
from the collapse of classic Mayan civilization and the emergence of the Aztec
empire. During the Classic Mayan period, society was organized around small
independent city-states or `kingdoms` with rural hinterlands surrounding each.
Although trade among major centers took place, each was independent and
essentially self sustaining. In Mexico this form of organization was replaced by
a larger centralized Aztec empire in which Mayan type entities were more closely
integrated into a more tightly defined system. With the absence of wheeled
vehicles and domesticated animals the Aztec integrated most of Mexico and
archaeologists wish to understand the political and economic mechanisms
involved. Mr. Ohnersorgen's research focuses on this question. He will conduct
an archaeological survey of the site of Cotaxtla which is located in Veracruz
Mexico and will focus on the Postclassic period (A.D. 900-1521). Based on
limited work to date, it is clear that Cotaxtla was originally independent and
subsequently incorporated into the Aztec empire. Mr. Ohnersorgen will attempt to
answer two basic questions: first, how did the Aztecs maintain control? Did they
use direct (through, for example, the stationing of soldiers) or more indirect
means? It appears that the Aztecs used different methods in different parts of
their empire. Secondly, what was the economic impact of Aztec domination? How
did the organization of production change? Did a wide range of manufacturing
activities continue or did Cotaxtla become a specialized producer? Did the
production of items such as obsidian tools take place on an individualized
household or a more centralized level? To accomplish these goals Mr. Ohnersorgen
will conduct a survey of the site to locate mound groups and other areas of
concentrated activity. On this basis he will use a laser transit to produce
detailed maps. Surface collections of ceramics, lithics and other artifacts will
then be made. These data will permit economic activities to be identified and
their distribution plotted over space. This research is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on how complex societies develop. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a
promising young scientist.