* 9729158
* Formation Process and 3-D Dynamics of Vortex Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,05/03/1999
* Monika Nitsche, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/03/1999
* USD 32,000.00

9729158 Nitsche The goal of the present project is to perform numerical
investigations to develop a better understanding of vortex ring dynamics. The
case is considered in which a vortex ring is formed by ejecting an amount of
fluid from an opening. In the first part of the project, the focus will be on
the initial formation process of axisymmetric rings. Viscous effects dominate
the flow in an initial time interval and affect the vortex trajectory and total
shed circulation. The effects of viscosity by adapting a successful
2-dimensional Navier Stokes solver for high Reynolds number flow to the
axisymmetric case will be investigated. Inviscid effects of the flow using a
vortex sheet model will also be studied in order to determine whether present
similarity theory predictions can be adjusted to better predict the initial
flow. The second part of the project concerns 3-dimensional dynamics of vortex
rings formed at an opening. The development of a numerical method to compute
3-dimensional vortex sheet separation at an edge will enable the study of the
stability of these flows, as well as the effects of nonaxisymmetric openings and
nonaxisymmetric forcing. For this purpose, a 3-dimensional vortex filament
method will be developed which incorporates vortex separation at a sharp edge
and implements a fast summation algorithm to enable high resolution
calculations. Understanding the dynamics of vortex rings is essential to
understand more complicated flows such as those that occur in combustion
processes, or in the airborne vortex structures presenting a hazard to aircraft.
An inviscid numerical model has been developed for axisymmetric vortex rings
generated at a circular opening. This model was proven by comparison with
experiment to recover detailed information about the real flow. In the present
work, this model will be extended to 3-dimensional flows, and will be used to
study the stability of the flows, the effects of non-axisymme tric openings and
nonaxisymmetric forcing, as well as the potential applicability of present
theoretical results to predict the flow. Several of these aspects of the flow
are difficult to understand experimentally or analytically, and the computations
promise to give a deeper insight into the flow dynamics. In order to perform
this work, current numerical tools available for 2-dimensional flows will be
expanded to 3-dimensions.