* 9729957
* Deviance Among Team Personnel in Space and Analog Polar     Field Environments: The Effects of Size and Heterogeneity   of Crew and Mission Duration on Behavior and Performance
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Dr. Marilyn Dudley-Rowley, OPS-Alaska
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

This is a study of deviant behavior in space missions and polar expeditions. It
will examine the effects of independent variables such as heterogeneity of crew
and mission duration on behavior and performance, within the context of
structural and ecological sociology. A key purpose is to generate baseline data
about dysfunctional acts in extreme environments in order to construct
applicable theory for living and working in remote and isolated places. The
study examines the key social structural variables thought to correspond with
deviance in extreme environments and a substantial sample of space and polar
groups. After full operationalization of what is meant by a deviant act in an
extreme environment, multiple coders will extract deviant acts from
approximately 100 space and polar field expeditions. Once occurrences of deviant
acts and related data have been extracted from mission and expedition records,
ANCOVA with nested terms will be employed to examine numbers of deviant acts
against their crew sizes, heterogeneity, and mission duration in each mission
and expedition. Data will be input according to the separate quarters of a
mission and expedition regardless of the mission/expedition length. This
methodology seeks to examine how crew size, heterogeneity, and mission duration
structure deviance in extreme environments. In particular, it will test the
hypothesis of increased deviance around or after the midway point of extreme
environment expeditions. The methodology also allows a comparison of these
points by space and by polar field milieu if narrative sources permit. This
study tests the scope of general theories of human behavior by applying them to
life in extreme environments. The results of this pioneering study will generate
new insights and stimulate further research in a substantive area where little
systematic research has been done previously. The findings will also guide
future planning for long duration space missions.