* 9729980
* Chemosensory Mechanisms Regulating Predation
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Kenneth Browne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2002
* USD 274,748.00

Predation is a major biotic force regulating prey populations, as well as
exerting strong effects on community structure. Evidence suggests that the sense
of smell mediates predatory search in many terrestrial and aquatic animals. Past
investigations have not, however, been designed to link either the degree of
successful olfactory-mediated search or guidance mechanisms with the production
of chemical attractant by prey or the hydraulic environment in which predatory
activities naturally take place. Using the predator - prey interaction between
blue crabs (Callinectes sapidus) and hard clams (Mercenaria mercenaria), this
project will investigate the olfactory basis for predation. Results from assays
of crab predatory search behavior will guide chemical fractionation and
isolation of peptide attractants being released by intact live clams. Water
collected from the excurrent siphons of actively pumping clams will be
characterized by partitioning into different molecular weight classes and by
using selective enzyme degradation to probe peptide structures. As attractants
are isolated and identified, pure compounds will be bioassayed for potency
(dose-response) and for potential mixture interactions. In this manner, the
natural ligands will be discovered and made available for discriminating between
the roles of antennules and legs in chemosensation that mediates crab predatory
search behavior. The rates of water exchange and attractant flux will then be
measured for clams, and a biomechanical and chemical model of a clam releasing
attractants will be engineered. Crab ability to find clam patches will be tested
under controlled hydrodynamic conditions in a large (10-m long) flume,
simulating flow in the natural habitat. As a final test, selected experiments
will be repeated in the field by using live clams and models as attractant
sources to free-ranging crabs. This project will thus provide the most rigorous
test to date of olfaction as a regulatory factor in predator-prey interactions.
It will yield new attractant structures for use in cellular and molecular
studies on basic chemosensory processes, while it will provide a critical link
between the olfactory sense of predators and prey vulnerability to predation.
Finally, it could open significant avenues for future research to explore the
mechanisms through which prey might defend themselves by adopting risk-sensitive
metabolic strategies in which attractant production stops when nearby predator
are detected.