* 9729190
* Interaction of a Boundary Layer with a Point Vortex
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Seth Lichter, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 09/30/2002
* USD 216,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9729190 Principal Investigator: Lichter This is a
grant to explore simple models of the interaction of a vortex monopole with a
wall-bounded shear layer at high Reynolds number, Re. While boundary layer
theory treats layers which are thin compared to the distance to the vortex, the
model proposed here considers the physically more realistic problem of a vortex
which is in close proximity to, or within, the boundary layer. This work
utilizes analytical models and efficient vorticity based numerical methods which
have been developed previously. Many industrial processes rely on vortex
enhanced mixing of mass, heat or momentum between boundary layers and the bulk
flow. In other types of processes, vortices degrade performance and so their
presence is discouraged. The active control of transition relies on detection of
vortices and their characterization in terms of their disruptive yield. In spite
of the numerous applications, fundamental questions remain on how vortices and
boundary layers interact such as: the role of vortices in initiating
disturbances, the extent that the thickening of a separating boundary layer
alters the trajectory of the vortex, the accuracy and range of applicability of
non-interacting boundary layer methods, the trajectories of vortices when near
boundaries or within boundary layers and the role of vortices in entraining
fluid into the boundary layer and in ejection of boundary layer vorticity.
Because of the complexities of the issues involved there is a need, then, to
simplify the governing equations while identifying and retaining the dominant
mechanisms by which a vortex interacts with a boundary layer. The model
considered here avoids the singularity present in boundary layer models and can
describe boundary layer evolution to long times. The model is accurate at high
Re and so complements methods whose accuracy is limited to low or moderate Re.
Furthermore, it considers the compact disturbance produced by a vortex and so is
an adjunct to methods which consider boundary layer receptivity to wave-like
disturbances. 1 1