* 9729245
* Predicting Dynamics of Forested Landscapes from Individual- based Models of Tree Performance
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Richard Kobe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2000
* USD 20,000.00

9729245 Kobe Numerous studies in vegetation ecology have focused on the
delineation and description of forest communities, often in relation to soil
attributed. However, relatively few studies have explained variation in species
composition from the more mechanistic perspective of how tree species vary in
performance in response to resource availability, as supplied by different
forest community types. Furthermore, among-site variation in species
interactions and subsequent influence on community composition remain little
explored. The objectives of the research established with this Postdoctoral
Fellowship Starter Grant are to (1) characterize the resource-dependent growth
of juveniles of five dominant tree species in different ecological land types in
a landscape of northern hardwoods forest, and (2) evaluate if variation in
sapling growth predicts the dominant canopy tree species under specified
resource conditions. The study's emphasis is on saplings because of their
importance in influencing forest community dynamics. The chosen species (Quercus
alba, Q. rubra, Acer rubrum, A. saccharum, Pinus strobus) span a range of shade
tolerances and mature-tree associations with soil properties, and thus, provide
the variation necessary to address the objectives of this research. Ultimately,
this type of information can provide a more mechanistic understanding of
species-habitat relationships which can provide better predictions of the
response of forested landscapes to human intervention.