* 9729075
* Stable Dynamic Optimization Strategies for Large-Scale      Chemical Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Lorenz Biegler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2000
* USD 236,905.00

Biegler CTS-9729075 Strategies for process optimization have seen widespread
applications over the past decade. These have been applied in the design of new
chemical processes, real-time optimization of process units and plants in
petrochemical processes, and for sophisticated analyses related to the
operability and flexibility of chemical processes. The vast majority of these
applications have been for steady state process models, described by systems of
algebraic equations. Simultaneously, development of powerful, large-scale
dynamic simulation tool are also becoming widespread and equation based dynamic
process models have been constructed with up to 100,000 differential-algebraic
equations (DAE). The success of dynamic process simulation has led to the demand
for optimization tools that deal readily with process models described by
differential algebraic equations (DAEs). However, development of dynamic
optimization strategies has lagged that of simulation for a number of reasons.
Among these are conceptual limitations of current optimization strategies. These
become important for DAE models that are highly constrained or have unstable
dynamic modes. The latter are often true in reactive and reactive-separation
systems including exothermic reactors and reactive distillation. The PI is
planning on developing a simultaneous formulation for dynamic optimization that
includes a stable large-scale decomposition based on boundary value
formulations. Novel nonlinear programming, strategies that detect unstable
modes, exploit problem structure for large scale decomposition and adapt
leading, edge methods for the treatment of large sets of inequality constraints
will be considered. The development of these strategies will be aided by
research collaborations with applied mathematicians that specialize in nonlinear
programming and DAE solution algorithms. The combination of these strategies
will lead to large-scale dynamic optimization strategies that can be applied to
dynamic simulation models currently considered in industrial applications. The
methods developed will be validated by large scale industrial applications in
reaction engineering and reactive distillation.