* 9729818
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Laboratory for Data          Management and Modeling
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Michael Conrad, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/1999
* USD 91,048.00

CISE Research Instrumentation: Laboratory for Data Management and Modeling
9729814 Grosky, William I. Wayne State University This research instrumentation
grant contributes to the purchase of several workstations and a 50 GB RAID
subsystem, to be interconnected via 100Mbps Ethernet to establish a Data
Management and Modeling Laboratory. The instrumentation will enable the
following projects:- Distributed Numerical Computations on Networks of
Workstations,- Simulation System for Studying Biochemical Information
Processing, - Virtual Reality Interfaces to Databases, - Multi-Resolution
Indexing of Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Features for Image and Video Database
Retrieval, and- Compressed Video Processing for multimedia, supporting efforts
directed to interdisciplinary research on topics involving multimedia data
management, computational modeling, and distributed computing. The first project
explores issues related to node allocation, data partitioning, load balancing,
and disk I/O balancing for scientific computations. The second project applies
to empirical modeling of complex biochemical systems, metabolic engineering, and
emulation of chemical and molecular computing devices. The third project focuses
on applications of VRML interfaces to databases. The fourth project is directed
to the efficient database access of images and video segments having particular
semantics. The long-term goal of the fifth project serves to build a capability
for automatic real-time annotation of images and videos for content-based
searching and retrieval in large image and video databases.