* 9729109
* Mutual Control of Carriers and Light in Low-Dimensional     Semiconductor Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Theodore Norris, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2000
* USD 198,000.00

9729109 Norris This new project is a collaboration between D. Citrin at
Washington State and T. Norris at the University of Michigan. It addresses the
response of low-dimensional semiconductor structures to sub-picosecond shaped
optical pulses. In particular, we will employ tailored optical pulses incident
on semiconductor optical microcavities to coherently excite a population of
excitons, and then de-excite them on the subpicosecond time scale. We will focus
on the ultrafast modulation of the optical nonlinearities of the system due to
the control of the exciton population at 100 GHz repetition rates. In addition,
in this project we will explore the use of shaped optical pulses in
semiconductors to generate tunable terahertz electromagnetic waveforms in
quantum wells in the presence and absence of additional externally applied
strong electromagnetic fields. Control of the THz waveforms ill be attained
using ideas from coherent control and dynamics of optically excited electron-
hole wavepackets. %%% This is a new collaboration between D. Citrin, a theorist
at Washington State and an experimentalist, T. Norris at the University of
Michigan. Laser pulses of extremely short duration will be used to control the
behavior of electrons in microscopic semiconductor-based structures. This new
project will address, from a fundamental viewpoint, how such short pulses
propagate through small semiconductors, and how the electrons respond to the
passage of these light pulses. In addition to the contribution to our
understanding of the ultimate limits to the response of semiconductors
illuminated by very short laser pulses, the results of this project will be
useful to identify fast processes in semiconductors that may be employed for the
next generation of ultrahigh- speed optical switches for optical-fiber-based
communications systems. Other expect ed applications will be in creating new
sources of electromagnetic radiation in regions of the spectrum where no or few
convenient sources presently exist. ***