* 9729535
* EPSCOR:  Influence of Gender and Lactation on Calicum       Signalling and Hormone Release in Pituitary Slices
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1998,10/31/1999
* Jerome Fiekers, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 10/31/1999
* USD 74,508.00

Fiekers 9729535 Lactation is a physiological process which occurs in mammalian
females in preparation for nourishing their young. Significant changes occur in
the female anterior pituitary gland in preparation for lactation. The cells in
this gland direct and regulate the activity of the cells and tissues involved in
the production and expression of milk by the mother. Lactotrophs are one of the
cell types in the pituitary gland and these cells synthesize and secrete
prolactin, a hormone largely responsible for the development of the female
organs in preparation for lactation. Very little is understood about the changes
which occur in these cells during lactation. It is known, however, that
secretory cells require an elevation of cytosolic calcium for secretion and that
action potentials are important for providing the increases in cytosolic calcium
required for stimulus-response coupling in neuroendocrine cells. Dr. Fiekers is
interested in determining the cellular mechanisms by which lactotrophs response
to external stimuli. He has developed an acute pituitary slice preparation which
allows him to examine these neuroendocrine cells with their cell to cell
associations intact and, in many cases, with the cells polarized to secrete into
adjacent blood vessels. Thus, Dr. Fiekers can study individual cells in their
normal configuration within the gland thus retaining the cell to cell contacts
and communication which occur between neighboring cells. Using state-of-the-art
patch clamp techniques combined with confocal laser scanning microscopy, he will
examine the basic properties of stimulus-response coupling in single
lactotrophs. Dr. Fiekers will define the properties of the lactotrophs prior to
and during lactation in female rats to better understand the nature of the
fundamental changes which occur during this physiological process. The results
of this proposal will provide significant new information on the fundamental
steps in the release of the hormone prolactin during lactati on. In addition, he
will be able to measure alterations in the structure of the anterior pituitary
gland with respect to size, distribution and arrangement of lactotrophs in the
gland which occur as a result of lactation. These potential changes represent a
transformation of the organization within the gland which occurs during the
physiological state and may provide the basis for our future understanding of
changes in cell structure and function which occur, for example, in pregnancy,
cancer, and senescence.