* 9729213
* SGER: Innovative Design and Fabrication of High Performance and Low Cost Optical Fiber Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Maria Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

This exploratory research project investigates an innovative idea on design and
fabrication techniques for low-cost and high-performance novel fiber sensors.
The proposed approach represents a major breakthrough over the traditional
optical fiber sensors currently available but not widely used in practices due
to their lack of robustness, low reliability and high cost. Major research tasks
in this project will include (1) development of fabrication techniques; (2)
development of a prototype optical fiber displacement and accelerometer,
together with their central signal processing units; (3) experimental
investigation on sensor performance; (4) study multiplexing techniques and
develop a prototype multipoint sensor network; and (5) improvement of existing
designs. The sensor heads may also be embedded into materials, typically in
advanced composites, to monitor their properties and behavior not only during
processes but also over their service life. This is an emerging research area in
both mechanical and civil engineering. The project demonstrates a preliminary
work on untested and novel ideas. In addition, the project involves in a multi-
disciplinary work in the areas of materials processing, mechanical, and civil
structure. With the attractive combination of high performance and low cost, the
sensors can have unlimited applications in monitoring health conditions of
various material and structure systems ranging from mechanical, aerospace, to
civil infrastructure systems. The research findings could significantly
contribute to the development of a new generation of material and structural
systems equipped with smart sensing capability to ensure system integrity,
minimize maintenance cost and maintain material and structural longevity.