* 9729630
* US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative Research in Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2005
* George Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 02/28/2005
* USD 132,500.00

9729630 Lee The overall objective of the US-PRC Protocol for Cooperative
Research in Earthquake Engineering is the continued collaboration between the
National Science foundation and the People's Republic of China for the
advancement of earthquake engineering and consequently earthquake hazards
reduction. The purpose of this request is to seek NSF support to allow the
National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER) to assist NSF in
organizing its annual protocol coordination meetings between US and Chinese
representatives. NCEER proposes to provide administrative and logistical
support, and participant support, toward coordination and implementation of
three (3) US meetings, and participant support for two (2) meetings in China
under this program. These meetings will take place over a five year period,
beginning in the fall of 1997. Through the implementation of this agreement,
NCEER will act as an agent for NSF, assuming responsibility for organizing
annual protocol coordination meetings between the US and the People's Republic
of China. As such, NCEER proposes to effectively coordinate all logistical
details as required by NSF for the organization and conduct of three US meetings
during years 1, 3, and 5 of this agreement. In addition to organizing the three
US meetings, NCEER will coordinate US and Chinese participation, accounting for
participant expenses for approximately six Chinese participants, with an
additional four US participants to be supported at the US hosted meetings.
NCEER's technical focus and international reach has allowed the Center to become
recognizable worldwide, with international cooperation becoming a more prominent
component of its research program with each additional year of operation. NCEER
continues to strengthen its international ties, and handles a myriad of details,
in both the technical and logistical sense, while hosting and visiting its many
international partners. The current administrative infra structure facilitates
the execution of the programs that are currently in place and embraces new
opportunities to expand on this strong capability and assist NSF. ***