* 9729495
* Adaptive Data Republication in Distributed Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Konstantinos Kalpakis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2000
* USD 31,525.00

The University of Illinois at Chicago and the University of Maryland at
Baltimore County collaborate on this project motivated by the tremendous growth
of the Internet and the World-Wide-Web (WWW). Adaptive replication is an
approach for improving performance, response time, and access cost in
distributed database systems in general, and Internet/WWW in particular.
Adaptive replication is a generalization of the principle of caching. In
adaptive replication the number of copies of an object, the location of these
copies, and which updates are propagated to each copy, change dynamically
depending on a given cost function. The project establishes the fundamental
principles of adaptive replication in distributed database systems, and it
develops, implements and analyzes a system for adaptive replication of objects.
The system consists of a set of algorithms to be used for various cost
functions. For the analysis the investigators are building a simulation testbed
in which the user defines the network, selects a replication algorithm, selects
a cost model, and an access pattern at each computer. The system enables
comparison among the various adaptive and static replication algorithms. The
project will improve the understanding, cost, and performance of distributed
systems and distributed databases, and it can lead to a more efficient Internet
and World-Wide-Web.