* 9729009
* Modulating Cerebral Asymmetries for Language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Christine Chiarello, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 05/31/2000
* USD 90,000.00

The cortex of the human brain is subdivided into two halves, the left and right
hemispheres, which process information in characteristically different ways.
Although it is acknowledged that nearly all mental activities require some
contribution from each cerebral hemisphere, understanding when and how each
system participates in a variety of cognitive tasks remains a significant
scientific challenge. The long-term goal of this research is to determine the
precise contributions of the left and right hemispheres when people comprehend
words. The experiments will test the hypothesis that the relative participation
of each hemisphere in word recognition is determined by the linguistic context
in which a word is experienced, rather than by intrinsic characteristics of the
word itself. Words will be presented in the left or right visual fields, thereby
selectively stimulating the right or left hemisphere. Two important word
properties will be investigated: grammatical class (noun vs verb) and
concreteness of meaning (concrete vs abstract). It is predicted that the right
cerebral hemisphere will make a greater contribution to recognizing nouns and
concrete words in the context of verbs or abstract words, than in more
homogeneous contexts. Such findings would suggest that cerebral asymmetries for
word recognition vary dynamically in concert with variation in the stimulus
environment, rather than reflecting static (and hence unmodifiable) processing
differences. This research will indicate the extent to which context modulates
the brain systems used to recognize words, thereby enhancing our understanding
of the neural bases for language comprehension.