* 9729904
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Acquisition of a Compute     Server for Image Analysis Research that Emphasize Empirical Performance Characterization
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Lawrence Hall, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1998
* USD 59,232.00

9729904 Bowyer, Kevin W. University of South Florida CISE Research
Instrumentation: Acquisition of a Compute Server for Image Analysis Research
that Emphasizes Empirical Performance Characterization This research
instrumentation grant contributes to the purchase of a compute server for the
lab research network at USF with four 250 Mhz UltraSparc Processors, 1GB main
memory, 35 GB of formatted disk pace, and a tape drive, which will enable the
following projects:- Automated Performance Evaluation of Edge Detectors,-
Nonrigid Motion and Structure Recovery from 2D Views, - Performance Evaluation
of Perceptual Organization Modules, and - Automatic Tumor Volume Extraction from
Brain MRI. This project deals with four image analysis tasks: performance
analysis of edge detector algorithms, algorithms for analysis of non-rigid
motion in image sequences, the development and analysis of perceptual grouping
algorithms, and the development of clustering-based algorithms for the
segmentation of magnetic resonance images. These tasks are all computationally
expensive. In addition, the studied empirical characterization of the
performance of the algorithms is emphasized. This style of research presents
enormous computational demands, and it is not feasible to conduct this style of
research with the typical workstation that an individual user would have on
their desk. To make it practical to carry out this research, USL will acquire a
compute server that will provide much greater computational power. This compute
server will be shared among the research projects. Each of the projects is
innovative and will lead to high-quality publications. In addition, the data
sets and empirical methods that are created in these projects will have
substantial impact on future research.