* 9729358
* Acquisition of a Multi-User Scanning Laser Confocal for     Science and Engineering Research at Hopkins University
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Victor Corces, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2001
* USD 225,000.00

It is proposed to purchase a scanning laser confocal microscope with two-photon
capabilities to measure the 3D conformation of living cells, tissues,
macromolecular assemblies, and novel materials. With this new microscope, one
can (i) slice clean, thin optical sections out of thick fluorescent specimens
and light scattering materials, (ii) view specimen planes parallel to the line
of sight, (iii) penetrate deep into light-scattering tissues, living cells,
complex fluids, and complex materials, and (iv) gain 3-D views at very high
resolution. This new microscope will compliment the experimental techniques
currently used by Hopkins faculty, active in research projects in biomedical
engineering, chemical engineering, materials science and biology. This proposal
details four projects where the new SLCM will have a dramatic impact. These
projects include: (1) the development of a high resolution particle-tracking
instrument coupled to the new confocal microscope to probe the in vitro and in
vivo mechanical properties of biopolymers; (2) studying the lateral organization
of membrane proteins in epithelial cells emphasizing the packaging of
glycosylphos-phatidylinositol-anchored proteins, GPI-proteins, for targeted
delivery to the apical surface of morphologically polarized cells; (3) studying
the molecular mechanisms by which chromatin insulators affect enhancer-promoter
interactions; in particular, studying the gypsy insulator, a sequence located in
the 5' transcribed untranslated region of the gypsy retrotransposon of
Drosophila; (4) monitoring the process of transfecting cells and micro-
organelles translocations with high spatial and time resolution. One of the
primary educational objectives for acquiring a confocal microscope is to train
Hopkins scientists and engineers to use one of the most versatile and promising
tools of investigation in the life and materials sciences. Of course, such a
powerful instrument cannot be used properly and to its full potential with out
proper training. Therefore, two of the Co- PIS will be teaching a new course
entitled "Practical Confocal Microscopy" to be offered during the January
intersession to advanced graduate students in science and engineering who are
interested in learning how to use the confocal microscope in their graduate
research.