* 9729252
* Workshop on Planning, Design, Managemnet and Control of     Transportation System; April 14-16, 1998; Arlington, VA
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Cynthia Barnhart, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 06/30/1998
* USD 64,754.00

This award is made to plan and conduct a workshop on `Planning, Design,
Management, and Control of Transportation Systems.` Changing requirements for
transportation in a climate of constrained resources, environmental sensitivity
and growing demand; increasing capabilities in new technology,
telecommunications and control, and computer simulation; and evolving future
requirements of the transportation professional workforce indicate the
importance of holding this workshop in the near future. The workshop will
convene some of the current and future leaders in transportation research,
practice and education to identify areas where the generic science base
necessary for the planning, design, management and control of multimodal
transportation systems is inadequate (or not sufficiently related to
applications); articulate a set of research and education topics that NSF can
consider as recommendations consistent with its mission of advancing the
progress of science and engineering; identify, develop, and relate knowledge
bases to practical transportation applications; and stimulate collaboration of
research professionals across the modern and traditional disciplinary lines. The
workshop will focus on three major topics: 5) intelligent planning and design of
transportation systems; 2) real-time management, learning, and control for
transportation systems; and 3) interdisciplinary education in transportation
systems. Approximately 40 representatives of industry, academia and government
will participate. Attendees will include a diversity of individuals who can
provide the interdisciplinary expertise necessary to define the generic science
base and research and education topics that will define planning, design,
management and control of multimodal transportation systems in the coming
decade. The workshop will include keynote speakers from government, industry,
academia, and one invited from Europe. The outcome of the workshop will be a
report that will be widely distributed.