* 9729041
* GOALI:  Fundamental Study of Dense Phase Conveying
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1998,10/31/2001
* George Klinzing, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 10/31/2001
* USD 273,125.00

Abstract 9729041 G. Klinzing, University of Pittsburgh This is a GOALI project
between University of Pittsburgh and The Dow Chemical Company. The objective of
this proposal is to provide basic understanding of highly concentrated gas-solid
flows through pipes based on data from a large-scale system. It is well known
that small-scale laboratory facilities cannot fully reproduce gas-solids
transport phenomena in large industrial scale. The flow patterns in horizontal
and vertical dense phase pneumatic transport will be investigated as a function
of the materials properties and operating conditions using 3 and 4 inch pipes
and specific experimental tools for dense phase flow. Collaborations include
other industrial units (Dow, MAC, DuPont, Eastman, Babcock, and others) and
leading research groups in U.K. and Japan. The experimental tools include
particle plug and shear testers, pressure fluctuation transducers, fast video,
electrical tomography, as well as statistical and Fuzzy logic analysis methods.
The tested materials will be determined by an industrial advisory board in order
to be representative for industrial applications. The proposed project, if
successful, will provide a predictive method for calculating the performance of
large scale industrial dense phase conveying systems based on the fundamental
materials properties, and principles of powder and fluid mechanics. Graduate
students will perform their research in both the academic and industrial
facilities. ***