* 9729537
* Redox Regulation of mRNA Destablization and Gene            Transcription During the Defense Response in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1998,02/29/2000
* Mona Mehdy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9729537 Mehdy Plant disease resistance mechanisms include the rapid production
of active oxygen species in response to pathogen attack. Active oxygen species
such as hydrogen peroxide serve as secondary messengers to mobilize changes in
the expression of some defense-related genes. Dr. Mehdy and her associate's
prior studies of cultured dwarf French bean cells treated with fungal elicitor
provided evidence that hydrogen peroxide from the oxidative burst results in the
rapid degradation of a normally stable cell wall proline-rich protein mRNA,
PvPRP1. The ensuing reduced synthesis of the PvPRP1 protein is likely to
contribute to remodeling of the cell wall to make it more resistant to pathogen
attack. To understand the mechanism of PvPRP1 mRNA downregulation, Dr. Mehdy and
her associates will focus on the biochemical characterization and cloning of a
50-kD RNA binding protein that specifically binds to the PvPRP1 MRNA. Since the
purified protein requires reduced sulfhydryl group(s) for RNA binding activity,
specific cellular reductants that may play a regulatory role will be
investigated in in vitro assays. Thirdly, Dr. Mehdy and her associates will
begin to use the genetically amenable legume species, Medicago truncatula, to
screen for mutations in components that lie between pathogen-induced hydrogen
peroxide and regulation of PvPRP1 mRNA expression. This study will contribute to
understanding signalling pathways involving active oxygen species and suggest
strategies for improving disease resistance in crops.