* 9729014
* Analysis of Mitochondrial DNA in Subfossil Lemurs
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,08/31/1999
* Anne Yoder, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1999
* USD 78,363.00

This project involves the extraction, amplification, and sequencing of
mitochondrial DNA from a diverse assemblage of extinct primates from Madagascar.
These giant lemurs began to disappear approximately 2000 years ago, a process
that was completed with their final extinction within the past several hundred
years. The evolutionary origins of these animals are as mysterious as their
disappearance. The proposed research will employ ancient DNA techniques to
investigate both their origins and their demise. The initial focus of the
project will be on reconstructing the phylogenetic relationships among and
between the extinct and living lemuriforms. The results will be significant for
understanding morphological and ecological evolution in a remarkably diverse
group of mammals as well as for understanding the biogeographic history of
Madagascar and Africa. Patterns of genetic diversity within extinct lemur
populations will also be examined to the extent possible. As dwindling diversity
is almost certainly characteristic of living lemuriform populations, it seems
expedient to explore the genetic patterns of a known extinction event with an
eye towards avoiding such crises in the future. The results of the project will
add to a growing body of information relevant to the study of DNA change over
time. This increasingly valuable field has applications for disciplines as
diverse as the analysis and control of organic pathogens (e.g., the AIDS virus),
biogeography, phylogenetics, physiology, and conservation biology, just to name
a few.