* 9729608
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of lls1, An Inhibitor of Cell    Death in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,05/31/1999
* Gurmukh Johal, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1999
* USD 125,000.00

Johal 9729608 The focus of this research is to elucidate the function of a novel
gene from maize that appears to act as a suppressor of cell death in plants.
This gene, designated llsl (lethal leaf spot) is identified by a recessive
mutation and characterized by the initiation of necrotic lesions that expand to
kill leaves. Since llsl spots visually resemble lesions incited by race 1 of
Cochliobolus carbonum on susceptible maize, this mutation has been placed in the
general class of mutations called disease lesion mimics. Plants with these
genetic defects appear to undergo aberrant cell death, resulting in the
formation of spontaneous lesions that sometimes resemble known diseases of
maize. The genetic and phenotypic behavior of llsl predicts that the normal
function of this gene is to prevent the spread of cell death, which may be
triggered by any stimulus, including a pathogen infection, physical wounding or
a genetic lesion. Once a cell dies on an llsl plant, it initiates a chain
reaction of cell death, leading to the formation of a continually expanding (in
a radial fashion) zone of dying cells that eventually consumes the entire leaf
tissue. Interestingly, the expression of llsl lesions is developmentally
programmed, cell autonomous, and light-dependent. It appears that llsl lesions
only initiate and propagate in photosynthetically active tissues. In order to
understand the nature of the llsl gene, it has been cloned from maize following
tagging with Mutator. Sequence analysis of Llsl reveals that it encodes a novel
protein highly conserved between monocots and dicots. It is present in a single
copy in both maize and Arabidopsis. Phenotypic comparison along with mapping
data of the Arabidopsis homolog predict it to be the acdl (accelerated cell
death) gene. This hypothesis is strengthened by the demonstration that at least
two EMS-induced acdl alleles have undergone single base-pair mutations in
conserved residues of the llsl homolog. In this proposal, a multi-faceted
approach employing genetic, histological and molecular biology tools, will be
used to unveil the function of Llsl in planta. The experimental plan will take
advantage of two excellent plant model systems - maize and Arabidopsis. Specific
goals are to determine: * how llsl is regulated during both normal and
pathological situations; * where its site of action is, both at the cellular and
intracellular levels; * what its target/substrate is in the cell; and * what its
relationship is to the acdl mutant of Arabidopsis7 It is highly likely that the
results obtained from this study will provide a unique and important insight
into the mechanisms of regulation of cell death in plants. In addition to
contributing to basic research, these studies may eventually permit the
conception of rational new approaches for the biotechnological manipulation of
cell death in agriculture. Some obvious areas are plant protection,
transformation, stress resistance, propagation and male sterility.