* 9729452
* Forum on Biodiversity, held at the National Academy of      Sciences in October 28-30, 1997, in Washington D.C.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Tania Williams, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 25,000.00

9729452 Williams Knowledge of earth's biological resources, the species and the
communities they constitute on land and in the sea, has grown with human use and
management of those resources. With use and development has come a growing
appreciation of the sustainability, and at times vulnerability, of natural
biological systems and of individual species of organisms. Uninformed or
misguided uses have resulted in disruption and destruction of natural ecological
processes, with direct or indirect consequences on the size and health of
populations of plants, animals, and microbes. At the same time, exploration on
earth has revealed novel organisms and communities, often existing at
environmental extremes heretofore unimagined. The sense of wonder that
accompanies this new knowledge of novel species and communities clashes with the
sense of urgency about effective stewardship of biological resources around the
globe. Many of these issues have come to be subsumed under the term
"biodiversity" which at its core is concerned with the study of earth's living
organisms, their interactions in natural or human-managed communities, and their
sustainability in the face of global environmental processes and human uses.
Following 11 years upon a national Forum on Biodiversity that brought widespread
scientific and public attention to these issues, the National Academy of
Sciences is hosting a second forum to assess progress and define challenges in
the continuing study of earth's biological heritage. Leading scientists and
resource managers will convene under the aegis of the Academy and of supporting
organizations such as the Smithsonian Institution, Library of Congress, and the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. The meetings and workshops,
and the print publications resulting from these discussions, will be extended
through Web-based dissemination and continuing discussion via the Internet.