* 9729863
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Parallel Computing For       Wireless Networking Research
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* David Goodman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 11/30/1998
* USD 170,000.00

9729863 Goodman, David J. WINLAB (Wireless Information Network
Laboratory),Rutgers University CISE Research Instrumentation: Parallel Computing
For Wireless Networking Research This research instrumentation grant enables the
following research projects: - Scalable Simulations of Telecommunication
Systems- Interference and Coexistence of U-NII Band Wireless Systems - Routing
and Power Control in Multihop Packet Radio Networks - Interference Cancellation.
WINLAB, an NSF/Industry Cooperative Research Center, will purchase a high
performance 14-processor SMP computer (SUN UltraSparc HPC 4000) to support
computation-intensive research projects in wireless data networking which
exhibit considerable degree of untapped parallelism. The new and ongoing
projects that critically depend on such a computing platform include:-
Development of a Virtual Wireless Testbed for parallel simulations of radio
propagation, mobility, network traffic and protocols. The Testbed evolves to
become a standard research and education tool.- Investigations of interference
and robust protocols for the wireless systems in the recently allocated 5 GHz
bands for the Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NII).-
Investigations of power control and feasible routing schemes in multihop radio
networks.- Design of a testbed implementing sophisticated multiuser detectors
for new CDMA systems. The purchase of the multiprocessor SUN UltraSparc will
greatly accelerate research in these areas, as well as in other projects
involving DIMACS (an NSF S&amp;T Center) and ECE and CS Departments at Rutgers,
which currently do not have a comparable high performance multiprocessor with
parallel thread support.