* 9729226
* CRHCT:  Cost-Reducing Protein Production and Delivery       Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Hugh Mason, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 09/30/2000
* USD 51,733.00

9729226 Arntzen Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) represent a significant
threat to the general population but this problem is even more prevalent in the
urban environment. As a result 12 million Americans including 3 million
teenagers acquire these diseases each year. This is an important social problem
that has an impact on families and the community. Reducing the incidence of
these diseases would be a factor in influencing social science thinking for
years to come. The research to be conducted is directed toward a novel
inexpensive approach to sexually-transmitted disease (STD) prevention using
transgenic plant proteins and a polymer- based delivery system. Specifically, a
polymer-encapsulated orally-delivered protein antigen would be used to prevent
infection. The research seeks to solve three major problems: 1) Inexpensive
methods for protein production. Obtaining protein from plants represents a less
expensive alternative to laboratory production. 2) A self-administered (orally)
delivery system. 3) Improving awareness of the potential impact of
bioengineering on the economics of disease prevention. Other types of delivery
systems will be considered that may be more effective in dealing with other
diseases such as genital herpes, Hepatitis B, and AIDS. This research is being
conducted as a component of a research project at Cornell University supported
by award BES-9708250. ***