* 9729900
* CISE Instrumentation: Research Instrumentation for the      Design and Prototyping of Emerging Low-Power RF VLSI        Technologies
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1998,01/31/1999
* Krishna Shenai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 71,000.00

9729900 Shenai, Krishna University of Illinois - Chicago CISE Research
Instrumentation: Research Instrumentation for the Design and Prototyping of
Emerging Low-Power RF VLSI Technologies This research instrumentation grant
enables four distinct research projects: - Semiconductor Technology CAD (STCAD)
Tool Integration and Calibration,- Investigation of a Novel Physical Phenomena
in Deep Submicron Low-Power RF CMOS Devides and Interconnects,- Circuit
Simulation Modeling of Low-Power RF CMOS Devices and Interconnects, and- Design
Optimization and Prototyping of Low-Power Mixed Signal RF CMOS VLSI. To support
the aforementioned projects, the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at the University of Illinois at Chicago will purchase state-
of-the-art computing equipment dedicated to supporting multidisciplinary
research in computer and information science and engineering. The equipment will
be used for several research projects cited above. The primary objective of this
proposal is to acquire a high-performance multiprocessor and two workstations
which will enable performing highly cpu-intensive finite-element simulations
with reasonable turn-around time. The server will provide the performance
necessary for simulations of a complexity and accuracy not permitted with
conventional desktop workstations. This equipment will support over 20 graduate
students and one faculty member in their research.