* 9729793
* SGER:  New Productions and Nitrogen Cycling in the Off-shoreRegions of the Black Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* James McCarthy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,974.00

A. Project Summary Many scientific papers have been written that detail
environmental changes in the Black Sea, and many speculate on the implications
of further potential anthropogenic changes 1) in various drainage basins that
provide freshwater to this sea, 2) along its coastal margins, and 3) in
extraction of its resources. While the ecological effects of industrial activity
and changing land and water use are most apparent in coastal regions of the
Black Sea, they are also evident off-shore. For example, the observed trend of
increasing nutrient concentrations and doublings of both phytoplankton biomass
and primary productivity throughout the central region of the sea between the
mid 1970s and early 1990s, have been attributed to anthropogenic causes. Perhaps
the most dramatic basin-wide changes have been associated with the accidental
introductions of carnivorous gelatinous zooplankton, most recently Mnemiopsis
leydii. These species have profoundly affected Black Sea community structure.
Many aspects of the Black Sea ecosystem make it an attractive system for
biological oceanographers to study. Major food web perturbations allow for
testing of hypotheses relating to the influence of community organization and on
the flow of energy and matter. Basin scale physical processes are becoming
increasingly well known, and the physical scale of this sea allows for realistic
state of the art linkages among physical and biological processes in
contemporary modeling efforts. The foremost of these models are nitrogen based,
and they lead to conjecture regarding the sources of nitrogen that drive
plankton production. However, there have been no actual studies of the dynamics
of the annual nitrogen cycle and, in particular, no determinations of new
production in the Black Sea. Moreover, generalizations that have been made, such
as in models, are predicated upon the generalizable behavior of a Black Sea
planktonic ecosystem prior to the environmental changes of the last decade. In
conjunction with colleagues in Turkey, Dr. McCarthy has developed a plan to fill
these gaps in knowledge of the dynamics of the nitrogen cycle in the euphoric
zone of the Black Sea. Rates of N uptake, N2 fixation, and nitrogen flux among
dissolved components will be measured with stable isotope techniques and
interpreted within the context of plankton community and geophysical structure.
This study will serve to document current conditions, provide a basis for
inferring the effects of recent environmental changes, and contribute to more
realistic modeling efforts of the Black Sea ecosystem. This proposed
collaboration responds to an unprecedented opportunity to investigate the
openwater nitrogen cycle in the Black Sea very efficiently. Turkish scientists
at the METU Institute of Marine Science have just launched an intensive program
to study the "Dynamics of the lower trophic levels of the Black Sea:
Biogeochemical processes, and system modeling". The first field campaign in this
program has begun, but a critical component, the dynamics of nitrogen fluxes
among nutrient and particulate pools and trophic levels is missing. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research will provide this critical component.