* 9729229
* A Multi-Criteria, Dynamic, and Place-Based Approach to      Ecosystem Valuation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Bryan Norton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/1998
* USD 94,997.00

This one-year planning project explores a new approach to ecosystem valuation by
developing a multi-criteria system of environmental valuation for use within
locally based ecosystem management processes. Emphasis will be on three
objectives: (1) to refine the theoretical aspects of a proposed multi-criteria,
dynamic, and place-based approach to environmental valuation; (2) to identify
and propose alternative methodologies for empirically studying community-based
processes for articulating goals for environmental management, paying special
attention to measuring how the values/preferences of participants change as a
result of participation in such processes; and (3) to establish working
relationships with two currently existing watershed management projects in
Northern Georgia, one in the rural Etowah River watershed and one in the rapidly
urbanizing Lake Lanier area on the Chattahoochee River. The principal
investigators, working with an Advisory Committee, will establish linkages
between emerging theories of multi-criteria decision criteria and new,
iterative, and participatory processes for identifying, clarifying, and
reconciling competing values. The theory to be explored hypothesizes that, in
addition to well known value differences among stakeholder groups, there are
also important conflicts between short-term, individual values as measured by
actual and hypothetical valuation techniques of economists and the longer-term
values that represent the aspirations of a community. The investigators will
develop and refine an iterative, community-based process to empirically study
changes in values in response to discussions that encourage contrasts between
immediate preferences and more community-based, multi-generational values.
Specifically, the investigators will delineate the scope and context of the case
studies, identify group participants (which will likely include stakeholders,
citizens, scientists, decision-makers, a moderator or facilitator, and the
research team), and design the group processes and empirical instruments (such
as interview protocols, surveys, and analytic procedures for operationalizing
and measuring preference changes). This research will provide a new system for
examining community values, a system that differs both theoretically and
methodologically from the more usual, single-criterion valuation approach (such
as cost-benefit analysis). The approach differs theoretically from welfare
economics by considering the impacts of social interaction and participation in
management processes on valuations made by citizens (rather than seeking
aggregations of valuations by individuals acting atomistically), and also by
expecting citizens' inputs into valuation processes to change in response to
context and as a result of interactions with other citizens (rather than
treating preferences as stable and unquestioned). These theoretical departures
from usual valuational work will shift emphasis from `snapshot` studies of fixed
preferences toward study of an iterative process by which scientists,
stakeholder groups, the public, and agency staff interact in a search for
consensually accepted goals for environmental management.