* 9729528
* The Shikimic Acid Pathway and Polyketide Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Kevin Reynolds, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* William David Nes
* 02/28/2001
* USD 308,997.00

9729528 Kevin A. Reynolds In streptomycetes variations of the shikimic acid
pathway provide building blocks for numerous important natural products.
Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid (CHC) is derived by a reductive biosynthetic process
from shikimic acid and is found in numerous antibiotics such as ansatrienin and
asukamycin. CHC is also used in directed biosynthetic fermentations to prepare
doramectin (an analog of avermectin), an important antiparasitic veterinary
product. Dihydroxycyclohexanecarboxylic acid (DHCHC) is also derived from
shikimic acid and is used as a starter unit in the biosynthesis of the
immunosuppressants FK506, rapamycin and ascomycin. This project involves an
analysis of the CHC, DHCHC, and shikimic acid pathways in Streptomyces collinus
and Streptomyces hygroscopicus. The specific objectives are as follow: 1) To
continue an analysis of the unique, individual enzymes involved in CHC
biosynthesis in S. collinus and to determine if the genes encoding this pathway
are clustered. These genes will be used to engineer the complete CHC pathway
into a blocked mutant of S. avermitilis, creating a new mutant that can produce
doramectin without addition of CHC to the fermentation broth. In the long term
coexpression of these genes (or those involved in DHCHC biosynthesis) with
hybrid polyketide synthases may provide approaches for production of novel
polyketides. 2) To clone and sequence genes encoding dehydroquinate dehydratase,
dehydroshikimate dehydrogenase, and a deoxy-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate
synthase, in a rapamycin-producing strain of Streptomyces hygroscopicus.
Disruption of these genes will then be used to determine their role in providing
shikimic acid for both primary metabolism and DHCHC biosynthesis. In the long
term these studies will provide a) an understanding of the regulation of the
shikimic acid pathway in organisms that produce shikimate-derived natural
products, and b) genetic approaches to increase the yields of these products in
fermentation process es. Blocked mutants generated in this study will also be
used to obtain rapamycin analogs by directed biosynthetic experiments. 3) Time
permitting to initiate the purification of an enzyme involved in DHCHC
biosynthesis in a rapamycin producing strain of S. hygroscopicus. This project
represents an excellent opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to obtain broad-based training in enzymology, molecular biology, and
organic chemistry. It is through such interdisciplinary approaches that
secondary metabolic pathways can be understood and harnessed to create
additional diversity in natural product biosynthetic processes.