* 9729816
* The Uruk Collapse and the Uruk Expansion:  Excavations at   Tilbes Hoyuk
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Mitchell Rothman, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2001
* USD 62,812.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mitchell Rothman will conduct two
seasons of archaeological investigation at the site of Tibles Hoyuk which is
located on the Euphrates River in Turkey. With the construction of the Euphrates
River dam, this site and many others which document the rise of state level
societies in the Near East will soon be lost to scientific research. The site
and associated cemetery date to the Late Copper and Early Bronze ages, during
the fourth millennium BC and both precede and succeed the period of Uruk
expansion. Together with adjacent sites coincident with the Uruk, Tibles Hoyuk
spans a crucial period in Near Eastern prehistory. The Uruk state which was
located in southern Mesopotamia is the first of the great regional empires and
thus represents an important stage in the development of complex societies.
Archaeologists wish to understand how empires, which brought divergent peoples
together in a single political structure, functioned and how they were
maintained given the difficulties in communication and transportation which
characterized technologically simple societies. The Euphrates area in Turkey
represents a hinterland at the Uruk's northernmost fringes and thus offers an
interesting perspective to examine questions of control and independence.
Anthropologists have proposed a number of models which range from conquest and
complete dependence to more complex forms of mutually dependent economic
interaction. Because Dr. Rothman has a sequence which precedes, coincides with
and then succeeds the Uruk expansion into the region, he has a valuable context
in which to examine the question. In contrast to larger urban centers, Tibles
Hoyuk is a village site typical of those in which most people lived. Through
broad horizontal excavations and the analysis of ceramics and other material
remains, as well as associated flora and fauna, it will be possible to
reconstruct both the economic and subsistence organization of the site and also
gain insight into social organization. On these bases, the relative degree of
economic and political independence, and how these changed over time, can be
gauged. This research is important because it will provide new insight into the
emergence of state level societies. It will serve an important salvage function
and provide data of interest to many archaeologists.