* 9729764
* The School-Home Science Connection: SHSC, Using TV-based    Internet Technology to link School Science Projects to      Home Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Elliot Soloway, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1999
* USD 98,500.00

9729764 Soloway This SGER project will design, implement, and assess learning
environments in which parents/guardians and children use TV-based Internet
(i.e., the Web-TV commercial service) to engage in home science activities
linked to science classroom curricula. For example, in the context of better
understanding the biological basis of asthma (a major health problem in low
socioeconomic status, urban communities), parents/guardians and their children
can collect data twice daily on the child's lung capacity. They can then use the
TV/Internet link to share this data with classmates, to receive analyses of this
information on a longitudinal basis, to relate outcomes to current environmental
conditions such as pollution, and to better comprehend theories about biology in
the school curriculum. This study has three goals: 1) understanding how to
create activities that encourage parents/guardians and their children to engage
in serious scientific activities at home, 2) understanding how to better link
specific school-based science curriculum units to home-based science activities,
and 3) understanding how TV-based Internet technology can be used to support
scientific inquiry activities by parents/guardians and children in home
settings. As a pilot activity, the investigator is already working with four
homes in which children have asthma, providing Web-TV service and prototype
versions of learning materials. The proposed study would scale this initial
effort into a one-year project linking a 7th grade classroom in an urban middle
school to the homes of all children in that class. The project will develop and
study four learning activities will be developed and studied, deriving design
implications for researchers doing similar studies. The project will aid in
understanding how consumer and entertainment technology can increase children's
motivation and performance in science classes. This type of study is of great
value for researchers in informal science education and in school-home linkages,
as well as those concerned with improving the science knowledge of parents. ***