* 9729225
* SGER: Survey of Employment, Income, and Attitudes in Russia
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Theodore Gerber, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1998
* USD 37,084.00

This is a study of the social consequences of economic reforms in Russia. The
systemic transformations of state socialist economies have no peacetime parallel
in their scope and impact on the populations involved. The rapid transitions
from state socialism pose critical theoretical issues for sociologists: How do
labor markets respond to institutional change directed by state policy makers?
How does market transition in former state socialist societies alter patterns of
socio-economic stratification? What factors shape economic and political
attitudes in the context of rapid institutional change? To answer these
questions this project will study Russia, state socialism's birthplace and
paradigmatic incarnation. To address the important theoretical issues, this
research will collect the following data (and usual demographic indicators)
combined in one survey: 1) employment histories since 1987, to trace job shift
and labor force participation patterns since the onset of economic reforms; 2)
social origins and background characteristics from the pre-reform era, including
respondents' and parents' involvement in the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, to determine how one's standing in the previous social order shapes life
chances in the new institutional context; 3) longitudinal data on current
employment, household structure, and material standing, to illuminate what
shapes individual-level success and failure as institutional change proceeds;
and 4) longitudinal data on economic and political attitudes, to reveal the
dynamic interplay of attitudes, employment, and income, and to assess the
reliability of attitude measures in Russia. The Survey of Employment, Income,
and Attitudes in Russia (SEIAR) will provide the first wave of what will
eventually be a panel study of employment, income and attitude dynamics. SEIAR
will be fielded in two stages, one in November 1997, one in January 1998. A
supplemental battery of 35 questions will be added to the bi-monthly "Omnibus"
surveys con ducted by the All-Russian Center for Public Opinion and Market
Research (VCIOM). Since the Omnibus surveys already contain some of the
necessary information, 35 items will suffice to provide the full content
described above. The two data sets will be pooled (anticipated N=4800).
Moreover, to determine the feasibility of an eventual panel survey, respondents
will be asked if they are willing to be re-interviewed and the appropriate
records will be kept. The unique timing and content of the survey will permit
qualitative leaps in our knowledge regarding employment, stratification, and
attitudes in Russia. In particular, the data will facilitate studies of how the
Russian labor market has evolved over the course of the reform period, what
shapes material success and failure in the post-Soviet era, how status in the
Soviet period influences post-Soviet material situation, and what determines
Russians' economic views. The data will be especially useful should a panel
study eventuate from this initial round. However, the initial round will yield
important insights by itself, and it is necessary in order to determine whether
a longitudinal study on these topics is viable.