* 9729391
* Research Experiences for Biology Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Steven Oppenheimer, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 08/31/2003
* USD 395,772.00

9729391 Oppenheimer Forty-grade 5-12 life science and integrated science
teachers per year for three years will be engaged in six-week summer experiences
in the laboratories of working research scientists. It is planned that the
research experiences will be translated into classroom instructional practices
as recommended by the National Research Council's National Science Education
Standards. TO this end an educator in the teacher preparation will assist
teachers in bridging these two areas with the specific aim of improving science
teaching and instruction. The six-week research experiences will also include
four enrichment activities on translation into best classroom instruction,
teacher assessment of student work, bioethics, and recombinant DNA technology.
Two seminars will prepare the scientist mentors for their work with the teachers
prior to the start of each summer program. The scientists will make continued
research experiences available during the academic year for teachers interested
in continuing their research projects. Extensive outreach efforts will target
teachers from schools with 50-95% underrepresented. Letters from principals have
been received that pledge funds for supplies to implement student research
projects in the classes of project teachers. Nobel Laureate Francis Crick will
work with the teachers motivating them to excel in the program. A student
research symposium will be held on or about June 1 of each year for students of
the project teachers to present their research. Students will also publish their
research in the Journal of Student Research Abstracts and teachers will publish
their work with their mentor scientists and present their work at meetings of
professional societies. The journal will be supported entirely by CSU,
Northridge. Curriculum expert, Dr. Norman Herr will assist all teachers in the
transfer of their research experiences into a classroom research curriculum.
Classroom expert, Dr. Hakansson from UCLA and research expert Dr. Epel from
Stanford will direct evaluation. Evaluation will include careful examination of
teacher and student products, laboratory and classroom visitation and extensive
use of case study modality. The project will be institutionalized from day one
of the program through a biology department course (Biology 699) that will
permanently provide teachers with research experiences in the laboratories of
research scientists at CSU, Northridge. This project is intended to serve as a
national model for the effective transfer of research experiences of teachers
into best classroom student research training practices in the proper use of the
scientific method and extensive peer review at every step of the research
project. The project is to also serve as a model for institutionalizing teacher
research experiences through university courses.