* 9729124
* De Novo Design of Helical Electron Transfer Metalloproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2001
* George McLendon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2001
* USD 418,000.00

Dr. McLendon is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program to perform experimental studies of electron transfer in
metalloproteins. McLendon has proposed to use three-helix peptide bundles to
probe structural relationships in long-range electron coupling in proteins.
Having demonstrated a synthetic methodology that allows systematic protein
structural variations, rigidly linked acceptor/donor moieties may be introduced
at known distances. This advancement in the art will allow the examination of
distance dependence upon electron transfer along a helix. A second aspect of the
proposal involves derivatization of hydrogen bonding sites on the helix. In the
absence of significant perturbations to helix structure or stability, the
proposed modification will help determine the role of hydrogen bonding pathways
in electronic coupling. Additionally, electron transfer through side chains and
the effect of aromatic residues on the rate of electron transfer will be
investigated. Understanding electron transfer in metalloproteins has been
limited by the ability of chemists to control protein structure, particularly
access to redox mediating functional groups. By coupling established measurement
techniques with systematic protein structural variation methods, roadblocks to
the full elucidation of this phenomenon may be overcome.