* 9729848
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Parallel and Distributed     Constraint Programming Systems on Multiprocessor PCs:       Implementations and Applications
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Janyce Wiebe, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/1999
* USD 37,907.00

9729848 Gupta, Gopal New Mexico State University CISE Instrumentation: Parallel
and Distributed Constraint Programming Systems on Multiprocessor PCs:
Implementations and Applications This research instrumentation serves to support
the purchase of four-processor Pentium-based multiprocessors and a fast Ethernet
hub to enable the following projects in parallel and distributed computing at
the NMSU Computer Science: - Parallel and Distributed Constraint Logic
Programming Systems,- A Concurrent Constraint-based Unified Framework for
Internet Programming, - Parallel Constraint-based Natural Language Processing,
and- Parallel Specification and Verification of Real-time Systems,all sharing
the common theme of constraint-based technology. For the projects cited, the
purchased equipment facilitates: first, the design and implementation of systems
that exploit parallelism implicit in logic and constraint programs; second, the
distributed network is enabling the prototyping of a unified framework for
Internet programming, encompassing symbolic constraints and concurrency; third,
parallel constraint software technology will significantly speed up the
execution of large natural language processing applications; and fourth, the
development of parallel tools for verifying large, complex real-time systems.
Parallelism and distributivity are key to accomplishing the goals of these
projects. The chosen platform is cost-effective, flexible, and provides a
balance between shared memory multiprocessors, which are efficient but not
scalable, and distributed networks of processors, which are less efficient but
scalable.