* 9729065
* Collaborative Research: Architecture of Functional          Categories in American Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,06/08/1999
* Judy Kegl, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/08/1999
* USD 52,000.00

This project represents a continuation of research into the syntactic structure
of American Sign Language (ASL), funded by NSF grant #SBR-9410562. The research
agenda has been to investigate the distribution of functional categories in ASL.
Functional categories are those that signal structural relationships among
lexical categories. For example, functional categories, such as Tense, Aspect,
and Agreement, contain grammatical information that is often expressed
morphologically through inflection. Different languages make productive use of
different subsets of grammatical categories. It is the characteristics of
functional categories that establish basic sentence structure and determine
typological variation. The goal has been to uncover the syntactic structure of
ASL through examination of functional categories. Research to date has
investigated a large number of syntactic constructions in the language, focusing
most intensely on Tense and person Agreement projections, as well as the higher
level projection relevant to the structure of questions. With respect to these
three areas, our results have diverged from previous beliefs about ASL. We have
demonstrated the existence of lexical tense markers (contrary to the belief that
ASL lacks grammatical tense). Our discovery of non-manual syntactic markings of
agreement has provided new insights into the nature of agreement, its
representation in the syntax, and its relation to the distribution of null
pronouns. Our analysis of questions challenges previous claims about the
mechanism of question formation in ASL, as well as claims that have been made
about purported constraints on phrase structure and movement processes in
language generally. The syntactic research on functional categories will now
extend to several additional projections that display interesting interactions
with those that we have already studied. For example, Aspect has not only manual
instantiations (which have been described in the l iterature) but also
interesting non-manual correlates that have not yet been examined. We will also
extend our work on agreement to number agreement, both within the clause and the
determiner phrase. In addition, we will address several syntactic projections
above the level of TP (the clause). Finally, we will complement our studies of
the functional structure of ASL with studies of the verb lexicon, focusing on
the argument-taking properties of particular classes of verbs.