* 9729103
* Cognition East and West: Attention Categorization, and      Reasoning for East Asians and European Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Richard Nisbett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 02/28/2002
* USD 276,000.00

This project will investigate the contention of scholars in many fields that
East Asians and people who are products of European culture reason differently.
East Asians are held to reason holistically, attending to the `field` or context
in which objects are embedded and attributing causality to interactions between
the object (person, animal, or thing) and the field. Also, there is no tradition
of formal logic in East Asia; instead there is a preference for `dialectical`
reasoning in which opposing facts or points of view are resolved. Europeans are
held to be analytic, attempting to discern properties of the object and
attributing causality to such properties. Formal logic plays a role in reasoning
and is used to create general laws about the behavior of objects based on their
category memberships. Preliminary research provides some support for these
hypotheses. For example, Americans tend to explain the behavior of people by
referring exclusively to personality traits, whereas East Asians understand the
same behavior in terms of the social context. East Asians are less likely to use
categories in making inductive inferences, for example, to spontaneously think
of `mammals` when asked to generalize from one animal to another. East Asians
more accurately detect covariation among arbitrary stimulus events in the
environment, such as those presented in different locations on a computer
screen. Asian students like dialectic proverbs, that is, those involving a
contradiction, and prefer dialectic to linear arguments. This project will build
on the preliminary findings by examining 1) the tendency to classify objects
using categories based on formal rules vs. memory for similar objects; 2) the
ability to detect relationships among features of an object vs. ability to
detect covariation among events in the field; 3) the degree to which attention
is paid to the object vs. the field; 4) the degree to which causal attribution
for events is to the object vs. to the field; and 5) the ability to learn and
use abstract rules for reasoning. Participants will be Americans studied in the
U.S., and Chinese studied in the U. S. and China. Additional work will study the
social factors which presumably underlie the cultural differences: the
prediction is that attention to the social field with be associated with
holistic reasoning style within both cultural groups. Results are expected to
raise serious questions about the universality of cognitive processes commonly
regarded as basic and to suggest that psychologists may not have correctly
identified the `fault lines` of cognition. For example, the importance of
categories and formal inductive and deductive rules may be less great than
generally presumed. The results can also be expected to suggest that there may
be different styles of learning that should be taken into consideration when
teaching members of different groups; and to provide evidence that cultural
diversity of work groups has advantages for problem-solving. Finally, the
results are relevant to understanding interaction between Asians and Americans
in business and government contexts: The two groups are likely to have different
and potentially conflicting understandings of the motives underlying behavior.