* 9729146
* Gas Phase Ion Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 02/28/2002
* USD 804,048.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Michael T. Bowers of the
University of California-Santa Barbara in his continuing studies of sigma bond
activation at transition metal centers. Prof. Bowers will investigate clustering
of second row metals with dihydrogen, reactions of first and second row metals
with methane and other small alkanes, the role of different ligands in tuning
reactivity, and cluster assisted sigma-bond activation. In addition, he will
focus on a new effort studying macromolecular systems. He will exploit gas phase
H/D exchange as a complementary method for conformational analysis of
biologically interesting systems; specifically, he will investigate polymer
conformation, folding dynamics and energetics as a function of repeat number. He
also plans to study host/guest systems, in particular the influence of solvation
on host selectivity. To support the biological studies, Prof. Bowers will
construct a bright electrospray based mass spectrometer. Gas phase ion chemistry
and the related discipline of mass spectrometry have made huge strides during
the past decade, especially in the past five years. Much of this progress is due
to technological breakthroughs in detector design, ion sources and the
availability of bigger, faster and especially cheaper computers. Further
development of this powerful analytical tool as applied to bond activation at
metal centers will improve understanding of the behavior of heterogeneous
catalysts, used extensively in many industrial processes. Prof. Bower's present
effort focusing on macromolecular systems will provide structural information on
these larger species.