* 9729032
* Support for a Geological Society of America's Penrose       Conference Entitled "Linking Spatial and Temporal Scales in Paleoecology and Ecology," May 1998, Annapolis, Maryland
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1997,11/30/1998
* Andrew Cohen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 11/30/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9729032 Cohen This proposal provides a rationale for partial funding from the
National Science Foundation in support of a Penrose conference entitled "Linking
spatial and temporal scales in paleoecology and ecology". The Penrose conference
series is the primary research conference series of the Geological Society of
America (GSA). Because of its interdisciplinary nature, this conference is being
cosponsored by the Ecological Society of America (ESA) and the Paleontological
Society (PS). Here we provide a rationale for NSF funding, which will be used to
cover travel and conference costs for key U.S. and international speakers, and
to allow for increased graduate student participation. The idea for holding this
meeting arose out of long-standing discussions among the conveners concerning
the need to increase communication between paleoecologists and ecologists. Long
standing splits in departmental affiliation (geology vs. organismal biology),
professional society affiliation and training have hampered communication
channels between the two disciplines. However the need for such an informational
exchange and synthesis has become greater than ever as a result of cross-cutting
societal problems such as impending global climate change and loss of
biodiversity that will depend on information input from both fields. Through the
use of brief formal introductory talks, followed by extensive periods for poster
sessions, panel discussions and open workshops we hope to achieve a synthesis of
how the two disciplines can interact more effectively in the future. We have two
goals for the conference support funding we request from NSF. First, we want to
insure that outstanding scientists who share our goals of interdisciplinary
synthesis are well represented at the conference. Second, we want to promote
this goal in the upcoming generation of graduate students in ecology and
paleoecology, by providing them with cross disciplinary contacts early in their
careers and breaking down traditional cross -disciplinary barriers that often
make this leap more difficult later in one's career.