* 9729262
* SGER:  High-Resolution Isotope Paleotemperature Record and  Implications for Quaternary Climate Changes in the          Caribbean, Based on Speleothems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Keddy Yemane, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2000
* USD 16,695.00

9729262 Yemane Quaternary Caribbean climates are predominantly derived from data
collected from environments. Based on micropaleontological data CLIMAP concluded
that the tropical ocean belt during the Quaternary had sea surface temperatures
(SST) similar to or slightly warmer than the present, and that there was no
warming between the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the Holocene. (18O values of
planktonic foraminifera infer small (<3(C) temperature changes whereas, those on
corals suggest that early Holocene SST for the tropical ocean dropped by as much
as 6.5(C than the present. Another study on rare gasses dissolved in ice age
ground water suggest that LGM temperatures were 5(C colder than today's surface
continental temperatures. Similarly, COHMAP numerical models based on general
circulation patterns suggest a cooler tropical ocean where the average annual
temperature may have been as low as 7-9(C cooler during the Last Glacial Maximum
(LGM), but steadily increased to the present. Although post-glacial anomalies
show that tropical climate is sensitive to subtle changes in climate forcing
mechanisms, the tropics are generally presumed to have buffered the effects of
recent climate changes. Since SST's may not accurately reflect terrestrial
climates, it is necessary to obtain independent paleoclimatic data from
terrestrial environments. Continental datasets, such as from speleothems in
Puerto Rico, can be used to evaluate the published climatic retrodictions and
numerical climate models for the Caribbean, as well as perhaps assist in
predicting future climate trends. Speleothems form by the precipitation of CaCO3
as vadose seepage waters enter a cave and lose CO2 to the cave atmosphere.
Assuming that calcite deposition had occurred under conditions of oxygen isotope
equilibrium, (18O measurements of the cave calcite would reflect surface
paleotemperatures. The proposed study aims to establish a paleotemperature proxy
record from Puerto Rico, which will broaden the database fo r Quaternary climate
changes in the tropics. Thickness of carbonate growth layers will be measured to
determine the rate of growth. Cathodoluminescent, UV-fluorescence, and XRD
studies on individual growth layers will be used to evaluate recrystallisation,
carbonate alteration, and organic matter input. Concentration of trace and
ultra-trace elements in the speleothem samples will be measured by ICP-AES.
Absolute chronostratigraphy will be established on strategically selected
samples by 230Th/234U series method using high-precision thermal ionization mass
spectrometer. (18O and (13C ratios will be measured on samples collected along
the axis of the speleothem on a high-precision automated mass spectrometer. The
resulting paleotemperature record will be compared to published data, as well as
will be used to constrain the climatic and hydrologic processes on continental
masses in the Caribbean Sea.