* 9729295
* Implementing Consumer Right-To-Know Provisions:  A          Normative &amp; Conceptual Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Robert Wachbroit, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/2000
* USD 133,050.00

The 1996 Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) makes fundamental changes in
national goals with respect to pesticide regulation and use. This project will
analyze the normative and conceptual issues underlying the shift, particularly
with respect to `consumer right-to-know` provisions. The multi-disciplinary team
of investigators will identify the nature and kinds of values to which the
legislation responds, examining values ranging from trespass and wrongful harm
to efficiency and wealth production, in relationship to right-to-know provisions
in the law. They will review federal and state programs and policies, as well as
the food information and consumer right-to-know literatures, with particular
attention to measures of effectiveness and perceptions of fairness, and to ways
to adapt lessons from published experience to the FQPA requirements. This
comprehensive catalogue of consumer right-to-know strategies and federal and
state programs and policies will be classified according to which values and
interests they serve. The investigation will discuss the civil, social,
economic, industrial, and moral implications of the analysis and propose
guidelines for consideration by legislators, regulators, and others. It will
identify a series of qualitative and quantitative research projects whose
results could help to support, refute, or augment the recommendations. The
project will result in papers, presentations, and a book.