* 9729809
* CISE Instrumentation: Acquisition of a Multidisciplinary    Research in Computing
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Manoj Franklin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1998
* USD 60,994.00

9729809 Franklin, Manoj Clemson University CISE Research Instrumentation:
Acquisition of a Multiprocessor for Multidisciplinary Research in Computing This
research instrumentation award serves to acquire a multiprocessor system which
will enable the following research projects:- Instruction-Level Parallel
Processors,- Automatic Generation of Benchmarks for Shared Memory Computers, -
Finite Element Computations in Structural Acoustics,- Performance Validation of
Nonlinear Controllers for Magnetic Bearings, and - Nonlinear Vibrations of
Coupled Fluid-Structure Systems. Each of these projects involves the development
of large simulators and the use of compute-intensive simulations that require
powerful dedicated processors, large RAM capacity, and large I/O capacity.
Research in ILP processing involves developing decentralized execution models
and studying them by detailed, parallel simulators. Research in automatic
benchmark generation involves developing techniques to automatically generate
multiprocessor benchmark programs from concise algorithm specifications, which
aids in identifying the top-performing algorithm on an individual system basis.
Research on finite element computations deals with predicting wave propagation
from large structures by developing and implementing high-order space-time
finite element methods and appropriate data structures for simulating them on
multiprocessors. Research on nonlinear controllers involves the development of
improved nonlinear dynamic models for active magnetic bearing, and their
validation via dynamic simulation on multiprocessors. Research on nonlinear
vibrations focuses on using multiprocessors to develop models and
computationally intensive techniques to solve the equilibrium and linearized
vibration of complex, nonlinear, fluid-structure systems used in textiles and
high performance underwater cable structures applications.