* 9729889
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Infrastructure to Support   Accurate Performance Measurements of Multithreaded Programs
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* William Cohen, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2000
* USD 55,000.00

9729889 Cohen, William E. Kavi, Krishna The University of Alabama at Huntsville
CISE Research Instrumentation: Infrastructure to Support Accurate Performance
Measurements of Multithreaded Programs This research instrumentation enables the
following research projects: - Pre-Load/Post-Store (PL/PS) architecture, - Fine-
grained scheduling of multithreaded applications, and - Performance evaluation
of the Java language. To support the aforementioned projects, the University of
Alabama at Huntsville (UAH) will purchase a 4-processor SMP system and data
logging hardware (NIST MultiKron II instrumentation board) which will provide an
environment for experimental research in Computer and Information Science and
Engineering. The system's low-overhead hardware/software instrumentation enables
accurate performance measurements of multithreaded software and multithreaded
architectures without resorting to slow, often intrusive, software simulation
techniques. Research topics supported by this instrumentation include the
evaluation of the Pre-Load/Post-Store (PL/PS) architecture, the comparison of
adaptive and static fine-grained task scheduling techniques, and the examination
of runtime performance of multithreaded Java programs. The PL/PS architecture
breaks each task in a program into three phases: load, compute, and store.
Separating the phases of each task allows greater flexiblity in scheduling the
code and provides a means of hiding memory and communication latencies. Detailed
simulators and compiler optimizations are being developed for the architecture.
The fine-grained scheduling examines the overhead introduced on contemporary
hardware/software environments by the various scheduling techniques applied to
suites of real-world problems. The Java performance evaluation investigates the
viability of Java as a programming language for high-performance computing and
identifies features in the languages that limit performance. A better
understanding of these topics will lead to techniques to improve the performance
of multithreaded programs and architectures.