* 9729297
* Structural Studies of Defects, Disorder and Phase           Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Simon Moss, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

Moss&lt;br/&gt;9729297&lt;br/&gt;This research project in materials physics
employs x-ray and neutron scattering methods to address a range of problems in
the structure of matter. The interest on the one hand is with atomic structure
relationships, and on the other with those details that lead to important
physical properties. Topics include interfacial disorder in multilayers,
replacive disorder and order-disorder transitions in metals, semiconductors and
superconductors; orientational disorder in molecular solids; displacive disorder
in structural transitions, and the effects of surface on disorder and phase
transitions. The project includes computer modeling and simulation, and
collaborations with theorists. Materials under study include quasicrystals,
superconductors, fullerenes, vanadium hydrides, metals with martensitic
transitions, and multilayers of various metals. The research provides excellent
training for graduate students and post-doctoral associates in x-ray, neutron,
synchrotron x-ray and small angle x-ray scattering methods. Because of the
breadth of materials under study, students receive an excellent background in
materials physics and are prepared for a range of scientific or technical
careers.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This research project in materials physics
uses x-rays and neutrons to probe atomic arrangements in many different types of
materials. The task is first to determine how the atoms are arrange in the
solids and then to determine how the physical properties of the materials depend
on the atomic arrangements. The materials under study include high-Tc
superconductors, metals, fullerenes (bucky-balls), semiconductors, and
multilayers of metals and semiconductors. The experiments depend strongly on
computer modeling and simulation, and interaction with theorists. The research
provides excellent training for graduate students and post-doctoral associates
in x-ray, neutron, synchrotron x-ray and small angle x-ray scattering methods.
Because of the breadth of materials under study, students receive an excellent
background in materials physics and are prepared for a range of scientific or
technical careers.&lt;br/&gt;