* 9729643
* Sexual Differeniation of Glia
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2001
* Margaret McCarthy, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/2001
* USD 250,119.00

9729643 McCarthy Throughout the mammalian lifespan, the central nervous system
is a target organ for the actions of steroid hormones. This is most clearly
illustrated in the developing brain where exposure to gonadal steroid hormones
permanently change its structure and function. Indeed, differences in behavior
between males and females result from differential exposure to androgens and
estrogens during a sensitive period of development. The hypothalamus is one of
the critical brain regions where steroids modulate neuronal activity. While most
of the research is directed towards understanding the mechanisms by which
steroids hormones interact with neurons, the brain is also packed with non-
neuronal glial cells. Recently, it has become clear that glial cells modulate
neural development and activity, and can undergo remodeling in response to
fluctuation in gonadal steroid levels. Dr. McCarthy has reported that there are
enormous changes in the morphology of glia in the hypothalamus after exposure to
testosterone during the first few days after birth. She will now determine the
significance of these morphological changes by further characterizing the
steroid modulation of neonatal glia in regards to steroid sensitivity,
specificity, and site of action. Moreover, Dr. McCarthy will use state of the
art microscopy to analyze the mechanism of neuronal-glial communication with
sexual dimorphic regions within the hypothalamus. These studies will determine
how changes in the shape of glial cells impact on that of the nearby neurons and
alters brain development. Understanding how gonadal steroids influence the
developing brain helps us to understand the etiology of neurological disorders
that effect males and females differently as well as serving as an excellent
model for examining the complex process of normal brain development and neural
plasticity. The results will also help us elucidate how the basic structure of
the brain is related to behavior.