* 9729524
* Regulation and Assembly of a Type III Protein Secretion     Apparatus in Pseudomonas syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Steven Hutcheson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Hutcheson 9729524 Type III protein secretion systems are required for the
pathogenicity of many mammalian and plant pathogenic bacteria. This type of
secretion system has been associated with the trans-location of proteins from
bacteria into target cells of the host. We have previously shown that the
hrp/hrmA gene cluster isolated from Pseudomonas syringae Pss61 encodes for the
conserved components of a putative type III protein export apparatus (PEA) as
well as an apparently dedicated regulatory system involving HrpL. Pathogenesis
by P. syringae is thus likely to involve adhesion of the bacteria to plant
cells, plant cell contact-dependent induction of hrp gene expression, assembly
of a hrp-encoded type III PEA and translocation of virulence and host range
determinants into target plant cells. The mechanisms for coordinating assembly
of the PEA have only been partially characterized thus far. The overall goal of
this project will be to elucidate the mechanisms controlling assembly of the
hrp-encoded PEA and define the role of the PEA in the pathogenicity of P.
syringae strains. In the proposed experiments we will: 1) complete the
characterization of the HrpL-dependent regulatory system; 2) use a novel
reporter gene system to dissect the secretion pathway for Avr products; and 3)
employ a genetic screen to identify the genetic determinants regulated by HrpL-
linked regulatory system. Plants have the capability to recognize and respond to
invading pathogens to protect themselves and thereby minimize disease. This
involves recognition of pathogen signals by the cells of the plant. The hrp
genes of Pseudomonas syringae have been shown to function in the recognition
process and the products of these bacterial genes are predicted to form an
apparatus that injects proteins into plants cells. These injected proteins are
the stimulus to which the plant cells respond. These experiments will use a
genetic approach to investigate early steps in the recognition process.
Elucidation of the regulation a nd function of the hrp-encoded secretion
apparatus will influence current research in molecular plant-microbe
interactions by providing insights into: 1) molecules and regulatory pathways
controlling disease resistance in plants; 2 innate mechanisms controlling
pathogenicity of bacteria in plants; 3) new strategies for breeding stable crop
resistance against a broad array of pathogens by targeting specific attributes
of the pathogen; and 4) evolution of protein secretion systems functioning in
the pathogenicity of mammalian and plant pathogens.