* 9729030
* RUI: Mapping Attractor Fields in Face and Object Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* James Tanaka, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 06/30/2003
* USD 214,000.00

A familiar face, such as the face of a colleague or relative, is easily
recognized despite changes in expression, viewing angle, and age. Face
recognition processes are robust in the sense that a face memory can be
triggered by a broad spectrum of perceptual stimuli. The many-to-one mapping of
face stimuli to a single face memory may be described as a face representation's
`attractor field.` According to this approach, a given face memory will be
activated by any perceptual stimuli falling within the boundary of its attractor
field. In this project the attractor field concept is investigated by probing
the boundaries that separate competing face memories in recognition. Boundary
testing is performed using an image technique known as morphing in which two
face images are spatially averaged to produce a morphed face image. An attractor
field boundary is defined as the point at which identification of the morphed
image switches from one competing face memory to the other. The goal of the
research is to understand how attractor fields might function in face and object
recognition processes. This problem is approached first by determining the
factors that influence the size of face memory's attractor field, and second by
investigating how learning and experience might modify the properties of an
attractor field. While the experiments are aimed at providing an account of
attractor fields in face recognition, the proposal also addresses the role that
attractor fields might play in general object recognition processes by examining
their function in the recognition of non-face objects (i.e., cars, birds, dot
patterns). Finally, the proposal investigates the computational principles of
attractor field recognition in a series of neural network simulations.