* 9729514
* Lexical Representation and Sentence Comprehension: A        Multidisciplinary Conference, New Brunswick, NJ, March 19-21 1998
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Suzanne Stevenson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 16,072.00

A special conference session entitled "Lexical Representation and Sentence
Comprehension: A Multidisciplinary Perspective," will be held in conjunction
with the 11th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, March 19-21,
1998. Lexical influences on processing are currently a major focus of attention
in psycholinguistic studies of sentence comprehension; however, much of the work
remains isolated from the vast amount of scientific activity on the topic of the
lexicon in other subdisciplines. This is an opportune time to bring together
researchers from these different perspectives to exchange ideas and information
that can help to inform each others' work. For the special session, the
organizers have invited four speakers from linguistics, computer science, and
philosophy who have made significant contributions to recent research on the
lexicon in their fields, concerning the structure of lexical information and the
computation of probabilistic models over lexical features. In addition, three
discussants from the mainstream sentence processing community will play a key
role in the session, by elaborating on those aspects of the invited talks that
are of particular relevance to theories of human sentence processing. The
proposed special session, along with a panel discussion and a set of talks and
posters selected from submitted abstracts on the topic, will provide a unique
and timely multidisciplinary exchange between the relevant areas of research.
The CUNY conference is particularly well-suited to host the special session
because of its multidisciplinary nature, attracting psychologists, linguists,
and computer scientists who investigate all aspects of the human sentence
processing mechanism. In order to continue the dialogue on lexical
representation among the various fields, the organizers plan to publish an
edited volume containing the papers from the special session.