* 9729056
* Lexical Guidance During Syntactic Generation, Selection, andReanalysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1998,02/29/2000
* Julie Boland, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 02/29/2000
* USD 120,709.00

This project investigates how syntactic representations are initially developed
during sentence comprehension, and how recovery proceeds when the initial
analysis turns out to be incorrect. As in constraint based lexicalist
approaches, the focus is on the interface between word recognition and sentence
understanding. However, the primary goal is to directly test some assumptions
that constraint based lexicalists often make: (1) structural alternatives are
generated and evaluated in parallel, (2) syntactic selection immediately follows
the generation of alternatives, and (3) all relevant classes of lexical
knowledge are used in the earliest stages of syntactic analysis. This project
diverges from most constraint-based approaches by making a distinction between
syntactic generation and syntactic selection. However, the current approach
differs from the incremental model and the garden path/construal model in many
ways. Notably, the proposed experiments examine the possibilities that syntactic
generation may be influenced by lexical probabilities, and that semantic
processing is not wholly parasitic upon syntactic processing. Both possibilities
are common elements of constraint based models. Thus in the current proposal,
syntactic and semantic processing will be measured independently to the extent
that it is possible to do so using some new experimental paradigms. This project
challenges some of the basic assumptions made by researchers in sentence
processing, and explores experimental paradigms that may be able to test these
assumptions directly. The first set of studies is methodologically oriented,
combining three experimental strategies. Reading times measure on line
processing difficulty, and the cross modal integration paradigm and event-
related brain potentials differentiate the syntactic and semantic levels of
processing. The second set of studies investigates sentences containing sense
ambiguous verbs like pass and tense ambiguous verbs like raced. Both lexical
ambiguities create structural ambiguities, and cross modal naming will be used
to test the hypothesis that lexically defined syntactic alternatives are
generated in parallel. Additional experiments evaluate the hypotheses that the
structural alternatives are weighted by relative frequency, and that error
recovery is facilitated if the (unselected) syntactic alternative is still
accessible. The third set of studies investigates prepositional phrase
attachment ambiguity. Preliminary studies using on line sensibleness judgments
have suggested that non structural lexical information influences processing
difficulty in sentences like John gave the letter to his son to a friend. The
studies use reading time paradigms to test the hypothesis that verb argument
structure and/or probabilistic information influence the timing and outcome of
the attachment decision. Additional experiments measure event related brain
potentials in order to learn whether the observed processing difficulty is
caused by a semantic anomaly (eliciting an N400), syntactic anomaly (eliciting a
P600), or both.