* 9729762
* A Transnational Database on Household Income
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2001
* Timothy Smeeding, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2001
* USD 102,000.00

This is a transnational study of household income. The Luxembourg Income Study
(LIS) database project consists of comparable microdata on the composition of
households and the structure of their incomes for 27 industrialized economies as
of July 1997. It has also added labor force survey data for 14 nations under
another subtitle, the Luxembourg Employment Study (LES). Over the past ten
years, the LIS project has demonstrated its feasibility and usefulness as an
internationally sponsored and researcher-lead database infrastructure project.
It provides the means for researchers to make accurate cross-national
comparisons of economic status for several nations on a simultaneous basis,
addressing such questions as whether inequality is currently increasing in the
most advanced, industrial nations. In particular, it is used extensively to
compare levels of relative and absolute poverty across countries and over time.
This award provides core support for the Luxembourg Income Study for a period of
three years. During that time there will be several improvements in database
management (more sophisticated electronic access system, direct availability of
some data to qualified users, better on-line documentation, fourth wave of data
for the mid-1990s, new surveys of the labor force); in research (inequality,
poverty, and gender studies); in training (annual LIS workshops in the United
States, in Europe and elsewhere); in setting new international standards for
income distribution statistics; in developing purchasing power parities for
income distribution studies; and in providing US users with more direct access
to the other nations' surveys. The Luxembourg Income Study contributes to cross-
national comparative research in economics, sociology, and the social sciences
more generally. It strengthens graduate education and training in these fields,
and achieves advances in database management. The research made possible by the
LIS directly addresses central themes of the Human Capital Init iative, such as
overcoming poverty and deprivation, fostering successful families, reducing
disadvantage in a diverse society, educating for the future, and employing a
productive workforce. Moreover, it is a prototype for scientific facilities in
the social sciences including interdisciplinary, cross-national cooperative
ventures that strengthen the data infrastructure and promote research that is
liable to have important public policy implications.