* 9729979
* Collaborative Research:  The Emergence of Status Orders     in Discussion Groups
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Joseph Whitmeyer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2000
* USD 76,548.00

This project will examine the effects of neighborhood characteristics on
adolescents' school completion and educational attainment, sexual activity and
non-marital childbearing, and delinquency and drug use. The theoretical
framework is grounded most heavily in William J. Wilson's treatise dealing with
the impact of neighborhood disadvantage on inner-city social dislocations. The
primary explanatory variables will include indicators of the socioeconomic and
demographic status of the adolescent's neighborhood, such as the poverty rate,
the unemployment rate, racial composition, and mate availability. Special
attention will be given to the functional form of the relationship between
neighborhood economic disadvantage and these behaviors; the potentially
differential impact of neighborhood characteristics across different
socioeconomic, age, and racial groups; factors such as parental supervision,
educational and occupational aspirations, and peer group norms, that might
mediate the effects of neighborhood conditions on adolescent outcomes; and the
degree to which differences in the socioeconomic and demographic composition of
the neighborhoods inhabited by blacks and whites can explain the often
pronounced racial differences in educational attainment, premarital sexual
activity, and non-marital fertility. The analysis of this unique, multi-level
data set holds promise for refining theoretical models of how neighborhoods
affect life events and life chances, for testing recent claims regarding the
increasing concentration of disadvantaged groups in underclass areas, and for
informing public policies that address these issues.