* 9729633
* Collaborative Research:  Network Browser Security and Human Values:  Theory and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,09/30/1999
* Batya Friedman, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 09/30/1999
* USD 138,490.00

The common good of our information infrastructure depends on well designed
network security that is embraced by the public and private sectors. Well
designed network security requires well formed technical mechanisms and
responsiveness to underlying moral and societal values, as well as a well
thought out system of user interactions. In recent years, significant efforts
have been directed toward developing the technical dimensions of network
security, but little systematic work investigates and integrates the
corresponding dimensions of human values and user experience. This collaborative
project provides a model of interdisciplinary collaboration that can deepen our
understanding of the cognitive, ethical and social implications of new types of
inter-activity. It will study and implement security for a network browser that
integrates these three key considerations: technical excellence, responsiveness
to moral and societal values, and sensitivity to users' perceptions. It will:
(1) develop a conceptual framework, or model, for network security that accounts
for human values and user experience; (2) design and implement a working
prototype of a network security system guided by the conceptual model; and (3)
apply the experience of this project toward a better understanding of
methodology for the general purpose of designing technology that is responsive
to human values. Drawing on the technical, philosophical, and social science
expertise of the three investigators, the work will begin with a close study of
the network security in existing browsers such as Netscape 4.0 and Internet
Explorer 4.0. The goal is to characterize the technical mechanisms, grasp value
implications, and understand users' perceptions of these systems. Based on this
study, the investigators will develop a conceptual model that represents the
interaction among technical characteristics, values supported by (or embodied
in) the system, and users' perceptions of their interactive experience with it.
This model will guide the next phase of the project: to design and implement a
prototype for a security configuration that is explicitly responsive to values
and users' perceptions. User studies and further philosophical analysis of the
prototype will help to refine the security configuration and, ultimately, to
refine and assess the model itself. Through industry contacts and other
traditional methods, the investigators will disseminate the results of their
study, including the conceptual model, prototype, and aspects of the
multidisciplinary methodology they develop.