* 9729968
* The Physics of Plasma-Induced Charging Damage
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Konstantinos Giapis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 09/30/2002
* USD 280,000.00

ECS-9729968&lt;br/&gt;Giapis&lt;br/&gt;Patterned surfaces are frequently exposed
to plasmas as in plasma characterization through minuscule sampling orifices or
in applications ranging from etching, deposition, and ashing in
microelectronics, to selective surface functionalization. Frequently, the
patterns consist of dissimilar materials (insulating masks, conductive metal or
polysilicon, gate and field oxide), which charge up as a result of the
directionality difference between ions and electrons at the plasma-sheath exit.
Plasma-induced charging may cause ion deflection with undesirable consequences;
for example, mask charging leads to sidewall profile irregularities when etching
high aspect ratio features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we seek to
reveal the fundamental physics of plasma-induced charging &lt;br/&gt;through a
combined experimental and theoretical approach focused on dense sub-micron
&lt;br/&gt;patterns of insulators and conductors similar to those encountered
during plasma etching. &lt;br/&gt;Large-scale Monte Carlo simulation will
combine sheath dynamics, microstructure &lt;br/&gt;charging, electrostatics,
reactions, scattering, electron tunneling through t n insulators, and
&lt;br/&gt;surface currents to shed light into a variety of conflicting reports
on the influence of &lt;br/&gt;plasma parameters on charging damage. In
particular, we seek to understand the nature of &lt;br/&gt;the so called
"electron shading" damage, which causes catastrophic electron tunneling
&lt;br/&gt;currents through the gate oxide in polysilicon-on-insulator
structures. Significant modeling &lt;br/&gt;effort on pattern-dependent charging
effects will be expanded to include tunneling effects &lt;br/&gt;and surface
currents and will be used to predict:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) The influence of
electron temperature, rf bias, and rf frequency on charging damage.&lt;br/&gt;b)
Aspect-ratio-dependent charging effects. Is there a correlation between
microloading and electron shadowing?&lt;br/&gt;c) Mask thickness effects. How
will the use of thinner hard (oxide) masks impact charging damage?&lt;br/&gt;d)
Feature- and wafer-scale effects. Does charging of a particular feature affect
damage in neighboring trenches?&lt;br/&gt;e) Pulsed-plasma effects. Why do
pulsed plasmas reduce both forms of charging damage? &lt;br/&gt;f) New device-
layout rules for eliminating charging damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
simulation results will be validated by extensive etching experiments in a high
density plasma produced in a helical resonator&lt;br/&gt;