* 9729278
* Dissertation Research:  Household and Community Organizationof a Formative Period Bolivian Settlement
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Courtney Rose will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct surface survey and excavation at the
archaeological site of La Barca which is located in the La Joya region of
highland Bolivia. The site dates to the Wankarani period (1500 BC - Ad 400) and
consists of a mound approximately 6 meters high and 90 meters in diameter.
Architectural structures and features dating from the final phase of occupation
appear undisturbed and remain visible on the surface of the site. Thus they can
be exposed without deep excavation. The culture history of highland Bolivia
reflects a process which occurred in many parts of the world. During the Archaic
period people lived in small groups and subsisted by hunting and gathering. In
Wankarani times a more settled village way of life, based on agriculture and
llama pastoralism developed. MS Rose wishes to understand the nature of the
social process which accompanied this subsistence change. Hunters and gathers
are egalitarian. They share food, do not horde within the family and exhibit a
communal mode of organization. On the basis of archaeological work in the Andean
region, it appears that greater variability characterized the succeeding
agriculturists and pastoralists. Settlement organization and the distribution of
material remains indicate that some cultures maintained this communal mode while
in others a family and lineage based system appeared. Under this individual
social units stored food and engaged in relatively little sharing beyond the
family. Archaeologists have looked for a deeper pattern to explain this
variability and have focused on differences in the distribution, variability and
predictability in food resources. MS Rose will address this question in the
highland Bolivian environment. She will conduct a surface survey of La Barca and
on this basis select units for broad scale excavation. She will reconstruct the
village plan, map storage facilities to determine if these occur in communal or
family contexts and examine the distribution of material remains. On these bases
social and economic reconstruction should be possible. This research is
important because it will shed new light on the social processes which
accompanied the Neolithic Revolution and the development of a settled village
way of life. It will provide important data for a relatively unknown period in
the Andes and it will assist in training a promising young scientist.