* 9729230
* Teacher Education Addressing Mathematics and Science at     Wheelock College
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Linda French, Wheelock College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2000
* USD 163,727.00

This project is designed to continue the work done at Wheelock College under the
National Science Foundation funded Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
Preparation, Teacher Education Addressing Mathematics and Science in Boston and
Cambridge (TEAMS-BC) to improve mathematics and science education of students
preparing to teach young children in the elementary schools. Over the past three
years, with the support of TEAMS-BC, Wheelock has used six strategies to reform
its mathematics and science programs: The enhancement of the basic courses in
curriculum development with additional mathematics and science elements; The
development of new mathematics and science courses and the revision of existing
core courses that meet the distribution requirements to reflect an approach to
the teaching of science and mathematics that emphasizes the acquisition of basic
concepts in science and mathematics and inquiry and problem solving skills and
models effective teaching for understanding; The development, revision, and
extension of courses in science and mathematics education (methods courses) so
that they relate more closely to the mathematics and science courses and to
reflect more clearly and deeply the nature and strategies of teaching for
understanding; The enhancement of the Mathematics/Science Major and
intensification of recruitment activities; The development of a mathematics and
science specialty for students wishing to pursue mathematics and science in
greater depth; and The provision of opportunities for faculty and mentor
teachers to work together to enhance their skills in science and mathematics
teaching and mentoring. In this proposal, funds are requested to: (1) further
develop and finalize science and mathematics courses at the undergraduate and
graduate levels which were revised and/or introduced during the first three
years of TEAMS-BC; (2) complete the revision of the initial mathematics course
sequence for Wheelock undergraduates; (3) continue the development of tw o new
programs at Wheelock focusing on mathematics and science education (Specialty in
Teaching Mathematics and Science, Certificate in Teaching Mathematics); (4)
continue to collaborate with cooperating teachers on mentoring and science and
mathematics teaching at three professional development sites - the Holmes School
and the Young Achievers School in Boston and the King School in Cambridge; and
(5) prepare portfolios of key courses for dissemination within the college and
to other institutions.