* 9729390
* SGER:  Impact of Severe ENSO Events on Insular Endemic      Shorefish Populations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Gerard Wellington, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1999
* USD 19,642.00

Recent meteorological predictions indicate that a severe El Nino/Southern
Oscillation will develop during that latter part of 1997 and extend through
1998. This ENSO event is predicted to be comparable or more intense than the
1982/83 event the strongest ENSO recorded in this century. This SGER study will
gather baseline data for investigating the effects of this ENSO on recruitment
and population dynamics of reef fish populations in the Galapagos Islands. Of
particular interest is the effects of hybridization and introgression observed
between invading mainland species and island endemics that resulted from the
1982/83 ENSO. Recent work has found evidence to indicate that extensive
recruitment of the mainland damselfish species, Stegastes acapulcoensis in
Galapagos occurred during 1982 83. Currently extant populations of S.
acapulcoensis coexist in Galapagos alongside the island endemic, Stegastes
arcilrons. Otolith analyses of adult fish indicate that the first cohort of
these adults arrived in 1983. The population has subsequently grown, presumably
from local recruitment. In addition, a significant proportion of hybrids have
been detected by electrophoretic protein analyses. Dr. Wellington predicts that
another invasion will occur in early to mid 1998. He add associates will
document the distribution and intensity of recruitment of S. acapulcoensis in
the Galapagos Archipelago. These data will provide invaluable information needed
to predict potential effects of climate change on insular marine organisms.