* 9729940
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Isotopic Composition of Equus Tooth Enamel and Its Relationship to Diet
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Mitchel McClaran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 35,964.00

9729940 McClaran The C and O isotope composition of structural carbonate (and
phosphate) in the tooth enamel of fossil Equids has become widely used in
Cenozoic paleoenvironmental studies in south Asia, Africa, and North America.
Yet, with respect to modern horse (Equus), there is insufficient knowledge of
(1) what portion of the surrounding ecosystem the horses utilize for their diet,
(2) the relationship of the isotopic composition of dietary intake to the
isotopic composition of body water and dissolved CO2 in blood, and (3) the
inter-and intra-tooth isotopic variability in a given individual. A better
understanding of these uncertainties is important to decipher the environmental
significance of the C and O isotope composition of enamel. We propose to conduct
a two pronged study to answer these questions through: (1) controlled dietary
studies on experimental horses at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine and
(2) a two year study of two feral horse herds in which we (a) isotopically
characterize the surrounding ecosystem, (b) monitor the monthly plant species
composition, and isotopic composition, of the horse diet, (c) monitor the O
isotope composition of body water, (d) examine intra-tooth isotopic variability
in selected individuals, and (e) examine intra-tooth morphological and isotopic
variations. One impetus for this research is the observations reported in the
animal science and paleontological literature (as well asrecent findings by
isotope chemists) that Equus teeth form over a significant period of an
individual's life. While the exact chronology is somewhat uncertain, we believe
that teeth may potentially record both annual and seasonal variations in the
isotopic record of the past than previously recognized. Equally important,
potential isotopic variations within an individual caused by physiology, rather
than dietary intake, must be recognized for adequate interpretation of this
isotopic proxy. This research builds on pioneering studies of the relationshi p
between environmental water and the O isotope composition of enamel phosphate,
and on recent studies of in-tooth isotopic variability in fossil and modern
organisms. Our purpose here is to consolidate this existing knowledge into a
cohesive experimental design that will adequately answer the questions that
remain about Equus tooth enamel and its relevance as an isotopic proxy for
environmental conditions. This collaborative research will combine isotopic
expertise (Ronald Amundson, UC Berkeley), expertise in horse physiology and
surgery (John Pascoe, UC Davis), and experience in feral horse diet and habitat
(Martin Vavra, Oregon State University and Mitchel McClaran, University of
Arizona) into an integrated project that will thoroughly investigate the
questions addressed by the proposal.