* 9729996
* Natural Variations in Silicon Isotopes in Seawater Silicic  Acid and Marine Diatoms:  A New Tool for Studying the Marine Silica Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Michael DeNiro, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2003
* USD 380,564.00

9729996 Brzezinski In this project, researcher will test the utility of an
entirely new tracer for chemical oceanography. Analytical tools for measuring
silicon isotope natural abundance in biogenic silica from diatoms and dissolved
silicic acid from seawater have been developed and have been used to demonstrate
for the first time silicon isotope fractionation by marine diatoms during opal
biomineralization. The extent of fractionation is constant among species, and
does not vary measurably with temperature, suggesting a single fractionation
factor can be used to describe variations in silicon isotopic ratios due to
diatom growth in the sea. We propose to obtain data sets I) to assess rigorously
the role of biological fractionation in controlling the distribution of silicon
isotopes in the sea and ii) to evaluate silicon isotope natural abundance as a
measure of silica production in the surface ocean. The first goal will achieved
by analyzing samples of dissolved and particulate silica gathered from a number
of ocean basins. Additional samples will be obtained to define the isotopic
signature of the Si entering the sea through deep-sea hydrothermal vents and
rivers. The resulting data will be combined with numerical modeling to test the
hypothesis that the interplay among biological fractionation, the biological
pump and global thermohaline circulation governs the distribution of Si isotopes
in the sea. The response of the isotopic composition of dissolved and
particulate silica production in the surface water will be examined by comparing
time series of silica exported to depth. The samples from surface waters and
sediment traps for the proposed comparisons have been, or will be, collected
through existing research efforts allowing us to propose an extensive study at
low cost. Success will provide a powerful new tool for examining diatom activity
in the modern ocean and the ability to use variations in Si isotopes in sediment
cores to examine changes in silica production on geologic time scales.