* 9729144
* Collaborative Research: Organization of Nucleotide          Diversity in the Inversions of Drosophila pseudoobscura
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Wyatt Anderson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2001
* USD 123,806.00

Anderson 9729144 The research goals of this project are to test hypotheses about
the genetic forces that modulate variation of chromosomal alterations that
modify gene order known as inversions. The chromosomal inversions on the third
chromosome of Drosophila pseudoobscura have figured prominently in the
literature of evolutionary biology for more than fifty years. They have proven
to be a very useful model system for studies of geographic variation, natural
selection, gene flow, and genetic drift. The inversions seem to represent a
clear case of adaptive selection because they vary in frequency with the
environment, form classical clines, and in some populations there are seasonal
cycles of inversion frequency. The objective of this proposal is to determine
how selection acts on the genetic contents of inversions within and among D.
pseudoobscura populations. This research will discriminate between various
models of selection by analyzing nucleotide diversity of nine PCR amplified
markers uniformly distributed on the third chromosome of D. pseudoobscura. The
nine markers will be sequenced in D. pseudoobscura strains collected from four
populations that span an inversion frequency cline. Studies of molecular
evolution over the past two decades have focussed on the genetic forces that
shape diversity of single genes and have not considered if selection maintains
assemblages of linked genes on chromosomes. It is an open question whether the
association of genes on particular chromosomes within the genome happened due to
selection or accident. Inversions provide an important mechanism to maintain the
association of genetic diversity distributed across long distances of
chromosomes. This project will provide valuable data on the genetic forces that
modulate the evolution of large segments of the genome in natural populations.