* 9729087
* Support for a Meeting of the Heads and Chairs of Earth and  Space Sciences Departments to be held November 7-9, 1997    in Washington, D.C
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Eugene Bierly, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 08/31/2000
* USD 50,207.00

9729087 Bierly Several research studies by governmental and private groups have
addressed the changing research climate in the U.S. and also the changing
education environment at all levels, K-12 through post-graduate. These documents
all describe an academic environment in rapid transition with an emerging common
theme, the need for a closer integration of research and education.
Opportunities exist for restructuring or redirecting these programs in Earth and
Space Sciences. The American Geophysical Union proposes to convene a meeting of
the Heads and Chairs of Earth and Space Science Departments on "Support for
Education and Research in the Earth and Space Sciences" on November 7-9, 1997 at
the AGU building, 2000 Florida Ave., N.W., Washington, D. C. This meeting will
provide a forum for exchange of information and recommendations for the future
of these sciences. It will be the first such meeting of Heads and Chairs. AGU
anticipates convening these meetings on a biennial basis. Heads and Chairs of
academic programs offering undergraduate degrees in the Earth and space sciences
will be invited to participate. Earth and space science is broadly defined to
include atmospheric sciences, geochemistry, geology, geophysics, earth sciences,
hydrology, oceanography, aeronomy and space physics, and closely allied
disciplines. Goals include: 1) addressing the "integration of research and
undergraduate education" in the context of the Earth and Space Sciences,
especially as reflected in two recent reports of the Directorate of Geosciences,
National Science Foundation; 2) responding to observations and recommendations
regarding undergraduate education as detailed in the recent AGU May 1997 report
on the NSF funded workshop at AGU, November, 1996; and 3) recommending
priorities in undergraduate education to the AGU and other scientific and
science education societies in the Earth and Space Sciences and to federal,
state and local funding agencies.