* 9729251
* An International Conference on Turbulence: Challenges for   the 21st Century
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/1998,09/30/1998
* Katepalli Sreenivasan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 09/30/1998
* USD 14,000.00

Sreenivasan DMS9729251 "Turbulence: Challenges for the 21st Century" An
International Conference Wind gusts and roaring fires, tornadoes and hurricanes,
flows around ships and aircraft, flow through pipelines, pumps, turbomachinery,
as well as arteries, are some examples of turbulent motion of fluids. Our
ability to describe and predict turbulent phenomena strongly impacts such
diverse fields as environmental pollution, weather prediction, commercial
chemical processes, aircraft and ship design, ocean dynamics, and astrophysics.
Turbulence is thus a subject of great importance and demands serious attention.
Yet, it is one of the poorly understood subjects, despite about hundred years of
serious research. Why is this so? It is trite but true to say that it is a very
difficult subject. The difficulties stem from the fundamentally complex
dynamical characteristics of turbulence including, for example, strong
nonlinearity, the simultaneous presence of a large number of interacting degrees
of freedom across a wide range of spatial scales, marked departure from
statistical equilibrium, and so forth. More than $10^{18}$ degrees of freedom
can be excited in turbulent flows typical of atmospheric phenomena. This makes
full computer simulation of such flows impractical. Experimental studies have
also suffered because of approximations such as Taylor's hypothesis and the use
of one-dimensional surrogates for three-dimensional quantities. A confluence of
important advances has occurred in the last decade: new experimental tools have
emerged, and enabled direct measurement of spatio-temporal fields of turbulence,
and new parameter ranges are being explored in experiments by harnessing air at
high pressures or unconventional fluids such as helium. Direct numerical
simulation has become a powerful tool for the study of turbulence. Recent
improvements in computer memory and speed, especially the availability of we ll-
integrated massively parallel machines, have made computer simulation a useful
complement to laboratory experiments. In addition, greater insights into the
behavior of nonlinear partial differential equations are being acquired rapidly.
Together, these advances have had a qualitative impact on the understanding of
turbulence dynamics, and on the development of working models in engineering
practice. Particular progress has been achieved in the case of passive
admixtures (such as dye, water vapor, pollutants which are mixed by turbulence,
but do not feed back to the turbulent motion itself). For example, theoretical
predictions have been made for anomalous scaling in a class of passive
admixtures. These predictions are in turn supported by direct numerical
simulation. To assess these recent advances and define, where possible, new
directions for the field, a conference is being organized at Los Alamos between
the 25th and 28th of May 1998. The conference is being supported by the National
Science Foundation and the Los Alamos National Laboratory. The specific goal of
the conference is to provide an opportunity for scientists world-wide to
communicate recent critical advances in fundamental studies and engineering
applications of fluid turbulence, and to foster further development of this
broad field of nonlinear science.