* 9729875
* CISE Instrumentation: Applying Software Engineering         Methodologies to Robotics Tasks: A Cross Disciplinary       Approach
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Daniel Boley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 11/30/1999
* USD 64,011.00

9729875 Heimdahl, Mats, P.E. University of Minnesota, Twin Cities CISE Research
Instrumentation: Applying Software Engineering Methodologies to Robotics Tasks:
A Cross Disciplinary Approach This research instrumentation enables research
projects in:- Rapid Prototyping and Synthesis of Software for Embedded Systems,
- Studies of Different Issues in Vision-Based Robotic Grasping,- Sensor Fusion
in Vehicle Applications, and - Behaviors of Multiple Self-Interested Robots. To
support the aforementioned projects, the Department of Computer Science at the
University of Minnesota will purchase a VXI-bus embedded real-time software
development environment, several mobile platforms, and robot simulation software
which will be dedicated to research in software engineering, robotics, and
artificial intelligence. The equipment will be used for several research
projects, including in particular: requirements-based prototyping and synthesis
of control software for embedded systems, closed-loop vision-based robotic
grasping, sensor fusion for vehicle applications, and behaviors of multiple
self-interested robots. In addition to the contributions of the individual
projects, the collaboration between the PIs will help evaluate cutting edge
software engineering techniques on realistic projects (for example, evaluation
of scalability, evaluation of ease of use, and applicability to the domain) as
well as evaluate the use of rigorous software engineering techniques in robotics
and AI applications (for example, the effect on reuse of control algorithms, and
the effect on system performance, robustness, and safety). The equipment
purchase includes (1) a complete VXI-bus embedded software development
environment, (2) one VXI-bus embedded computer with interfaces for sensing and
control applications, (3) low-cost mobile platforms serving as testbeds for the
proposed projects, and (4) robotics simulations software to be used in task
planning and software prototyping.