* 9729990
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A Multiprocessor Platform   for Cross-Disciplinary Research in Parallel Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 11/30/1998
* USD 71,261.00

9729990 Teller, Patricia J. The University of Texas at El Paso CISE Research
Instrumentation: A Multiprocessor Platform for Cross-Disciplinary Research in
Parallel Systems This research instrumentation enables the following research
projects:- Dynamic and Adaptive Multiprocessor Resource Management, - Run-Time
Monitoring of Parallel Programs, and- A Parallel Implementation of SequenceL
Programs. To support the aforementioned projects, the Department of Computer
Science at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) will purchase additional
processors and memory, a star router to interconnect them, a DLT autochanger, a
spare hot-swappable hard drive, and software to upgrade their SGI/Cray Origin
2000. The upgraded multiprocessor system provides a platform that builds upon
funded-research efforts and creates new cross-disciplinary research
opportunities in the area of parallel systems. The system supports research in
computer and information science and engineering, in particular, research in:
end-to-end performance modeling of large, heterogeneous, adaptive
parallel/distributed computer/communication systems; dynamic and adaptive
multiprocessor resource management; run-time monitoring of sequential and
parallel programs; and very high-level parallel programming languages for data
mining applications. This research is significant because it addresses important
performance issues with respect to the design of future parallel architectures,
in particular, the memory hierarchy of these systems; the feasibility of run-
time monitoring of the integrity of software; and the effectiveness of mining
large databases. The research requires, and the system provides, the ability to:
characterize process resource demands, measure application performance, acquire
parameters for multiprocessor system modeling, validate multiprocessor
simulations, and perform parallel discrete event simulation. With these methods,
it is possible to evaluate the performance of dynamic and adaptive
multiprocessor resource management policies; various implementations of
integrity-constraint monitoring, in particular, concurrent processes; and very
high-level programming constructs.