* 9729311
* Studies on the Chemistry of Platinum Group Element          Complexes Relating to Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 12/31/2000
* USD 418,000.00

In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program, Dr. Richard Eisenberg of the University of
Rochester will continue his studies on the chemistry of platinum group element
complexes relating to homogeneous catalysis and bond activation. Part one of the
project is a continuation of mechanistic studies involving applications of
parahydrogen induced polarization (PHIP) to new organometallic systems. This
method can permit the detection of new hydride intermediates and may help
elucidate the mechanism of hydrogen addition. The activation of hydrogen by
oxidative addition to a variety of metal centers will be investigated, including
rhodium and iridium complexes capable of intramolecular C-H and C-C activation
and tantalocene hydrides. The addition of hydrogen to metal-nonmetal multiple
bonds contained in alkylidene, alkylidyne, imido and sulfido complexes will also
be studied in an effort to provide proof for a concerted 4-center addition.
Catalytic reactions that will be investigated by PHIP include asymmetric
hydrogenation and hydroformylation. Part two of the project focuses on the bond
activation and catalytic reactions of organometallic systems that exhibit
electrophilic or radical character. Cationic diphosphine complexes of Ir(III)
and complexes with specifically designed tetradentate ligands will be
synthesized. These complexes will have two adjacent labile sites for substrate
binding, activation, and coupling. Related electrophilic complexes of Pt and Pd
with new diimine and diamine ligands will also be studied. These and related
complexes will be screened for reactivity in reactions that include H/D
exchange, isomerizations, C-H bond activation, and olefin polymerizataion. Bond
activation by odd electron complexes will be studied with new d7 Rh(II) and
Ir(II) Schiff base complexes that contain tetradentate N and S donor ligands.
The metalloradical reactions that will be studied most extensively are those
involving C-H activation of methane, toluene, alkanes, and zylenes, and radical
driven polymerizations. A program of research on the chemistry of platinum group
element compounds relating to homogeneous catalysis and bond activation will be
conducted. Platinum group element complexes include the most widely used
catalysts in industry today, and developments in the past decade, particularly
with regard to asymmetric catalysis and polymerization catalysis, suggest that
this role will increase in the future. This program will advance our
understanding of the fundamental transformations that take place at the metal
and will help in the design of new important catalysts for the chemical and
pharmaceutical industry.