* 9729857
* Bioremediation Ecology:  Fundamental Relationships Between  Bioavailability Gradients and Diversity of                  Contaminant-Degrading Microorganisms
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* David Ward, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/2001
* USD 452,000.00

9729857 Ward Most naturally occurring microorganisms have never been cultivated,
probably because culture media poorly reflect the microenvironmental conditions
in which microorganisms live in nature. Molecular biology approaches are
however, beginning to reveal principals of the ecology of the dominant members
of microbial communities, which are leading to their cultivation. We have begun
a program of "bioremediation ecology" to evaluate whether fundamental principles
of chemical behavior and microbial ecology lead to a more predictive knowledge
of how to manage contaminant spills. We have shown that unique contaminant-
degrading microorganisms can be cultivated in media which simulates the low-
bioavailability microenvironments resulting from contaminant sorption to soil
organism matter. Here, we will examine their fitness relative to contaminant-
degrading microorganisms cultivated in unrealistic medium environments. Spills
occur as mixtures, yet most contaminant-degrading microogranisms are cultivated
on purifies contaminants. We will examine whether increasing complexity of
contaminant mixtures, and their interactions with realistic organic-matter
microenvironments, increases niche diversity, thereby increasing the diversity
of specialized contaminants-degrading microorganisms need for effective in situ
bioremediation. Such results have the potential to change the way we think about
the microbial ecology of bioremediation, by identifying the most-fit microbial
populations and understanding their specializations a basis for their successful
manipulation.