* 9729858
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment in Support of      Parallel Processing Research
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1998,01/31/1999
* Will Gillett, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 70,000.00

9729858 Franklin, Mark A. Washington University CISE Research Instrumentation:
Equipment in Support of Parallel Processing Research This research
instrumentation enables research in the following areas:- Patterns and Image
Recognition,- Computational Biology, and- Discrete Event Simulation. The
instrumentation grant funds the purchase of UtraSPARC II processors, data
storage, interfaces, backup disk, and software. The parallel processor will
support research requiring considerable computational resources to sustain
current efforts and make additional progress. A brief description of the
projects follows. - Mammogram Screening: Research will continue in the
development of automated means for detecting cancer from mammograms. The goal is
to improve existing parallel implementations for effective clinical usage. The
techniques employed combine the technologies of artificial neural networks and
wavelet transforms. - MCD (Multiple Complete Digestion) Mapping: Research will
continue on a form of high-resolution, restriction-fragment DNA mapping (MCD
mapping). The mapping problem is fundamental to DNA based genetic research. With
genomes of enormous size (millions to billions of base pairs), even relatively
simple support activities such as software testing are extremely time consuming.
The requested equipment will be used to develop parallel algorithms which are
faster and more accurate. - Discrete-Event Simulation: Research will continue on
developing parallel discrete-event simulation algorithms for modeling large
computer communications networks. Effective network designs are needed for the
continued expansion and improvement of the Internet and World Wide Web. Parallel
simulation techniques will be used to evaluate system performance when
relatively rare events occur. For example, blocking probability evaluation in
modest sized networks requires processing more than 10 trillion events.