* 9729839
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Equipment for Diverse        Computer Architecture Research
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Donald Tufts, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 12/31/1999
* USD 76,730.00

9729839 Uht, Augustus K. University of Rhode Island Research Instrumentation:
Equipment for Diverse Computer Architecture Research This research
instrumentation grant enables three distinct research projects: - Realizing
Instruction Level Parallelism in the 10's - A New Spectrum of Hierarchical
Storage Architectures for High Performance Disk I/Os - Ultra-Dependable and
High-Performance Distributed Computing while seeking to improve computer
performance in many dimensions: uni- or micro-processors, I/O (Input/Output)
systems, and multiple-computer systems. Further, the reliability of multiple-
computer systems is to be enhanced. These objectives are to be achieved by using
the new instrumentation equipment (multiprocessor and multiple-disk RAID storage
system) in several different ways. First, the Levo research prototype
uniprocessor is to be designed and simulated on the new multiprocessor. The
latter will serve to verify Levo's implementation and measure its performance,
as well as to allow Levo's construction, establishing that uniprocessors can be
designed to execute an order-of-magnitude more instructions per cycle than
current uniprocessors. Second, since I/O constraints can limit overall
performance, the novel Disk Caching Disk (DCD) I/O system is to be realized on
the new multiprocessor and RAID equipment, demonstrating factors of 2 to orders-
of-magnitude performance improvements of the DCD architecture. Lastly, the
Active Nodal Task Seeking (ANTS) distributed computing system achieves high
performance and ultra-dependability in a coarse-grain environment. The new ANTS
kernel is to be realized on the new multiprocessor, showing that the same can be
achieved on fine-grain applications.