* 9729020
* Improvements to the Florida Museum of Natural History       Lepidoptera Collection
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Lee Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 04/30/2001
* USD 110,490.00

The Lepidoptera collections of the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH)
Allyn Museum of Entomology (AME) represent one of the most significant regional,
national and international systematic research resources in North America.
Composed of a number of impressive older collections, other donations, and field
work completed by the curatorial staff and other investigators, including
several biodiversity surveys, the AME collections contain more than 1.1 million
specimens and are 92-95% complete in the representation of genera worldwide.
Among the institutions in the Western Hemisphere, the collections of AME rank
comparable with and exceed the holdings of some major institutions in
butterflies alone. Collection growth as the result of donations of private
collections and biological survey studies in progress has increased markedly
over the past seven years. In the interim, the storage capacity to integrate
these specimens into the main collection in order to make them readily available
for research and use by the scientific community has dramatically decreased.
These collections along with voucher specimens derived from previous and current
biodiversity studies in addition to a backlog of more than 80,000 processed
specimens have further exacerbated the situation. Due to critical lack of
appropriate storage facilities and very limited access, some data and specimens
are not available for study. This project will improve the collection in four
areas: (1) the installation of additional mechanical storage units to
incorporate significant collections, voucher specimens derived from biodiversity
surveys, and a backlog of processed specimens, (2) additional part-time
personnel to aid in the complete reorganization, transfer and integration of
these specimens and collections, (3) assistance in the sorting of specimens into
groups to be forwarded on loan for identification, and (4) provide support for
visiting taxonomic specialists to assist in the ident ification and integration
of specimens into the collection. At the completion of the project, the entire
collection will be reorganized and expanded to accommodate this backlog of
specimens. The identification and integration of all processed, backlog
specimens and other donations in kind received should be completed. The increase
in collection storage and reorganization will conserve and make these unique
research resources available for further study, enhance curation, and aid in the
future computerization of collection data.