* 9729422
* Anthropological and Paleontological Research at the Fossil  Site of the Fayum, Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Elwyn Simons, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2001
* USD 276,267.00

This primate paleontological research project spans three field seasons of
excavation in the Fayum Basin of Egypt, with subsequent study and analysis of
recovered fossils carried out at Duke University and cooperating research
laboratories. The objective of the project is to learn more about the earliest
forerunners of monkeys, apes, and humans. Previous discoveries have made this
one of the world's most important locations for research in primate origins and
evolution. The current project will yield skulls, jaws and post-cranial skeletal
elements from a broad range of early primates of both Eocene and Oligocene age
represented in the Fayum. These date to between about 36 and 26 million years
ago. Primate fossils, to be excavated from nearly a dozen quarries in the Fayum,
are seldom found as associated skeletal parts. As a consequence, sustained
research and excavation over long time periods is required to augment our
knowledge of the more than two dozen extinct primate species known from the
region by the systematic accumulation of additional, frequently unknown, limb
bones and cranial elements. Most of the described species are known only from
jaws and teeth, so much remains to be discovered. Africa appears to be the
continent where higher primates arose, and the Fayum holds the only continuous
sequence of deposits in Africa during the time period of interest.