* 9729886
* Enumerating the Risk of Reengineered Work Processes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Laura Lally, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2000
* USD 45,745.00

Reengineering -- the radical redesign of work processes using information
technology as an enabler -- creates new integrated processes. These new
integrated processes include: 1) combined `case manager` jobs, 2)
interorganizational systems, and 3) flatter organizational structures.
Reengineering is being widely practiced, but with many reports of failures or
undesired side effects. The advocates of reengineering tend to focus on the
political risks of bringing about radical organizational change and on the risks
of creating expensive new processes which do not support an organization's
strategic goals. They do not, however, address the problem that the newly
integrated processes themselves may be more risky to an organization's long term
viability by both exposing it to new sources of vulnerability and by creating
structures which will allow minor failures to propagate into major, disastrous
ones. Currently, reengineering studies have been limited to: 1) single case
studies of `successes` and 2) surveys which report high failure rates and
negative side effects, but do not specifically address the nature of the
failures and negative side effects and how they arose from the reengineering
effort. This interdisciplinary analysis applies organizational theory concepts
from Charles Perrow's Normal Accident Theory and the theory of High Reliability
Organizations, and information technology concepts from software engineering,
systems analysis and design, and the computer risk literature to three of the
newly integrated processes advocated by reengineering: 1) combined jobs, 2)
interorganizational systems, and 3) flatter organizational structures. The
results of the analysis indicate that many new types of risks may be arising and
that there is reason for concern that the new processes may increase an
organization's risk exposure. The study will involve interviews in 30
organizations to determine the degree to which these newly integrated processes
are being adopted by organizations, the degree to which risk factors identified
in the analysis are emerging in the implementation of these processes, and the
degree to which control factors to mitigate these risks are being applied. The
immediate goal of this study is to provide insights into the nature of
reengineering risks as they emerge in the newly integrated processes. The
ultimate goal is the development of a methodological tool to minimize and
control for the risks of newly integrated processes.