* 9729319
* Preparation of an Arctic Bibliography Database
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Martha Andrews, American Geological Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 08/31/1999
* USD 152,034.00

ABSTRACT The Arctic Bibliography is comprehensive guide to the literature of the
Arctic region from the earliest writings through 1975. The Bibliography includes
publications on the history, languages, peoples, archaeology, anthropology,
industry, settlements, exploration expeditions, geology, mining and minerals,
paleontology, climate, and geography of the region. Among the publications cited
are original sources, the chronicles, diaries and accounts of the people who
lived there. All the sources were seen by the compilers of the Bibliography and
it includes abstracts and the names of the libraries where the documents can be
consulted. In short, the Bibliography is an important tool for Arctic research.
Presently, sets of the Arctic Bibliography can be consulted in only a few
libraries, and it is in danger of being forgotten in current research. This
project is to produce an electronic version of the Arctic Bibliography. By this
means, the contents of the Bibliography will be preserved intact, and can be
incorporated into CDs containing other data on the Arctic, and also be made
searchable over the Internet. Permanent access to the Bibliography will be
assured. The database would be available in a simplified version of the UNISIST
Reference Manual format, a tag-data format without headers, which is well-suited
to processing on today's microcomputers. It would also be available in the MARC
format, which is the format used in the majority of the online library catalogs
in the United States, and widely used in other countries. As is common with
conversions of a print bibliography to a database, the resulting file would be
easier to use and afford more access points than the print original. All words
in the abstracts and titles would be searchable in the database. Depending on
the search software involved, all words anywhere in the data could be made
searchable, and searching using statistical methods to determine relevancy could
be employed.