* 9729609
* Mechanism of the B6 Enzyme, O-Acetylserine Sulfhydrylase
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Paul Cook, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9729609 Cook The objective of this research is a determination of the mechanism
of O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase (OASS-A), a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) dependent
enzyme . The kinetic and chemical mechanisms of OASS-A have been determined, and
the three dimensional structure of the enzyme has been solved. A number of
questions still remain concerning the mechanism. The slow steps in the first
half of the reaction have been identified, but virtually nothing is known
concerning the second half of the reaction. In this project, the reaction
mechanism will be probed using presteady state and steady state kinetic
techniques. Kinetic isotope effects will be used to obtain information on the
second half of the reaction. The stereochemistry of the elimination of acetic
acid and the addition of H2S, and whether a quinonoid intermediate exists along
the reaction pathway will also be examined. Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis
will be used to identify the enzyme residue that interacts with the acetyl side
chain of OAS, groups that interact with the cofactor, and residue(s) involved in
binding the alpha-carboxyl of OAS. The long term goal remains an elucidation of
the mechanism of the multienzyme complex cysteine synthetase, composed of serine
transacetylase and OASS. A complete description of the mechanisms of the
component enzymes alone and in complex will be determined. The present project,
however, focuses on the study of OASS-A. A study of the mechanism catalyzed by
OASS-A should significantly increase our understanding of PLP enzymes in
general, and those that catalyze beta-replacement reactions. Isotope effects is
a technique that allows one to look at the structure of the activated complex
(transition state) as reactant is converted to product, and the types of bonds
formed and broken during the OASS reaction and the differences in chemistry
compared to other PLP enzymes make OASS-A of interest. A knowledge of transition
state structure provides a basis f or bactericides for PLP-dependent enzymes
catalyzing beta-replacement reactions. The OASS-A reaction provides potential
for the production of a number of novel beta-substituted amino acids.