* 9729040
* Support to Verify the Computer Database of the              Herpetological Collections of The Field Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Harold Voris, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 07/31/2001
* USD 116,738.00

With over 265,000 specimens representing 6,239 species, the collection of the
Division of Amphibians and Reptiles at the Field Museum is one of the five
largest herpetological collections in the United States. By every measure the
collection is world class and heavily used. Even greater usage is expected as
the Division's massive online herpetological database is improved. Within the
database, however, are some long- standing problems which are now critical to
resolve in order to maximize its accuracy and usefulness to both current users
as well as the expanded community expected to utilize online access. Failure to
correct these problems will have deleterious effects as the errors in the
database are unnecessarily propagated in research, and in professional and lay
publications. Since 1993 an attempt has been made to edit portions of the
database in response to incoming requests for information or specimens. However
this labor-intensive process is incompatible with the high levels of normal
collection activities which occupy virtually all available staff time. This
piecemeal approach has resulted in unacceptable delays in responding to some
requests, and it has taken time from other essential collection curation tasks,
thereby creating other problems. Furthermore, such an approach is impossible to
implement with open access to online users. Only a comprehensive approach to
resolving the current problems in the collections and the database can assure
that online users will have complete,correct, current information about the
collection. In order to verify, edit, and inventory the collection database this
two-phase project will implement: 1) A careful, complete verification of the
agreement between the locality data in the database records, the original
collector/donor-supplied records, and the original catalogs, followed by the
correction of any discrepancies. 2) A comprehensive collection inventory to
assure the matching of the contents of containers, their labels or inventory
lists, and the information in the database; and, to assure agreement information
in the database records and on data tags attached to the specimens.