* 9729645
* The ErbB Receptor Tyrosine Kinases: A Model for Receptor    Interaction and Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* William Russell, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 02/28/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract Threadgill 9729645 The ERB proteins are a family consisting of four
different cell surface receptors with enzymatic kinase activity that are
activated by extracellular peptide growth factors. Upon activation these
receptors homodimerize with an identical family member or heterodimerize with a
different family member transactivating their respective dimerization partner by
phosphorylation. These phosphorylated dimers form active signaling complexes
that transmit the extracellular signal into the cell. A considerable amount of
signaling specificity potentially exists in the type of receptor dimer that is
formed. In this grant molecular and genetic analyses will be used to investigate
the importance of receptor homo vs heterodimerization in determining signaling
specificity and to determine to what extent receptor kinase activity is required
for signal transmission. First the mode of receptor phosphorylation will be
established in an in vitro cell culture system. The importance of the kinase
activity of ERB2 and ERB4 will be studied in an in vivo animal system by
engineering specific kinase-inactivating mutations in mice. The experiments will
indicate how tyrosine kinase activation influences receptor dimerization and
signaling specificity. This research is looking at some cell surface receptors,
and studying their early reaction to substances which bind to them, and the
means by which they pass this information on to other pathways in the cell which
bring about a final response. ***