* 9729234
* Spectroscopy and Reaction Dynamics of Activated Entrance    Channel Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 06/30/2001
* USD 456,100.00

Marsha Lester of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program in her ongoing studies to characterize the
intermolecular potential, inelastic scattering and reaction dynamics of
vibrationally activated entrance channel complexes composed of a hydroxyl
radical and a reactive molecular partner (carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, water).
Infrared excitation will provide sufficient energy to overcome the activation
barrier to reaction while intermolecular excitations will orient the reactants
such that the structure of the complex approximates that of the transition
state. Prof. Lester will use double resonance techniques to record the mid- and
near-IR spectra of the OH stretch as well as intermolecular bending levels of
the OH complexes. Spectral measurements should yield information on the
potential energy surfaces in the entrance channel to reaction for ground state
and vibrationally excited reactants. The hydroxyl radical plays a pivotal role
in the chemistry of the lower atmosphere. It is known as the `atmosphere's
detergent` because its reactions prevent the accumulation of most trace gases in
the atmosphere, many of which would act as air pollutants and greenhouse gases.
For the majority of hydrogen-containing molecules emitted into the troposphere,
reaction with the OH radical is their major, if not sole, chemical loss process.
Thus, reaction with OH radicals leads to the removal of these compounds from the
atmosphere and limits their atmospheric concentrations. Much experimental work
has already been performed to evaluate the OH radical kinetics and reaction
mechanisms under the conditions encountered in the atmosphere. In these studies,
Prof. Lester will use techniques developed in her laboratory to take a much
closer look at the reactions dynamics of OH radicals with molecular partners of
atmospheric relevance such as carbon monoxide, nitric oxide and water.