* 9729396
* SGER: Preliminary Studies of Larval Transport using Small   Moorings in Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Bruce Menge, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1999
* USD 49,976.00

This SGER award aims to determine the efficacy of small moorings anchored in
the nearshore (just beyond the surf zone) of central Oregon for determining
patterns of larval abundance and transport in relation to onshore patterns of
recruitment and community structure. It is essential to obtain proof that
moorings will work, and will provide information that can bear critically on the
issue of nearshore larval transport. In agreement with the community of ocean
scientists (as reflected in GLOBEC and CoOP mission statements) Dr. Menge
contends that the determination of the link between pelagic and benthic
environments through the nearshore region, heretofore a `black box,` is one of
the most important problems facing biological oceanographers and marine
ecologists. Determining abundances of zooplankton has long been hampered by
extreme spatial and temporal variation due to plankton patchiness. The use of
larval traps, which integrate over long times will provide larval estimates
which more accurately reflect patterns of larval delivery to benthic
communities. This study will employ inexpensive moorings, anchored in 12 15 m of
water between 0.5 and 1 km offshore, and will simultaneously sample larval
abundances, currents, water temperature, settlement onshore, and temperature
onshore. The measurements on the moorings will be taken near the surface and
near the bottom to quantify possible stratification of larvae and physical
conditions in the water column, which may relate to patterns of onshore/offshore
transport during upwelling and relaxation. For comparison with more traditional
oceanographic measurements, chlorophyll a, physical conditions, and zooplankton
abundance will be sampled using standard methods (Niskin bottles, CTD, plankton
nets) each time the moorings are monitored. Satellite imagery will be used to
examine the larger scale context in which our smaller scale sampling will take
place. This work will test if these moorings will prove to be a powerful and
inexpensive tool in studying nearshore ecological and oceanographic processes,
particularly in relation to larval transport.