* 9729023
* Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Keith Holyoak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

This project will extend and test a theory and computer model of human
reasoning. People routinely reason using schemas, knowledge structures that
describe general situations, events, rules, or relationships. For example, a
Restaurant schema might specify the kinds of events that take place in
restaurants, and the relationships between the actors in those events (e.g.,
chefs, waiters, customers); a Family Relation schema might specify the kinds of
relationships that define various family members, such as sisters, brothers,
parents, and uncles. A schema is both general, in that it refers to many
specific situations, and highly structured, in that it specifies the
relationships between objects, events, or even between other relationships.
Psychologists and computer scientists have long recognized the utility of
schemas as a basis for reasoning: If one can recognize an object or situation as
an instance of a general schema, then one can use the schema to reason about
that object or situation. Although the generality and structured nature of
schemas make them extremely useful, these features also make schemas very
difficult to model. Traditional symbolic approaches to computer modeling are
good at representing structured information, but they have difficulty in
flexibly matching specific instances to general facts; by contrast,
connectionist models are good at flexibly matching instances to general
categories, but they have great difficulty representing structured information
(such as rules and relationships). We have recently developed a theory of human
schema-based learning and reasoning, and implemented this theory as a working
computer model. The model, called LISA (Learning and Inference with Schemas and
Analogies), combines the flexibility of a connectionist architecture with the
capacity to represent and learn relational structures. The resulting system can
(a) learn general schemas from specific examples, (b) match new instances to
learned schemas, and (c) use the schemas to make inductive inferences about the
new examples. LISA makes several novel predictions about human learning and
reasoning. Part of the NSF-supported research will be a series of experiments to
test these predictions. Another part of the research will extend the LISA model
to account for aspects of human story and event comprehension (e.g., If someone
tells us `There are four plates per tray,` how do we know that this means each
tray will hold, or contain, four plates?), and aspects of spatial reasoning
(e.g., If we are told that Bill is taller than Charles and Abe is taller than
Bill, how do we figure out that Abe is taller than Charles?). Importantly, the
extended LISA model will account for these seemingly different capacities (as
well as other capacities, such as reasoning by analogy) in terms of the same
basic mechanisms as it uses to account for our ability to reason using schemas.
The knowledge gained from the project will contribute to the development of
methods for enhancing human learning and reasoning abilities, and also to the
development of artificially intelligent systems.