* 9729118
* A Cross-Linguistic Investigation of Agreement Phenomena in  Language Production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Gabriella Vigliocco, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 07/31/2001
* USD 152,719.00

This research project aims to shed some light on the basic architecture and
processes responsible for producing sentences. More specifically, it is
concerned with the processes involved in the construction of a syntactic frame
for a to-be-uttered sentence. The three issues the project deals with are: (i)
the input that the language production system receives from the conceptual
system; (ii) the mechanisms responsible for building a syntactic structure for a
sentence; and (iii) the possibility to find feedback from the processes
responsible to build a phonological frame for the sentence to the processes
responsible for its syntactic encoding. In a series of 19 experiments, speakers
of Italian, French and Spanish are required to produce completions for
sentential preambles or to rephrase sentences. The dependent variables in these
experiments are the proportions of agreement errors, between the subject and the
verb, the object and the verb (e.g., "The time for fun and games are over"), in
Italian, French and Spanish; or the proportions of subject-predicate gender
agreement errors in Italian and French. The rationale for using agreement to
address the issues presented above is the fact that agreement can be considered
as a tool of the language system for expressing conceptual relations through
syntactic relations, that are then translated into morpho-phonological
regularities in the language. The pursuit of these three interrelated research
lines in a period of three years will allow us to foster our understanding of
the processes involved in transforming a message into a syntactically well-
formed sentence, in real time. The Romance languages targeted in the project
provide not only a way to test a number of hypotheses, but they also provide us
with a tool to explore phenomena that until now have not been addressed in the
psycholinguistic literature, such as the computation of gender agreement, and
object-participle agreement during production.