* 9729827
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Infrastructure for an        Information-based Manufacturing Testbed: A Joint Initative  of Carnegie Mellon and Drexel University
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Pradeep Khosla, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2000
* USD 169,645.00

9729827 Khosla, Pradeep K. Paredis, Christian Carnegie Mellon University CISE
Research Instrumenation: Infrastructure for an Information-Based Manufacturing
Testbed: A Joint Initiative of Carnegie Mellon and Drexel University This
proposal initiates an education and research effort on information-based
manufacturing. This collaborative effort between Carnegie Mellon and Drexel
Universities, along with numerous industrial partners, will create a multi-
university Information-based Manufacturing Testbed consisting of pilot projects
in the areas of - Assembly Process Planning, - Subcontractor Selection; and -
Engineering Design Repositories. The CMU-Drexel Testbed will be used by
researchers, students, and industry participants to conduct exploratory research
toward the reduction and elimination of information bottlenecks in the
manufacturing enterprise. The fundamental research thrusts of the Testbed will
include (1) to define and test computing and network architectures to support
information-based design and manufacturing services; (2) to deploy prototype
services for assembly, process selection, design-for-manufacture, and artifact
fabrication; and (3) to create novel methods for search, retrieval and tracking
of engineering data as it is acted upon by teams of people and software agents.
The final results will be open to the public---creating an online forum for
providing many with a means to become familiar with the latest information
technology for engineering.