* 9729046
* Ion exchange without Chemical Regeneration:  Raman          Spectroscopy Studies of Hexacyanoferrate Derivatized        Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 09/30/2001
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract Proposal No: 9729046 Proposal Type: EPA-NSF Joint Initiative, 1997
Principal Investigator: Daniel T. Schwartz Affiliation: University of Washington
This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-
element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical
and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Daniel T. Schwartz
at the University of Washington. The research is directed towards the
development of a new class of environmentally benign ion exchangers using metal
hexacyanoferrate (HCF) derivatized electrodes. In these materials, the oxidation
state of iron is potential modulated between the ferric and ferrous state. By
thus modulating the charge density, the electrode behaves as an ion exchange
material allowing other cations to load into the electrode or elute out into
solution. The PI seeks to study this behavior for a variety of ions to determine
exchange efficiency and loading capacities. Fundamental studies include using
in-situ imaging Raman spectroscopy and photoelectrochemistry to characterize the
ion-exchange process. The research will have technological implications in the
development of environmentally benign ion exchange processes. The materials used
are innocuous, and easily regenerable through potential modulation rather than
the chemical methods used to regenerate conventional ion-exchange resins. Since
ion exchange processes are ubiquitous in the food, pharmaceutical, nuclear and
chemical industries, the development of environmentally benign ion exchange
processes will have a major impact on process operation in these industries.