* 9729820
* Robust Chemical Process Systems Modelling via Variational   Models and Equilibrium Programming
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Ross Swaney, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2003
* USD 204,520.00

Abstract - Swaney - 9729820 Formulating and solving process simulation models is
divided between setting up the models and then obtaining solutions numerically.
The status of modelling and user interfaces has undergone advances in recent
years. The performance of available numerical algorithms is less adequate
relative to the task required. Complex process models may be difficult to solve,
yet these can lead to the best technology. This research will develop a new
method for the numerical solution of large scale steady state process simulation
models. The need is for a robust method to solve the significantly nonlinear
process models that arise. The modeller should not be required to supply initial
guesses, but should be provided with an unambiguous mechanism to diagnose model
misformulations. This approach is to express each process subsystem model as a
variational problem. Domain constraints such as variable nonnegativity are
directly enforced. Solving the coupled subsystems then becomes a problem in
noncooperative equilibria, and may be solved as an equilibrium programming
problem. In this form, rigorous existence theorems may be invoked. A new pseudo-
physical homotopy-based solution procedure will be tested. By navigating
nonsmooth points and bifurcations along the path, solution attainment is
provable.