* 9729576
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Computational Techniques    for 3-D Modeling and Analysis of Infrared and MRI Image     Sequences
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* John Goutsias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

9729576 Goutsias, John I. Prince, Jerry L. Johns Hopkins University CISE
Research Instrumentation: Computational Techniques for 3-D Modeling and Analysis
of Infrared and MRI Image Sequences This research instrumentation award serves
to acquire a high-speed supercomputer which will enable the following research
projects: - New Techniques in Automatic Target Detection, Recognition, and
Tracking from Optical and Infrared Video Sequences, - Segmentation, Modeling,
and Statistical Characterization of the Geometry of the Human Brain Cortex from
Three-Dimensional Magnetic Resonance Images, and -Spline Algorithms for the
Reconstruction of MR Material Markers from Tagged Magnetic Resonance Images. The
proposed equipment will be dedicated to research in novel computational
techniques for modeling and analysis of infrared and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) data. The requested equipment will: (a) Allow development and
implementation of real-time and near-real-time algorithms using 3-D
morphological image processing and analysis techniques (Project 1). (b) Allow
fast implementation of continuous image modeling and active geometry algorithms
to fit a topologically correct surface to the central layer of the cortex, and
development of efficient methods to statistically characterize the shapes of the
major sulci (fissures) of the cortex (Project 2). (c) Allow development and
implementation of 3-D optical flow algorithms for motion estimation, and enable
solution of large matrix equations to determine higher order spline coefficients
for tag surface fitting and analysis (Project 3).