* 9729538
* Electrostatics and Lateral Domains in Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Stuart McLaughlin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2002
* USD 280,000.00

9729538 McLaughlin The working hypothesis is that physical factors (e.g.
electrostatics, surface pressure) can lead to the self assembly of specific
lipids and proteins into lateral domains in cell membranes and that these
domains are important for cell signaling. The specific objectives are to
understand (1) the molecular mechanisms by which basic peptides form lateral
domains in phospholipid vesicles; (ii) how proteins present at high
concentrations in the cell membrane, e.g. caveolin, self assemble into domains;
and (iii) how other cell signaling proteins, e.g. Src, and lipids, e.g.
phosphatidylinositol 4,5,-bisphosphate (PIP2), are sequestered in these domains.
Theory and experiment will be developed interactively to provide fundamental
biophysical information about this complicated but important problem in signal
transduction. Reconstituted systems comprising components of the
calcium/phospholipid second messenger system (e.g. PIP2, PKC, Src, G proteins,
phospholipase C) and peptides corresponding to the scaffolding region of
caveolin (residues 82-101) will be studied using fluorescence, surface pressure,
and other techniques. Theoretical calculations will be performed using realistic
molecular models of peptides, proteins, and membranes. Four factors that may
contribute to domain formation will be examined: self-aggregation of the
proteins or peptides; penetration of the polar head group region by W, F, and Y
residues; the entropic long rod effect described by Onsager; and electrostatics.
Theories that account for each factor's relative contribution to domain
formation will be formulated. Preliminary results and calculations show that
even simple basic peptides such Lys5 and the scaffolding domain of caveolin can
sequester PIP2 in lateral domains via nonspecific electrostatic interactions,
which may provide a molecular explanation for the sequestration of this lipid in
caveolae. This biophysics project has direct biological relevance because there
is good evidence that biologic al membranes contain several different types of
lateral domains that are important in signal transduction. For example, the
plasma membrane lateral domains called caveolae contain high concentrations of
caveolin and signaling molecules such as heterotrimeric G proteins, Src family
kinases, PKC, and PIP2; the latter is an important lipid that is both the source
of two second messengers and acts to anchor several proteins to membranes. Much
of the PIP2 that is hydrolyzed in response to receptor stimulation is localized
in the caveolae, suggesting they may be a primary site of agonist-stimulated
PIP2 turnover. ***