* 9729828
* CISE Instrumentation: Acquisition of High-Performance SMPs  and a High-Speed Network
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Loren Schwiebert, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1998
* USD 102,004.00

9729828 Chaudhary, Vipin Wayne State University CISE Research Instrumentation:
High Performance Computing on an ATM-Connected Cluster of Symmetric
Multiprocessors This research instrumentation grant serves to support the
purchase of one Sun Enterprise 4000 (with 6 processors), two Sun Enterprises
3000 (4 processors each), and a 12-port Switch with 8 ATM interfaces which will
enable the following projects:- Development of an Automatic Parallelization
Environment (APE) for Scientific Engineering Programs in a Cluster of SMPs,-
Real Time Optimization of #D Conformal Radiation Therapy Treatment Planning, -
Parallel Techniques for 3D Cone Beam Tomography, and- Measurement of Resource
Requirements for ATM ABR Connections. The first project integrates compile-time
and run-time parallelization techniques focusing on loops with non-linear
subscripts on a cluster of SMPs. An implementation of APE will reduce the
execution time for various scientific and engineering applications. The second
project serves radiation therapy where current computer assisted optimization
techniques are too slow or too expensive to be adopted in clinical practice.
Genetic algorithms will be used to optimize the dosage. A real-time cost
effective implementation on a cluster of multiprocessors will make the planning
process applicable in clinical practice. The third project encounters the
bottleneck in parallel implementation of 3D Cone Beam Tomography technique on
ethernet in the low bandwidth of the network. Using the virtual connectivity
provided by ATM, the multiphase broadcast can be efficiently implemented.
Results from this implementation will apply to other problems like volumetric
imaging applications and finite element analysis of 3D structures. The last
project utilizes profile data from various applications to enable sources to
request just the necessary bandwidth and facilitate fair allocation of
bandwidth. It will permit a better utilization of the network resources and
improve the application perf ormance.