* 9729570
* The Great War and Modern Chemistry:  The Chemists' War as A Technological System, 1914-1920
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Roy Mac Leod, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2003
* USD 164,709.00

This project will compare the industrial, academic and governmental responses of
the Allied and Central Powers during the First World War to unprecedented
demands on their resources and technology in what became a total war. Its focus
will be upon the chemical industry, the mobilization of chemists, and the
military role of chemistry during the war and into the early postwar era,
considering some of the enduring consequences for the integration of science,
technology and warfare. The project will differ from previous analyses of
chemical science and technology in the Great War by stressing the process as
well as the product of chemical manufacture. To analyze the infrastructure of
technological innovation and production, the project will compare detailed case
studies of three specific industrial locations in each major industrial nation
(Britain, France, Germany and the United States) and the roles of specific
companies, as well as the government agencies, university laboratories, and
military inspection and procurement agencies with which they dealt. The
investigators will also employ a new approach in their project, applying the
methodological framework of large-scale technological systems (interconnecting
human and material resources, technical processes, and a culture of political-
economic institutions), suitably modified to the unique exigencies of war. By
analyzing the function of the first modern, industrialized war in shaping a key
technological system, the project will produce an integrated and comparative
history that will serve as a model for future studies of the nexus of modern
global military-industrial-scientific competition. As such it should be of
interest to policymakers as well as to historians.