* 9729397
* Collaborative Project:  Coat Protein-Whitefly Protein       Interactions Necessary for Geminivirus Transmission.
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Judith Brown, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* linda hyman
* 12/31/2001
* USD 250,947.00

Brown 9729397 The subgroup lII geminiviruses (Geminiviridae) are transmitted by
a single species of whitefly, Bemisia tabaci, in a persistent, circulative
fashion. The transmission pathway requires that virions, taken up during insect
feeding along with plant sap, enter the insect gut and cross the hindgut
epithelium into the hemocoel. Virions then pass through the hemocoel in the
hemolymph, and must traverse both the basal lamina and plasmalemma of the
accessory salivary gland secretory cells to reach the salivary canal.
Transmission to the host plant phloem occurs through saliva delivered by the
stylet. This complex journey through the vector demands that virions be taken up
and released by insect cells, and that several transmission barters be crossed.
Each of these barriers involves a specific interaction between vital coat
protein (CP) and whitefly proteins (transmission factors/receptors). At this
time, CP sequences that participate in key recognition events have not been
identified, and there is no information concerning whitefly proteins involved in
transmission. To address these questions, a powerful combination of molecular
biology, biochemistry, and yeast genetics will be employed. In addition, a novel
and sensitive PCR-based bioassay for monitoring virus acquisition and
transmission by the whitefly will be used. The specific objectives of this
research are: 1. To identify specific amino acids in geminivirus CP that are
necessary for whitefly-mediated transmission. These studies will employ the
transmissible squash leaf curl virus (SqLCV) and the non-transmissible Abutilon
mosaic virus (AbMV). Defined sequence exchanges and amino acid substitutions
will be introduced into the AbMV CP gene in an effort to restore
transmissibility (gain of function), and into the SqLCV CP gene to abolish
transmissibility (loss of function). These experiments should identify CP amino
acids involved in transmission, and in particular those responsible for the loss
of AbMV transmissibility. 2. To identify whitefly-encoded cDNAs specifying
proteins which interact with geminivirus CP to potentiate virus acquisition and
transmission. The yeast two-hybrid system and expression cloning in COS cells
will be used to identify cDNAs encoding whitefly proteins capable of interacting
with geminivirus CP. Genetic analysis will be carried out to identify CP domains
involved in specific whitefly protein interactions, and to examine the relevance
of the interactions to transmission. Immunolocalization of interacting whitefly
proteins will also be performed as a prelude to functional analysis. The
whitefly-transmitted (WFT) geminiviruses (Geminiviridae; subgroup III) are
important pathogens of vegetable and fiber crops. The dissemination of these
pathogens through agoecosystems depends on three interacting components: the
geminivirus pathogen, the whitefly vector, and plant species that serve as hosts
for both the virus and the vector. In this project experiments are described
which are designed to extend the current understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of transmission, and the molecular basis of transmission specificity.
Defining the molecular mechanisms of geminivirus transmission by whiteflies has
broad implications for understanding the interactions that occur between
biological vectors and vector-borne pathogens of animals and plants, which in
most cases are poorly studied.