* 9729856
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Development of a Digital     Signal Processing (DSP) Compilation Testbed
* CSE,EIA
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* John Proakis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 11/30/1999
* USD 56,132.00

9729856 Kaeli, David R. Northeastern University CISE Research Instrumentation :
Development of a Digital Signal Processing (DSP) Compilation Testbed This
research instrumentation grant enables the following projects: - Digital Signal
Processing Applications in Telecommunications and Magnetic Recording Systems, -
Improved Program Layout for High Performance Signal Processors, and - Dynamic
Compilations for Networked Signal Processors. Digital Signal Processors are
commonly used to execute a range of performance-critical signal processing
applications. High-level language compilers have only recently been targeted for
DSPs. The optimization technology provided in these compilers lacks the level of
sophistication commonly found in most microprocessor compilers, and has
discouraged the use of high-level languages for performance-critical DSP
applications. As a result, assembly-language programming still dominates DSP
development, and there can be very high costs associated with maintaining legacy
assembly code. New code generation technologies must be developed which
capitalize both on the characteristics of signal processing algorithms and on
the resources available in modern DSPs. Compiler technologies that exploit the
evolving architectural features present in state-of-the-art signal processors
must also be used to develop highly performance-tuned signal processing
applications. The equipment requested by this grant will be used as a DSP
testbed by the principal investigators to develop new signal processing and
telecommunications applications, as well as to investigate new compilation
techniques which address the issues of producing maintainable, high performance
signal processing software.