* 9729389
* Support for Specialized Conference on Microbial Ecology of  Biofilms - Harrison Conference Center in Lake Bluff, IL     October 8-10, 1998
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Bruce Rittmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 10/31/1998
* USD 9,990.00

9729389 Rittmann This is an award to provide support for conduct of a
specialized international conference sponsored by the International Association
on Water Quality on the ecology of biofilms. Cosponsors include the Societe
Lyonnaise des Eaux, the Waterways Experiment Station of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The conference will
address the structure and function of biofilms in processes of significance in
environmental engineering practice. These include aerobic and anaerobic fixed
film and suspended growth reactors, water treatment processes, water
distribution systems, wastewater transport conduits, contaminated soil, surfaces
fouled by contact with water and corrosion of materials in contact with water.
This award will be used to support travel and other costs for participation of
three internationally distinguished experts in biofilms in the conduct of this
conference. Results of this conference are expected to provide insights into the
structure and function of biofilms that will improve the engineering design and
operation of processes using biologically active films adhering to solid
surfaces or formed in suspended growth bioreactors. Results are also expected to
provide knowledge that can be used in dealing with biofouling of water
conduction systems, cooling towers and other surfaces that are in contact with
water. ***