* 9729029
* Incorporation of the Kansas State University Fungus         Collection into the New York Botanical Garden Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/1998,07/31/1999
* Barbara Thiers, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 52,653.00

The fungi from the Kansas State University (KSU) herbarium were donated to the
New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) in March, 1999. This herbarium consists of
approximately 32,000 specimens of which about half belong to published and
widely distributed, uniform sets of duplicate specimens. The remaining
approximately 16,000 are unicate specimens. NYBG will incorporate the unicates
into its fungal herbarium, and to offer the duplicates to other institutions.
Incorporation of the Kansas State University fungus herbarium will involve
segregation of unicate from duplicate specimens, repair, databasing,
nomenclatural updating and filing of specimens to be retained. Based on previous
experience, this work will require approximately 3200 person-hours, or two
F.T.E. Curatorial Assistants for one year. Currently the KSU specimens are
stored at NYBG in sealed shipping boxes, because of a lack of herbarium case
space for unassimilated specimens. Fungal specimens stored outside of standard
herbarium cases are at risk of damage from mold and insect infestation.
Therefore it is imperative to incorporate the KSU specimens into the NYBG fungal
herbarium cases as soon as possible. In the fall of 1997, the NYBG will begin
construction of a new Plant Sciences Building, which will house the entire
herbarium and library, and the collections will be moved to the new building in
1999. Planning for the arrangement of the fungal herbarium in the new building
will be greatly facilitated if the KSU specimens have been incorporated before
the herbarium is moved.