* 9729290
* Engineering Research Equipment: Instrumentation for an      Experimental Control Systems Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Dennis Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2002
* USD 66,420.00

9729290&lt;br/&gt;Bernstein&lt;br/&gt;Control-system technology is an enabling
technology for many complex, high performance systems. In many of these
applications the control system is so essential that the system simply cannot
operate without it. On the other hand, failure of the control system can have
dire consequences. Graphic examples include the Chernobyl disaster and Airbus
crashes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years it has become clear that one of
the principal challenges facing control reseaxchers is the need to transition
theoretical advances to operational systems. To address this challenge, I am
proposing to expand my control laboratory by extending current experiments and
by developing new experiments. These experiments provide motivation for
theoretical control concepts and help to transition control theory to
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under prior NSF support we have developed five
control experiments, namely, the acoustic duct experiment, the rotating actuator
experiment, the rotating imbalance experiment, the control-moment gyro
experiment, and the autonomous aircraft experiment. Under the proposed program
all of these experiments will be extended to increase their versatility and to
provide additional challenges. In addition, we propose to develop three
additional experiments, namely, control of three-dimensional acoustic fields,
electrostatic control of a membrane, and control of combustion. These additional
experiments provide a significant expansion of our prior experimental activities
into new and more challenging applications of control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
equipment to be purchased under this grant includes a high-speed real-time
parallel processor along with supporting infrastructure which includes sensors,
actuators, filters, amplifiers, and power supplies. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;