* 9729971
* Information-Based Complexity of Multivariate Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Grzegorz Wasilkowski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 05/31/2001
* USD 208,960.00

Multivariate problems appear in many diverse applications; yet they are often
intractable in the worst case setting. A significant part of the research will
concentrate on the study of multivariate problems in the average case setting.
In particular, the study of the reduction in complexity by switching from the
worst case to the average case setting will be one of the central foci. This
will enrich understanding of the average case complexity of important
multivariate problems and will provide new algorithms that solve worst case
intractable problems with small expected cost and small expected error. Related
to the average case analysis are path integrals. The research will provide
complexity bounds for his important problem and should reveal new algorithms
that are more efficient than Monte Carlo methods (that are commonly used) for
some path integrals. One of the approaches in studying path integrals is through
the analysis of multivariate weighted integration and approximation over
unbounded domains. A part of the research will deal with the complexity of such
problems. In addition to theoretical results, the research will result in
efficient software for such problems as multivariate integration/approximation,
weighted integration/approximation, and path integrals.