* 9729404
* Tailored Solvents for Pollution Source Reduction in         Phamaceutical & Fine Chemical Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* T. Alan Hatton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2000
* USD 180,000.00

CTS-9729404 Hatton, T.A. MIT Abstract It is proposed to develop a new class of
solvents that have solvation properties similar to those of solvents used
conventionally in pharmaceutical and fine chemical processing but for which the
potential for loss by environmentally-unfavorable air emissions or in aqueous
discharge streams is minimized. A complete characterization of the new solvent
is to be undertaken, and their role in minimizing the potential for pollution,
and in reducing the number of solvent exchanges and unit operations required for
specific processes will be evaluated. The economic and environmental impact
assessment will include al aspects of the solvent usage, including its synthesis
and any wastes that may be generated thereby. These new solvents will be
obtained by suitable derivatization of the solvent tetrahydrofuran (THF) to be
replaced to render it significantly less volatile or water soluble, and thus
less inclined to enter the environment; the active solvent moiety will also be
'immobilized' by attachment to flexible polymers, which are then dissolved in a
more benign continuous phase. These new solvents will be tested as reaction
media for a broad range of model reaction systems, including a series of
reactions that are important in the production of the HIV protease inhibitor
Crixivan Detailed spectroscopic characterization as well as bulk thermodynamic
properties will be used to rationalize the kinetics results in terms of steric
and electronic effects introduced by the solvent modification. Process systems
modeling will be carried out to quantify the economic and environmental impact
of processes using these solvents, and compared with conventional systems. A new
range of solvents will be developed and characterized in terms of their
solvation, thermodynamic and transport properties, and tested for their efficacy
as reaction media using a range of different model reactions. Guidelines will be
established for product recovery and solvent regeneration, and process systems
models will be developed for optimization of reaction/separation sequences in
pharmaceutical and fine chemical syntheses. A life cycle analysis of these new
solvents from synthesis through to use in processing, including solvent
regeneration, will be made to delineate their useful application parameters.