* 9729805
* Studies with Liquid Helium Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1998,11/30/1999
* Robert Hallock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9729805 Hallock This proposal will support a component of the experimental low
temperature physics program at the University of Massachusetts/Amherst. The
objectives are: (1) to study new aspects of the He-3-He-4 mixture film system,
(2) to study in more detail capillary condensation and avalanche phenomena with
helium in porous materials, (3) to conduct studies with helium films on
patterned substrates in one and two dimensions, with a focus on two dimensional
localization, and (4) to bring to a conclusion our study of helium in the
context of C60 substrates. Experimental methods include quartz crystal
resonance, third sound, and heat capacity studies of the thermal properties of
He- 3/He-4 mixture films; and high resolution capacitance measurements of
capillary condensation and avalanche events in porous materials. The work will
lead to an improved understanding of helium on hydrogen, including "two
transitions" in the case of mixture films; a test of the appropriateness of
recent theoretical work concerning avalanche events in magnetic systems for the
description of similar events seen in hysteretic capillary condensation, and an
improved understanding of a method for determining pore distributions and
draining phenomena in porous materials. In addition to contributing to progress
in understanding the behavior of helium films themselves, the work will have
relevance to the wider community in the areas of Fermi systems, avalanche
phenomena, capillary condensation, and non- linear phenomena. The project
provides excellent training for graduate students in a number of important
techniques that are used in technical fields as well as fundamental research
projects. %%% Helium is a remarkable substance with special liquid properties
when cooled near the absolute zero of temperature. This proposed grant will
study various problems in condensed m atter physics using the unique properties
of liquid helium, particularly liquid helium films, as the vehicle to facilitate
the study. In some cases the helium itself will be the subject of the study, in
others, helium will serve as a convenient fluid to explore the phenomena of
interest. In particular, the grant will allow study He-4 and He-3/He-4 mixture
films and thereby enhance our understanding of phase transitions on two
dimensional surfaces and on weak binding substrates such as hydrogen. Capillary
condensation phenomena and avalanche events in porous materials will be studied
to gain a deeper understanding of how porous materials drain, an understanding
that cannot be reached using ordinary liquids. Finally, studies of helium on C60
substrates will be concluded. The project provides excellent training for
graduate students in a number of important techniques that are used in technical
fields as well as fundamental research projects. ***