* 9729496
* Combined NMR and Theoretical Investigation of Alkylation    Reactions on Solid Acids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,01/20/1999
* James Haw, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 01/20/1999
* USD 150,000.00

This is a grant co-funded by the NSF-EPA Partnership for Environmental Research.
It will generate fundamental knowledge necessary to provide the petroleum
industries with alternative catalysts for the HF-catalyzed alkylation processes.
Transition to solid-acid catalysis is currently considered the correct
alternative from pollution prevention standpoints but these catalysts have poor
selectivity and fast deactivation rate. Better understanding of mechanisms and
catalytic materials is needed in order to develop further these catalysts. Prof.
J.F. Haw in collaboration with Dr. J.B. Nicholas (Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory) will investigate the catalyzed alkylation of hydrocarbons on acidic
solids, namely sulfonated zirconia, BF3/alumina, and zeolite Beta. They will
apply complementary techniques, reaction kinetics in flow microreactor, solid
state NMR, and density-functional theory, to investigate fundamental catalysis
issues in alkylation over selected solid acids: sulfonated zirconia,
BF3/alumina, and zeolite Beta. The overall goal of the research will be the
determination of acid site structure and reactivity, mechanism of alkylation of
trans-2-butene with isobutane, and mechanism of catalyst deactivation. The
nature of active intermediates, transition states, deactivation pathways, etc.,
will be investigated spectroscopically, theoretically, and by kinetics
measurements.