* 9729338
* Integrating Young Workers in a Changing Labor Market:       Matching Educational Qualifications and Employment          Requirements
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,01/31/1999
* James Witte, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/1999
* USD 20,000.00

This is a study of young workers in changing labor markets, conducting
quantitative analysis of existing data to develop a new research instrument for
qualitative interviews. The objective of the broader research is to examine the
recent period of widespread economic change to improve scientific understanding
of how labor markets -- as systems of reciprocal relations between human capital
and occupational structure -- allocate people to positions and create positions
for people. The analysis also relies on a cross-national comparison between the
United States and Germany, building on a renewed interest in comparative work as
a means to introduce variation at the level of institutional structures. The
quantitative analysis will draw on two major longitudinal data sets: High School
and Beyond and the German Socio-Economic Panel. The immediate work combines
quantitative and qualitative methods in a unique manner, following an innovative
approach to directly integrate the quantitative findings in open-ended
qualitative interviews. Although quantitative data can begin to answer questions
of how institutional mechanisms link people and positions, a fuller
understanding can come through in-depth interviews with key institutional actors
in labor force integration processes, including: administrators and counselors
at secondary and postsecondary educational institutions, personnel managers,
human resource managers from large firms, managers and owners of small firms,
and staff at job search and placement agencies. This work will develop the
instruments and methodology required to carry out such research.