* 9729807
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Instrumentation for Research in Search Technology
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2000
* Hantao Zhang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2000
* USD 100,752.00

9729807 Zhang, Hantao University of Iowa CISE Research Instrumentation:
Instrumentation for Research in Search Technology This research instrumentation
grant contributes to the purchase of several CPUs, switch, disk and tape which
will enable the following projects: - Asynchronous Parallel Search Pruning with
Applications, - Fast Interior Point Optimization Algorithms, - Optimized Motion
Estimation Algorithms for Video Compression, - High Performance Satisfiability
Testing, and - Distributed Automated Reasoning, supporting efforts exploring
aspects of high-performance search technology. The projects will address: -
Development of nagging, an asynchronous, fault-tolerant, parallel search pruning
technique with applications to combinatorial optimization, computational
biology, and theorem proving; - Development of fast interior-point optimization
algorithms and their application to resource allocation and similar problems; -
Optimization-based motion estimation techniques for high-quality video
compression; - Development of efficient satisfiability testing algorithms and
their application to constraint satisfaction and problems in discrete
mathematics; - Development of distributed automated-reasoning systems based on
the clause- diffusion principle of parallel search with applications to
verification, constraint solving, and logic programming. In addition to an
environment for the development and testing of coarse-grained distributed search
techniques, this new NSF-supported distributed computing facility's high-speed
large-memory CPUs constitute the only available dedicated computational resource
for empirical evaluations of algorithmic performance, which may sometimes
require weeks of CPU time.