* 9729981
* Global Change Research in the Americas: Round 3 of the      IAI Initial Science Program
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2004
* Bradford Wilcox, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 1,878,984.00

The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) was created by
the Agreement Establishing the Inter American Institute for Global Change
Research, done at Montevideo on May 13, 1992 (`the IAI Agreement`). The IAI was
created to coordinate and promote scientific research related to global change
in the Americas. The Institute has an evolving `Scientific Agenda` identifying
particular areas for research. The US has played a leading role in the creation
of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its creation. The
Principal Investigator proposes to carry out a plan of research according to a
Science Agenda that has been defined by the scientific community of the Americas
in a series of meetings held over the last five years, and agreed upon by the
member States. The Scientific Agenda is complementary to the research priorities
of the US Global Change Research Program, and the results from this research
will be available to the US scientific community. The IAI will make awards under
the third round of the Initial Science Program (ISP) to teams of research
institutions based in IAI member States. The IAI will evaluate submitted
proposals in terms of technical merit using a peer-review system. Additionally,
several workshop activities to coordinate on-going and planned efforts with
other USG agencies (NASA, NOAA) and other international global change research
efforts will be supported, as well as a summer scholarship program for two to
three students per summer. The IAI receives additional support for the ISP from
the other Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and
Venezuela. This additional support takes the form of in-kind contributions
pledged directly to the IAI (20 full scholarships from the Government of Brazil;
7 full scholarships from the Government of Mexico; 2 full scholarships from the
Government of Canada), or in the form of pledges made at the time of proposal
submission in the form of investigator salaries, ship-time, computer time,
logistical support, etc. The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
(IAI) was created by the Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Institute for
Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May 13, 1992 (`the IAI
Agreement`). The IAI was created to coordinate and promote scientific research
related to global change in the Americas. The Institute has an evolving
`Scientific Agenda` identifying particular areas for research. The US has played
a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in
the IAI since its creation. The Principal Investigator proposes to carry out a
plan of research according to a Science Agenda that has been defined by the
scientific community of the Americas in a series of meetings held over the last
five years, and agreed upon by the member States. The Scientific Agenda is
complementary to the research priorities of the US Global Change Research
Program, and the results from this research will be available to the US
scientific community. The IAI will make awards under the third round of the
Initial Science Program (ISP) to teams of research institutions based in IAI
member States. The IAI will evaluate submitted proposals in terms of technical
merit using a peer-review system. Additionally, several workshop activities to
coordinate on-going and planned efforts with other USG agencies (NASA, NOAA) and
other international global change research efforts will be supported, as well as
a summer scholarship program for two to three students per summer. The IAI
receives additional support for the ISP from the other Parties to the Agreement
Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. This additional support
takes the form of in-kind contributions pledged directly to the IAI (20 full
scholarships from the Government of Brazil; 7 full scholarships from the
Government of Mexico; 2 full scholarships from the Government of Canada), or in
the form of pledges made at the time of proposal submission in the form of
investigator salaries, ship-time, computer time, logistical support, etc.