* 9729129
* Development of Corticostriatal Innervation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Laura Nisenbaum, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 01/31/2002
* USD 279,549.00

9729129 NISENBAUM A fundamental question in developmental neurobiology is how
axons from specific neurons in one region of the brain form precise connections
with target neurons in another region of the brain. Experiments examining the
development of target specificity have revealed two types of mechanisms that
contribute to the wiring of neural connections. The first type of mechanism,
which occurs during the embryonic and early postnatal period, relies on guidance
molecules to direct axonal projections along a path to their correct target
region. The second type of mechanism, which takes place later in development,
involves activity-dependent events to refine the precise pattern of neuronal
connections. Although a great deal is known regarding the development of
neuronal circuits within the brain, the development of the connections between
the cerebral cortex and the basal ganglia have been largely ignored. The basal
ganglia play a critical role in the control of movement and cognitive behaviors.
Thus, the formation of precisely patterned connections from the cortex to the
primary input structure of the basal ganglia, the striatum, is necessary for the
proper functioning of the motor system. The goal of Dr. Nisenbaum's research is
to determine when crucial target selection and pattern formation decisions are
made during the course of corticostriatal development. The results from these
studies will provide a better understanding of the types of mechanisms that are
responsible for the precision of corticostriatal connectivity, and also provide
insight into how motor systems become organized during development.