* 9729430
* Estimate of Panel Data Models of Discrete Choice            and Sample Selection and Application to Household Brand     and Purchase Quantity Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/1999
* Ekaterini Kyriazidou, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9729430 Kyriazidou This project develops estimation methods for models of
discrete choice and sample selection using longitudinal (panel) data. The models
studied are used in a variety of economic, medical and social studies. A large
amount of research has focused on developing methods for estimating panel data
models, especially in the case of short fixed-length models, that rely heavily
on the parametric specification of the statistical distribution of unobservable
variables, both of the permanent individual ones as well as the time-varying
idiosyncratic shocks or disturbances. This project addresses the limitations
inherent in this approach: biased and inconsistent estimation of the parameters
of interest and incorrect inference due to mis-specifications of the
distribution of unobservables and their statistical relationship with observed
explanatory variables, restrictions on parameter values that can not be
justified by economic theory, and very demanding computational requirements.
More specifically, the project constructs a class of M-estimators, that includes
Least-Absolute-Deviations-type (LAD) estimators, and examines their asymptotic
properties. The project examines how these estimators, which rely on the
assumption of strictly exogenous explanatory variables, can be modified to allow
for dynamic feedback from the lagged choice and outcome variables on the current
choice and outcome. The second part considers estimation of panel data discrete
choice models where the explanatory variable set includes strictly exogenous as
well as lagged endogenous variables and unobservable individual-specific
('fixed") effects that can be correlated with the other explanatory variables in
an arbitrary way. It is currently not known how to estimate this type of models
or whether estimation is even possible. The contribution of the project will be
to give conditions under which such models can be estimated, propose estimators
and derive their asymptotic properties. ??