* 9729178
* New Bioactive Composite Materials:  Proteins Immobilized in the Layers of Alpha-Zr(IV) Phosphonates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Challa Kumar, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/2002
* USD 281,153.00

9729178 Kumar The aim of this proposal is to develop strategies for the
successful immobilization of proteins at solid surfaces. In this study,
a-zirconium phosphonates with specific functionalities will be prepared, and
selected proteins will be immobilized at these surfaces by covalent and non-
covalent methods. Immobilized proteins will be examined with diffuse reflectance
spectral methods (Ultraviolet-Visible, Fourier Transform InfraRed), powder X-ray
diffraction, activity studies, and by differential scanning calorimetry. These
data for the immobilized proteins will be compared with those of the free
proteins to gain insight into how surface functionalities, linker lengths, and
covalent immobilization influence bound protein behavior. Such detailed
information is essential to learn how specific surfaces can be rationally
designed in order to maximize the bound protein function. %%% The catalytic
efficiency and selectivity of enzymes have not been fully exploited for societal
needs due to their instability and high cost. Immobilized enzymes, on the other
hand, are often more stable, result in lower costs, and they can be recycled.
Immobilized proteins are important for applications involving biosensors,
medical implants, enzyme reactors, and biomedical devices. Immobilized proteins
can provide new and improved catalysts to produce fine chemicals, pharmaceutical
intermediates, and synthetic fuels to meet growing societal needs while reducing
the environmental impact of human activities. This activity is jointly supported
by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Materials Research, and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities in the MPS Directorate. ***