* 9729929
* Defining the Hunter-Gatherer Antecedents in North China
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Robert Bettinger, Utah Geological Survey
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2001
* USD 77,868.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Madsen and his international
team of collaborators will conduct archaeological research in the Pigeon
Mountain basin region on the border of Inner Mongolia. On the basis of their
past work in the area, the investigators have identified a series of sites which
date to the Terminal Pleistocene and Holocene and thus span the end of the last
glaciation and the periods of significant climatic change which followed it. The
dried lake bed and marsh sequences in the currently desertic Pigeon Mountain
region contain a readily available wealth of archaeological material as well as
information on changing climate and environment. Preliminary data suggest that
during the Younger Dryas period, hunting and gathering cultures significantly
altered their material culture as well as subsistence strategy in response to
extremely severe dry conditions. The researchers hypothesize that they broadened
their resource base and concentrated on more efficient extraction and processing
of foodstuffs. To gather information to support these preliminary data the group
will survey to locate additional Younger Dryas period sites and conduct
extensive excavation at those known to contain such materials. Through an
expanded sample of faunal remains, chipped and ground stone tools and ceramics
they will gain additional insight into changes in adaptive strategy. The
transition from hunting and gathering to a subsistence mode dependent on
domesticated plants and animals represents perhaps the most important change in
human lifestyle over the last million years. It was this `Neolithic Revolution`
which led to the rise of settled village life, complex stratified societies and
nation states. This transition occurred at roughly the same time in many parts
of the world and archaeologists wish to understand the reasons for this change.
This process occurred, apparently independently in China and the work of Dr.
Madsen and his colleagues should shed new light on it. The group postulates that
it was the adaptations forced by the Younger Dryas climatic change which set the
stage for the emergence of agriculture. This research is important because it is
addressed at a central anthropological question. It will provide data of
interest to many scientists and will further cooperation between Chinese and
American researchers.