* 9729965
* The Electron Beam Process in Drinking Water Treatment:      Biological, Cryptosporidium and Giardia, Control and        Contaminant Destruction
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* William Cooper, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 05/31/2002
* USD 666,069.00

Cooper 97-29965 This is an award to support research on a disinfection process
for water by use of ionizing radiation produced by a beam of energized
electrons. The research will focus on use of the beam for inactivation of
Cryptosporidum sp and Giardia sp. It will consider the potential use of the beam
for treatment of raw water prior to its treatment using conventional
coagulation, sedimentation and filtration processes. The research will also
consider the possibility of using the beam to treat filter backwash water prior
to its return to the raw water supply line. Since it is likely that a residual
disinfectant will be needed before placement of water into a potable water
distribution system, this research will also address the potential the electron
beam has for destruction of precursors of disinfection byproducts produced by
chemical disinfectants such as chlorine. Since many of the common contaminants
of surface and ground water supplies are organic chemicals originating from both
point and non-point sources, the research will also examine the potential use of
the beam for destruction of organic pesticides, herbicides and organic compounds
that adversely affect the taste and odor of water destined for potable
consumption. The results of this project are expected to provide information
potentially useful in considering electron beam radiation as an approach to
disinfection of water contaminated with the target organisms. Co-investigators
include Dr. Joan Rose, Professor in the Department of Marine Science at the
University of South Florida, Dr. Kevin O'Shea, Associate Professor in the
Department of Chemistry at Florida International University and Dr. Prashant V.
Kamat, Senior Scientist, Radiation Laboratory, University of Notre Dame. Edward
H. Bryan, Ph.D., Program Director Environmental Engineering March 2, 1998