* 9729610
* Genetic Analysis of Cellular Signaling in Chlamydomonas     Flagellar Regeneration
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Laura Keller, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 02/28/2003
* USD 311,000.00

9729610 Keller Cells use intracellular messengers to coordinate their responses
to environmental cues. Certain environmental stimuli cause the unicellular
biflagellate green alga Chlamydomonas to rapidly activate a set of coordinated
responses that include excision of its flagella, transient upregulation of a set
of around 200 genes encoding flagellar protein subunits, and initiation of the
outgrowth of a new pair of flagella. Although independent, each of these
responses depends on the second messenger Ca. In this research a genetic
approach will be used to identify components of the signaling pathway leading to
flagellar shedding. Mutants that fail to shed their flagella in response to
stimulation will be isolated. These mutants will then be characterized by
genetic, molecular and cell biological approaches to determine the number and
order of steps in the signaling pathway leading to flagellar shedding. The
proposed experiments will yield insight into cellular signaling in the
Chlamydomonas flagellar regeneration system, and serve as a model for several
fundamental processes in biology including the integration of signal
transduction pathways, the coordinate induction of a large set of genes and the
de novo assembly of complex cell organelles. The green algae Chlamydomonas
responds to some environmental stimuli by shedding its flagella, expressing
genes for flagellar proteins, and growing a new pair of flagella. The research
here will use a genetic approach to identify components of the signaling path
that leads to flagellar shedding. This system serves as a model for many
fundamental cellular processes including cellular integration of signal
transduction pathways, coordinate induction of genes and the formation of
complex cell organelles. ***