* 9729993
* Collaborative Research:  The Determinants and Consequences  of Midlife Education
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Cheryl Elman, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2002
* USD 65,022.00

Social science research has emphasized early educational attainment for later
economic and occupational outcomes, virtually ignoring the trend toward
increased re-entry into education and vocational training among midlife workers.
This project addresses the questions of (1) who returns to education in midlife,
(2) what is the scheduling and shape of the educational trajectory over the life
course relative to co-occurring role schedules in other domains, and (3) how
does mid-life educational re-entry influence later economic and occupational
states. In modeling these three processes, several alternative theoretical
perspectives in stratification research will be examined. Data will be from two
linked waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), a
nationally-representative, longitudinal data set. These data contain information
about past and current educational/vocational exits and entries, contemporaneous
job exits and entries, spousal and household situations, and detailed individual
characteristics. We also attach the 1980 Occupational Characteristics data set
to assist in measuring industrial and occupational characteristics. The models
will include indicators of skills important in present-day occupational
structures, such as computer use, the substantive complexity of jobs, and human
resource management. The models also specify industrial sectors of the economy,
especially those undergoing growth and technological change. Finally, we propose
to replicate key outcome models using a fourth data set, the Health and
Retirement Survey, a study that targets a subset of the age group under study.