* 9729601
* Nucleocytoplasmic Transport of Mammalian mRNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Gordon Carmichael, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9729601 Carmichael The goal of this project is to understand how mRNAs are
transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Intron-containing pre-mRNAs are
usually spliced and polyadenylated within the nucleus before mature mRNAs are
transported to the cytoplasm. Most unspliced mRNAs are not exported. mRNAs
transcribed from cDNAs of many intron-containing genes fail to accumulate in the
cytoplasm, but some cellular mRNAs are intronless yet are transported
efficiently. A 100-bp sequence within the intronless mouse histone H2a coding
region has recently been found to permit efficient cytoplasmic accumulation of a
human (-globin cDNA transcript. This histone element also inhibits splicing and
can functionally replace Rev and the Rev-responsive element (RRE) for the
cytoplasmic accumulation of unspliced HIV-1-related mRNAs. Further, this element
appears to enhance polyadenylation. Therefore, this sequence may be a member of
the cis-acting elements that facilitate the nucleocytoplasmic transport of
naturally intronless messenger RNAs. Importantly, this is the first cellular RNA
sequence that has been shown to have these properties. To extend these initial
studies, a series of experiments are planned. First, the mouse H2a element will
be further characterized in a variety of ways, including by site-specific
mutagenesis. Second, experiments will be undertaken to identify the trans-acting
factor(s) responsible for the transport effect on intronless messages. Third,
using a number of different assays, the mode of action of the histone element
will be compared both in vitro and in vivo to those of other known transport
elements, which derive from viruses. Finally, other mouse histone open reading
frames will be screened for sequences that facilitate intronless mRNA transport.
Living cells contain genetic information (DNA), which must be copied into
informational molecules (called messenger RNA or mRNA) which is used to decode
the information into proteins and enzymes. In order to work correctly, these
mRNAs have to be efficiently transported from one cellular compartment (the
nucleus) to another (the cytoplasm). The research planned in this project will
help us to understand better how mRNAs are transported. For the first time a
cellular mRNA fragment has been discovered which appears to facilitate
transport, and this fragment will be characterized in molecular detail to learn
how it works.