* 9729082
* Modeling Traffic Dynamics for Internet Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Kavitha Chandra, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 02/28/1999
* USD 22,996.00

The research objective is to develop traffic and performance models for the
Internet. Internet applications exhibit growth trends, short and long term
traffic variability and pose dif- ferent quality of service demands on the
network. This traffic environment requires that networks migrate to dynamic
routing and resource allocation paradigms for efficient sharing of network
resources. Baseline traffic models and techniques to validate and adaptively
update these models must be in place in the net- work to support dynamic network
functions. This work proposes measurement driven time-series modeling approaches
for capturing traffic characteristics and other seasonal and exogenous factors
that influence traffic variability on the Internet. The models will be developed
to capture both the short time-scales over which the arrival processes can be
stationary as well the longer time-scale non-stationary features. Real-time
traffic monitoring, measurement and modeling algorithms that can adaptively
update and predict traffic descriptors will be designed for implementa- tion at
network nodes. The preliminary research plan is aimed at determining feasible
traffic measurement strategies for the longer term research work proposed above.
Traffic measurements will be taken at a small set of access routers on the
Internet. A baseline traffic sampling and characterization methodology will be
outlined. Packet voice, variable bit rate video and traditional Internet traffic
will be considered at the flow level. The effect of increasing granularity in
traffic measurements and relative increase in information content useful for
resource allocation will be examined. This preliminary work will determine the
relevant time scales for traffic monitoring and measurements and a better
understanding of the types of modeling tools that must be in place at Internet
nodes to successfully implement adaptively controlled service a nd routing
disciplines. The results of this research plan will be integral for the PI's
long term research interests in designing an adaptive dual mode connection and
flow level traffic charac- terization scheme to be used in admission control,
end-to-end resource reservation and adaptive routing decisions in broadband
packet networks. Refer to http://morse.uml.edu/~kchandra/traffic_rsrch.html for
ongoing research activities.