* 9729935
* Bioremediation of Petroleum-Contaminated Antarctic Soils
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2000
* Thomas Ballestero, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Joyce A. Jatko
* 08/31/2000
* USD 51,289.00

BALLESTERO 9729935 Preliminary research on petroleum contaminated soil from
McMurdo Station, Antarctica, has indicated that there appears to be a strong
influence of temperature on the reduction of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH)
in the soil. To be able to effectively remediate contaminated soils in
Antarctica, the remediation system would need to incorporate some means of
moderating temperature and maintaining the soil at a constant, uniform, above-
freezing temperature. The basic objectives of this research are: 1. To see if
petroleum contaminant levels of 1,000 mg/kg can be achieved by a bioremediation
system, and 2. To design the appropriate radio frequency antennae to provide the
heat source necessary to control soil temperature for pilot and full-scale
Antarctic systems. This research will be performed on petroleum contaminated
soil from McMurdo Station. No non-indigenous microorganisms have been or will be
introduced into the soil as other researchers have indicated that petroleum
degrading microorganisms are present in Antarctic soils. The first objective of
this research will be investigated by using a bench-scale study. Two
temperatures (50C and 150C) will be used. Additionally in the 50C reactors, the
effect of moisture content will be analyzed. Air flow and nutrients will be used
for all reactors. All reactors will be housed in small, sealed refrigerators.
TPH and specific petroleum compounds will be analyzed for by EPA Method 8100.
While the bench-scale studies will be carried-out in refrigerators, pilot and
full-scale efforts would require the use of some heat source. What is proposed
is to use radio frequency (RF) antennae to generate this heat. The RF heating of
the soil occurs by electromagnetic radiation. Design variables to be considered
include: operating frequency, power level, antenna applicator length, number of
applicators, applicator position, applicator orientation, mutu al coupling
between applicators, electrical phasing, and soil properties. Computer modeling
will be used to simulate the RF heating process to account for three fundamental
mechanisms: 1) Specific Absorption Rate (in units of watts/kg) of the materials
illuminated by the electromagnetic fields; 2) Thermal conductivity of the
regions of interest (i.e., heat conduction); 3) Fluid flow (resulting from
moving air and/or water in the region) and initial temperatures (i.e., heat
transport). By properly accounting for these three mechanisms, the temperature
at any point in the region of interest can be modeled. This modeling effort will
aid with the antenna designs. If bioremediation is not effective for larger
particles, RF heating may be useful for volatilization of the petroleum
contamination, a course of treatment which may be preferable to shipping the
larger particles off continent.