* 9729777
* Dissertation Research: Socioecology of Mother and Infant    Health Among the Panare
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1998,09/30/1999
* Benjamin Campbell, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/1999
* USD 11,977.00

This project examines the extent to which social and ecological stressors
influence mother and infant health among the Eastern Panare of Venezuela. The
people of this community are swidden horticulturists who have no access to
institutional healthcare, few social or economic ties with outsiders, and whose
daily activities reflect traditional patterns of subsistence and social
organization. This socio-ecological environment provides an excellent
opportunity for a longitudinal investigation of the effects of social tension
and residential movement on mother-infant health. The central hypothesis of this
study is that social stressors have a negative effect on health, independent of
nutrition. Data on salivary immune factors, milk energy, health,
anthropometrics, maternal stress, and family mobility will be collected from a
series of mother-infant pairs to test whether infants of more highly stressed
mothers exhibit evidence of poorer health and growth disruptions. While the
influence of nutrition on early childhood well-being has been extensively
studied, this will be the first study to combine ethnographic,
psychoneuroimmunological, and energetic methods to longitudinally track mother
and infant health. Consequently, this work will provide us with a much richer
understanding of how both social and ecological factors influence maternal well-
being and thus shape infant health status.