* 9729569
* Layer-by-Layer Processing of Polymers:  New Opportunities   for Surface Modification and Thin Film Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Michael Rubner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2001
* USD 285,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9729569 M. Rubner/MIT The objective of this research is to
establish the fundamental knowledge base needed to control the structure and
properties if sequentially adsorbed polyion layers and to use this knowledge to
create high performance light emitting thin film devices and versatile surface
modification layers. The program will explore in detail the role that processing
parameters play in determining the structure, organization, layer thickness and
properties of multilayer thin films fabricated from sequentially adsorbed
bilayers of weak polyacids and strong polycations. Important issues such as
determining and controlling the level of interlayer interlayer interpenetration
and the polyanion/polycation composition of the internal bilayers and outermost
surface layer will be examined including non-conjugated and conjugated polyions
and light emitting polyions. It is anticipated that the fundamental knowledge
gained by these new studies will make it possible to significantly enhance the
performance of thin film light emitting devices fabricated from conjugated
polyions and to create a new facility of surface modification layers suitable
for applications ranging from anti-fogging surfaces to contact lenses. Light
emitting thin film devices will be examined with the goal of creating large
area, high efficiency devices. ***