* 9729953
* AAAS Workshops on Electronic Publishing in                  Science-Intellectual Property Protections
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2000
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 11/30/2000
* USD 112,828.00

Frankel This project contributes to the NSF Knowledge and Distributed
Intelligence research area, being directed at deepening our understanding of the
ethical, legal, and social implications of Knowledge Networking. This series of
workshops will examine the intellectual property issues associated with
electronic publishing in science. Electronic journals in science, engineering
and medicine have grown dramatically in recent years. However, for the most part
these publications are merely electronic reproductions of their print
counterparts; they have been slow to adopt the novel features that online
production makes possible. There are a variety of reasons for this, but whether
or not electronic publications are to reach their full potential and be fully
embraced by the scientific community will ultimately depend on establishing a
clear and stable legal framework. The advent of electronic publishing poses a
number of intellectual property issues for science, even in light of recent
national and global efforts to bring copyright law into the information age. For
example, to what extent can the notion of science as a `public good` be
understood and valued in the increasing commercialization of the electronic
market place? What should be the features of a legal framework that assures the
protection of property interests yet encourages open communication and
innovation? How will acceptable fair use exceptions be implemented in the
context of electronic publishing? What is the `work` to be protected in dynamic/
interactive work? What changes in intellectual property law, if any, are needed
to protect the creators and distributors of scientific databases? To what extent
can technological innovations supplement or function as useful alternatives to
new laws for protecting the reproduction and distribution rights of authors and
publishers? These and related questions will be the focus of this proposal for a
two-year project involving two workshops linked by a series of working group
meetings consisting of key stakeholder groups in the sciences, electronic
publishing, and intellectual property law. Recommendations for establishing a
legal framework for U.S. copyright law as applied to electronic publishing in
science are expected to be generated by the project and will be widely
disseminated via print and electronic media. To ensure as much as possible their
consideration by stakeholders and their impact on law and public policy, AAAS
will sponsor briefings for scientific societies, associations, and publishers,
and the press as well as Congress and appropriate federal agencies. The project
is co-sponsored by two AAAS standing committees: the Committee on Scientific
Freedom and Responsibility and the National Conference of Lawyers and
Scientists, a joint committee with the American Bar Association. An advisory
committee, drawing on the most knowledgeable members of both committees on
issues related to electronic publishing and intellectual property law, has been
formed to guide the project.