* 9729197
* Workshop on "Teaching of Power Electronics".                To be Held at The University of Minnesota,                  June 25-27, 1998.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Ned Mohan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

ECS-9729197 Mohan A 3-day Faculty Workshop is proposed on the topic of "Teaching
of Power Electronics". Power electronics is an enabling technology which finds
itself a part of any electronics equipment for computation, communication,
office automation, and entertainment. It is an important component in robotics,
factory automation and process control which are vital for industrial
competitiveness. Power-electronics based solutions can result in significant
energy conservation, thus reducing energy costs and environmental pollution. It
is also certain that power electronics technologies will play an increasing role
in the power industry. Therefore, it is desirable that all universities with an
Electrical Engineering department should have course(s) in power electronics.
Our proposal to NSF "Innovations to Power Electronics Education" was recently
accepted for funding. Prior to this and as a part of this project, we have been
developing courses, laboratory and other educational material in the area of
power electronics. For disseminating this information, a workshop on "Teaching
of Power Electronics' is planned at the University of Minnesota, June 25-27,
1998. As a part of "Innovations to Power Electronics Education", a workshop on
"teaching of Electric Drives" was organized at the University of Minnesota, June
19-21, 1997. Nearly all the funds (a total of $3,000) allocated for organizing
three workshops were spent on this single workshop on "Teaching of Electric
Drives", primarily due to unexpectedly large number of participants, mostly
faculty members from universities in the United States. The purpose of this
proposal is to make the next workshop on "Teaching of Power Electronics" even
more successful by inviting both university as well as industry participation.