* 9729671
* LEXEN:  Development of the Capability to Measure Proxies of Microbial Activity within Oceanic Crust (Collaborative      Research)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 09/30/2002
* USD 229,169.00

9729671 Johnson This research suggests a program to test the hypothesis that
there is a substantial microbial biosphere living within the oceanic upper
crustal rocks of the off-axis ridge flanks, hundreds of meters below the water-
rock interface, by detecting specific metabolic products which are associated
with these sub-surface microbial communities. These diagnostic organic compounds
should accompany the hydrothermal fluid that is known to circulate within the
upper crustal rocks and eventually discharges into the overlying seawater at
diffuse vent sites in exposed rock outcrops. We will also detect and
phylogeneticallv characterize (ribosomal RNA molecular probe) any cellular
biomass associated with fluid discharges. To test the ridge flank subsurface
biosphere hypothesis, we propose to build an instrumented "bio-blanket" that
focuses up-welling fluid emanating from these diffuse vent areas through
relatively small scavenging columns that serve as traps for metabolic (organic
carbon) products. The proposed instrumented blanket would also measure up-
welling temperatures and velocities as the hydrothermal fluid vents into
seawater. The development of the bio-blanket will be in several stages: initial
instrument-component tests and fluid sampling will exploit the convenient
valved- plumbing system of the "corked" ODP Hole 1026B, which has documented 65
C outflowing fluids; subsequent complete prototype instruments will be deployed
over active diffuse vents at both an exposed outcrop at a ridge flank site (Baby
Bare, Cascadia Basin) and a mid-ocean ridge spreading center (Endeavour
Segment), where flux rates are high and the signal-to-noise ratio of any
component of the fluid is quite large. The direct detection of a wide-spread
biological community, living within the sub-surface ocean floor in the older
ridge flank regions, would dramatically alter our estimates of biological
productivity and the global carbon budgets, and have a profound impact on our
philosophical view of the earth. ***