* 9729587
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  A Cross-National Analysis of   Family Migration and the Labor Market Achievement of        Partnered Women and Men
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/1999
* Thomas Cooke, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,116.00

9729587&lt;br/&gt;Cooke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award provides
support for US-UK cooperative research on the causes and consequences of family
migration. The collaboration involves Thomas J. Cooke of the University of
Connecticut, Paul Boyle of the University of Leeds, and Keith Halfacree of the
University of Wales-Swansea. The motivation for this research is the conflicting
empirical evidence regarding the effect of family migration on the labor market,
in particular, the achievements of married women in labor markets. While most
research demonstrates that residential decision-making processes within the
family often serve to reinforce the marginal socioeconomic position of women,
more recent research indicates that in particular contexts migration may be a
socially and economically liberating experience for married women. The
investigators will use individual-level data from the Samples of Anonymised
Records (SARs) of the 1991 British Census and the Public Use Microdata Sample
(PUMS) of the 1990 US Census to investigate family migration on married, and
cohabiting, women and men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US and British investigators
have complementary expertise in migration research and extensive knowledge of
the PUMS and SARs data respectively. The project will advance understanding of
the linkages between geographic mobility and socioeconomic mobility in general,
and of the socioeconomic position of women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;