* 9729819
* Polymers of Mixed-Valence Ruthenium Azine Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,09/30/2001
* William Euler, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 09/30/2001
* USD 333,000.00

Dr. William B. Euler of the Department of Chemistry, University of Rhode Island,
is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program to study polymers of mixed-valence ruthenium azine complexes. This
project involves the synthesis and characterization of new ruthenium-polyazine
based polymers in order to determine the role of the metal in the electronic and
charge-transfer properties of the polymers. Systems selected will incorporate
the ruthenium center as part of the conjugated electron-transfer pathway. The
charge-transfer properties of the polymers will be modified by changing the
length of the oligoazine bridge portion of the polymer ligand and thus the
distance between ruthenium sites. A theoretical model predicts that as the metal
sites become further apart, the coupling between metals will increase, up to the
limit of the conjugation length of the oligoazine. Binuclear ruthenium-
oligoazine-ruthenium compounds will also be prepared and studied as models for
understanding this unusual predicted property of the polymers. All of the new
materials will be studied by infrared, nuclear magnetic resonance, and
ultraviolet-visible-near-infrared spectroscopies, cyclic voltammetry, and
variable temperature electrical conductivity measurements. In this project the
use of metal compounds appended to electrical conducting polymers is expected to
modify the polymer properties, allowing for the creation of new nonlinear
optical materials, catalysts, and nanostructured materials. The polymers to be
studied will also help in the fundamental understanding of the transfer of
electrons through proteins, an important problem in biological chemistry.