* 9729726
* Natural Causal Induction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Patricia Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 08/31/2001
* USD 183,000.00

Causal induction, the process of identifying causes for events, plays a central
role in everyday life as well as in science. The goal of this project is to find
out how people discover that one thing causes another, in daily life and in the
laboratory. Because relations between causes and effects are neither deducible
nor directly observable, they must be induced from observable events. Inferring
causes is far from trivial; whereas effects regularly follow their causes, not
all events that regularly follow one another are causally related. Cheng
recently proposed a theory of causal induction in which the reasoner explains
regularity of succession (a function defined in terms of observable events) by a
general notion of causal power (an unobservable theoretical entity), just as
scientists explain data with theories. Cheng's theory explains (1) the boundary
conditions under which regularity implies causality and (2) a diverse set of
robust psychological phenomena concerning judgments of what causes, or prevents,
an effect. In addition the theory makes many novel predictions. The goal of the
proposed research is to test these predictions against alternative accounts. The
experiments involve asking human subjects to make causal judgments when given
information about the occurrence of candidate causes for an effect. The project
directly aims at gaining a deeper understanding of the process of causal
induction; it indirectly aims at providing a basis for the development of an
effective program for teaching scientific methodology.