* 9729037
* Empirical Investigations of Locality Effects in Linguistic  Complexity
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2001
* Edward Gibson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 04/30/2001
* USD 270,000.00

The goal of this research is to investigate the relationship between the human
sentence processing mechanism and the available computational resources. A
promising new theory of this relationship is proposed whose main notion is
locality: the Syntactic Prediction Locality Theory (SPLT). There are two
components to the theory: an integration component and a memory cost component:
ª Integration resources are required to link new words into current syntactic
and discourse structures. This includes thematic role assignment and matching
syntactic category predictions. It is proposed that longer distance integrations
are more costly and hence more time consuming than shorter distance
integrations. ª According to the memory resource component of the theory, memory
resources are required to maintain the prediction of each syntactic category
that is needed to complete the input string as a grammatical sentence. It is
proposed that the memory resources required to retain a predicted category
increase over distance. The research consists of three sets of self paced
reading experiments that address a number of predictions of the SPLT and other
theories of language comprehension. The first two sets of experiments test
predictions of the SPLT in English, and the third set of experiments explores
the cross linguistic generality of the SPLT by testing the theory in a language
with very different syntactic structure from English: Japanese.