* 9729088
* The Albert Einstein Distingished Educator Fellowship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Arthur Livermore, Triangle Coalition for Science and Technology Education
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 72,000.00

9729088 Purdy The Triangle Coalition manages the Albert Einstein Distinguished
Educator Fellowships Program to give highly qualified K-12 mathematics and
science teachers an opportunity to spend a school year in the Washington, DC
metropolitan area to serve as a "teacher voice" with various federal agencies
and Congress. Currently, federal agencies such as NASA, the US Department of
Education, the US Department of Energy, and the National Institutes of Health
host Einstein Fellows. In these settings, the teachers have worked on several
initiatives of national importance. For example, the Fellows in the Department
of Education have participated in the follow-up to the Third International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). Another currently serves in Senator Jim
Jeffords Office. To become an Einstein Fellow, teachers submit a written
application and then undergo an interview process in Washington. The interview
panel is composed of current fellows and representatives of federal agencies.
Those selected as finalists are then placed. In 1997, 12 finalists were selected
out of 65 applicants. Many of the Einstein Fellows are former winners of the
Presidential Award for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching. This
program is now administered directly by NSF, and having a K-12 classroom teacher
(particularly one who is a former awardee) in the Division will be extremely
helpful to us.