* 9729413
* Interaction Between Substratum Surface Chemistry,           Conformation of Contaminant Upon Adsorption, and            Availability for Bacterial Degradation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* James Bryers, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/2000
* USD 348,000.00

9729413 Bryers We hypothesize that the bioavailability of adsorbed organic
contaminants is determined by their conformation upon adsorption and that this
conformation is affected by the chemical properties of the surface and the
contaminant. Research will quantify the surface chemistry effects on adsorption
conformation and the subsequent availability of adsorbed contaminants for
bacterial degradation. We will determine the degradation kinetics for model
compounds separately and as mixtures in suspended pure and mixed bacterial
cultures. Biofilm formation kinetics for pure and defined mixed cultures,
cultivated on a benign substrate will be determined. Silicon crystals of known
texture will serve as control surfaces. Next we will use self assembled
monolayers (SAMs) to bind desired functional groups to silicon substrata; thus
controlling local surface chemistry at constant topography. Variation in surface
chemistry of each substratum will be determined by a regimen of surface
analyses. Single organic contaminants, then mixtures of those contaminants will
be exposed to the various substrata. Contaminant configuration will vary due to
the pre-treatment chemistry or the spatial variation in that treatment.
Contaminant conformations will be quantified using the techniques above. Rates
of bacterial cell adhesion and biofilm formation will be measured non-invasively
using fluorescent confocal microscopic image analysis. Degradation of adsorbed
contaminants will be monitored using fluorescent reporter genes. Rates of
contaminant degradation, alone or within a mixture, will be correlated to the
molecular configuration adsorbed to the surface.