* 9730385
* Rational and Semi-Rational Learning-Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Rann Smorodinsky, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 268,816.00

*** 9730385 Alvaro Sandroni Rann Smorodinsky The objective of this project is to
model learning in situations of repeated interactions among agents. The research
looks at very general games, as well as concrete situations such as games of
common interest (e.g., partners in a firm) and financial markets. The common
thread underlying all of our models is the subjective approach. Namely, agents'
are endowed with a belief over the evolution of the economy which may not
coincide with the truth. In the first part we focus on a single, fully rational,
agent. We study necessary and sufficient conditions for agents to learn, and the
rate at which they learn. In the second part we extend the one agent model to a
repeated game set-up. We study necessary and sufficient conditions for
convergence to equilibrium (Nash equilibrium and its refinements.) We also show
how fast equilibrium is obtained. Another research direction, using this
subjective framework, is the consequences of plausible restrictions on players'
beliefs. Preliminary results suggest that in repeated coordination games, the
unique efficient allocation is obtained if agents believe (possibly incorrectly)
that they can influence their opponents behavior in a particular way (which we
will refer to as ``positive influence.'') The third part applies the techniques
developed in the previous parts to financial markets. The novelty is that we do
not impose any conditions on agents' beliefs. We show that the compatibility
conditions exogenously imposed in the game theoretic set-up must be satisfied in
financial markets, otherwise an arbitrage opportunity exists. From this we can
conclude that if agents are subjectively optimizing and if markets clear then
convergence to a rational expectations equilibrium (i.e., an ``objective''
equilibrium where agents' beliefs are correct) will eventually be obtained. We
also study the relation between forecast accuracy and wealth accumulation. In
the literature it is shown that if savings ar e exogenous then agents making
accurate forecasts may accumulate less wealth than agents with systematically
incorrect beliefs. We show that, once savings are determined endogenously,
agents who make inaccurate predictions are driven out of the market. The last
part departs from the fully rational approach. We study models of learning,
which we refer to as semi-rational. The motivation for this part is to close the
gap in the literature between rational learning and adaptive learning. We relax
extreme assumptions implied by full rationality on the one hand and myopic ad-
hoc models on the other hand. ***