* 9730243
* Longitudinal Micro Data for the Study of Long Run Changes   in Economic Mobility in the U.S., 1850-1990
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Joseph Ferrie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2001
* USD 106,525.00

Though economists have devoted considerable attention to patterns of economic
mobility in recent years, historical patterns of movement within the income and
wealth distributions and within the occupational hierarchy have been subject to
less scrutiny. This has been the result of a lack of suitable longitudinal data
like that found in contemporary sources such as the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) and the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS). This project will
continue work on creating such data for the second half of the nineteenth
century. Previous support made possible the creation of a new sample of 5,000
American males linked across the 1850 and 1860 federal population censuses, as
well as substantial progress on a sample of 7,000 American males linked across
the 1860 and 1870 federal population censuses. These new samples have permitted
a unique view of economic mobility in the U.S. in the years surrounding the
Civil War. They have made it possible to study wealth mobility, occupational
change, and the role of geographic mobility (in particular migration to the
frontier) in fostering economic opportunity. This project will complete the
creation of thirty years of longitudinal data for the nineteenth century by
making it possible to finish the 1860 1870 sample (now roughly 2/3 done) and to
link 3,200 males from the 1880 Public Use Micro Sample to the 1870 manuscript
census schedules. These linkages are now possible because of the recent creation
of a new index to the 1870 federal population census. When these samples are
completed, researchers will have access to longitudinal data that covers the
1850s, the 1860s, and the 1870s. These were momentous decades in American
economic history: they include the rapid movement of settlers into the West, the
Civil War and its aftermath, the emancipation of African American slaves, and
the growth of large scale, capital intensive industries. Each of these
developments should have had enormous consequences for economic mobility. For
example, the availability of unsettled land in the West may have provided an
important outlet for laborers in glutted Eastern urban labor markets, as
suggested more than a century ago by Frederick Jackson Turner. This project will
provide the first direct evidence with which we can test Turner's assertion.
Results presented in this proposal suggest that, at least for the 1850s, Turner
was correct. The poor economic performance of African Americans has been
attributed to the weak position from which they began in the years after
emancipation, with little human or physical capital, few employment
opportunities outside agriculture, a ruinous debt burden, and a discriminatory
environment. This project will provide the first data on their performance in
the decade following emancipation and make possible an examination of these
issues.