* 9730951
* Travel Grant for Students to Attend the American Power      Conference; Chicago, Illinois; April 1998
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1998,09/30/1998
* V Ramesh, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 9,975.00

9730951 Ramesh The American Power Conference (APC), sponsored by the Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT), is an annual national forum for the discussion of
the broad overall aspects of generation, transmission, distribution and
utilization of power. APC has significant educational value particularly for
undergraduate students who aim to learn more about the industry with a view
towards deciding their career options. In recognition of this fact, IIT has been
conducting a special program for faculty and students in conjunction with APC.
This program is called the Ben Elliott Sponsored Student Faculty Program
(BESSF). The program features special breakfast sessions and other events for
students (like plant tours) in addition to the regular APC sessions. Through
utility sponsorship, the program has been successful in enabling over 120
students and faculty to participate in APC each year. However, many
undergraduate and graduate students are currently unable to attend due to lack
of industry sponsors. The emerging competitive utility environment makes it
difficult for existing sponsors to even maintain their current levels of
sponsorship. In this proposal, we request travel funds, totaling $9,975, for 35
students to attend APC and participate in the BESSF program for the APC-98. The
amount will be cost-shared with funds from utilities and from universities of
the students. The students will be selected from among those enrolled in U.S.
universities per the following criteria: * Undergraduate students, in
particular, sophomores and juniors will be given priority. * Women and under-
represented minorities will be given first preference. * U.S. citizens and
permanent residents will receive greater consideration than non-citizens. *
Students who have demonstrated prior interest in the power industry either
through power engineering courses or through internships will receive additional
consideration. * Graduate students who intend to present papers at APC will be
given pr eference over other graduate students. This grant will significantly
aid the BESSF program in its mission of encouraging more students (especially
undergraduates) to pursue careers in power engineering. ***