* 9730892
* Multi-Modal Approach to Understand BOLD fMRI Image-Contrast
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2001
* D.S. Fahmeed Hyder, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2001
* USD 271,797.00

06/30/98 This award supports the development of new methodology to enhance the
NMR imaging and spectroscopy performance of the 7T horizontal bore spectrometer
at Yale Magnetic Resonance Center for quantitative blood-oxygenation level
dependent (BOLD) functional MRI (fMRI) image-contrast. The main significance of
this project is that it will provide the fundamental basis for converting the
BOLD images into neuronal activity maps. Autoradiography studies on animals and
PET studies on humans have provided the standards for quantitative measurements
of changes in cerebral activity by detecting alterations in cerebral perfusion
and metabolism at high spatial resolution. However, the major disadvantages of
these techniques are that both methodologies require radioactive tracers and
temporal alterations in neuronal activity cannot be monitored. The BOLD fMRI
method, in contrast, does not require exogenous tracers and provides a dynamic
measure of brain activity. The proposed project will allow the BOLD signal to be
quantitatively related to cerebral metabolism and perfusion, providing a
quantitative MRI method of probing the physiological parameters that are coupled
to cerebral activity. A non-invasive and non-radioactive method for
quantitatively mapping alterations in neuronal activity in the mammalian brain
would be a very important tool in neuroscience. Applications would include brain
mapping of sensory and cognitive functions, assessment of altered cerebral
activity in the diseased or injured brain, and long- term investigations of
brain development and functional plasticity.