* 9730416
* The Recurrent Coastal Plume in Lake Michigan:  A Critical   Event for Copepod Reproduction and Recruitment
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Marie Bundy, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 01/31/2003
* USD 102,684.00

9730416 Bundy Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
Opportunity (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes. This is a
collaborative research project between investigators from ten academic and
government research institutions. The research is being conducted under the
auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal
Ocean Program. This collaborative, 5-year research program will focus on the
importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore transport and subsequent
ecological consequences. The study seeks to 1) determine what processes control
the cross- margin (inshore to offshore) transport of biological, chemical, and
geological materials in the coastal margins of the Great Lakes, and to 2)
develop and test scientific strategies for assessing, quantifying, and
predicting the impacts of multiple stresses both natural and anthropogenic, in
the Great Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions. A tight coupling between
sediments and overlying water exists in lakes and coastal ecosystems through the
process of sediment resuspension. Satellite observations in Lake Michigan
illustrate an annually recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore transport, a 10
km wide plume of resuspended material extending over 200 km along the southern
shores of the lake. Preliminary evidence indicates that this episodic event may
be the major mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan. The
program results will be applicable to similar events in many coastal areas. This
component of the study addresses the general hypothesis: large episodic events,
such as the Lake Michigan Recurrent Coastal Plume (LMRCP), change
mesozooplanktonic community structure and production by altering species and
life-stage distributions of certain organisms and their trophic interactions.
Field observations, process studies, and laboratory investigations will be
combined to evaluate physical and biotic effects of the plume on the
mesozooplankton community. Biweekly sampling of nutrients, physical variables,
and other parameters will serve to put the LMRCP in perspective with ongoing
changes in the plankton and other events, and help evaluate its significance to
the Lake as a whole. The response of mesozooplankton to large scale episodic
events during the winter-spring period in the Great Lakes and other similar
aquatic systems is important at the ecosystem level because these populations
play a pivotal role in energy transfers and nutrient transformations that occur
throughout the rest of the year.