* 9730354
* The Effect of Gamete Competition on Levels of Gamete        Production in a Marine Invertebrate
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Philip Yund, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2002
* USD 285,000.00

Previous work suggests that high population densities result in more intense
male gamete competition and select for increased levels of production of these
gametes. This hypothesis will be tested by examining spatial and temporal
correlations between density and male gamete production levels in natural
populations of a colonial ascidian. Two additional considerations which might
modify the effect that male gamete competition has on levels of male gamete
production will also be explored. First, natural selection can only act on the
genetic portion of total phenotypic variance. Secondly, selection acts
simultaneously on the entire phenotype, and so the effect of selection on male
gamete production could be constrained by genetic correlations between this and
other life history traits that are also subject to strong selection. Negative
genetic correlations between male gamete production and allocation to other
traits or structures would generate a trade off, with enhanced male gamete
production offset by reductions in other traits. Alternatively, positive genetic
correlations would constrain selection to operate on total allocation patterns
as a single unit. These two potential constraints on evolution will be examined
via a laboratory breeding experiment that will estimate the narrow sense
heritability of male gamete production levels and explore possible genetic
correlations between male gamete production and other life history traits.
Overall, this study will contribute to our knowledge of the evolution of
reproductive strategies in marine organisms by examining the selective pressures
that fertilization processes can exert on gamete production patterns.