* 9730142
* Industrial Productivity, Urban Growth, and Air Quality      Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* J. Vernon Henderson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2002
* USD 272,220.00

This project has three interrelated parts, with a unifying theme being the
dynamics of patterns of location and agglomeration of plants, industries, and
populations as affected by agglomeration economies, geography, and regulation.
Another unifying element is the data utilized. The first part examines the
effects of environmental regulation on major polluting industries, where, apart
from studying regulatory effects on location and industrial structure, a focus
concerns plant operating efficiencies in different locations, over time, and by
plant size and age. Capital intensities across plants are compared by age before
and after the advent of strong environmental regulation and between regulated
non attainment (`treatment`) and less or unregulated attainment (`control`)
areas. Quasifixed factor cost functions are estimated so as to be able to
calculate shadow marginal products of capital and efficient operating sizes.
Issues to be analyzed include to what extent environmentally induced investments
contribute to productivity and to what extent and at what cost plants after
regulation and in non attainment areas are relatively overcapitalized and
relatively under sized. The second part of the proposal examines the spatial
evolution of high tech and traditional industries and the effects on plant
productivity of local static and dynamic externalities. Spatial evolution of
distributions of high tech employment across cities are modeled as a stationary
first order Markov process. Apart from studying issues of `convergence,` the
object is to determine what urban site characteristics define good sites for
what industries. To what extent are urban high tech `miracles` predictable? Site
characteristics include predetermined city population and employment
characteristics, exogenous geographic characteristics, and characteristics of
neighboring cities. If, for example, base period metro area population is a key
characteristic, there remains a question of why. To answer this question, urban
externalities will be examined to determine if they are static versus dynamic
and if they are ones of localization versus urbanization. The third part focuses
on urban evolution. The theory combines the urban elements of local scale
economies versus diseconomies yielding multiple finite size cities in an
economy, with exogenous national population growth and endogenous economic
growth through human capital investment involving localized knowledge
spillovers. Apart from modeling urban evolution, the idea is to study evolving
income inequality across cities. At any instant, different goods and city types
will generally have different equilibrium per person human capital levels and
real observed incomes. Moreover workers may sort across cities by ability
levels. A key issue concerns the interaction among localized knowledge
spillovers, parental education, inter generational transmission of ability,
urban production patterns and income inequality. The empirical part examines
urban evolution in the USA from 1900 to the present. The research uses three
major data sets. First is the Longitudinal Research Database from 1963 1994 to
study plant productivity, metro area industrial environments, and environmental
regulation (combined also with Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures data
of the Census Bureau). Second is county level data set for 19001990 for all USA
counties consistently defined over time, covering Census population and
industrial characteristics and incorporating geographic characteristics. Finally
there is annual County Business Patterns data for 1977 1995, giving industry
detail on all private employment, combined with Census data on government
employment and urban characteristics.