* 9730062
* Accomplishment Based Renewal of: Autoregressive Conditional Duration, Arch, Common Features, and Cointegration
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Robert Engle, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2003
* USD 229,080.00

9730062 Engle As computers increase in power and memory it becomes feasible to
collect and analyze data at higher and higher frequencies. Data sets that record
every transaction - the highest frequency possible - now exist for many
financial data sets as well as microeconomic transactions such as telephone
calls and credit card purchases that are recorded by computers. The analysis of
such data sets poses new and interesting economic challenges, one of them being
the choice of the proper interval of time within which to aggregate the data so
as to generate a data set with observations spaced evenly part. The problem with
fixed interval analysis is that it can leave the investigator with many
uninformative data points or disguise the periods of most interest. This
Accomplishment Based Renewal continues the study and application to financial
microdata of an alternative to fixed interval analysis developed by the
investigator. This approach is called Autoregressive Conditional Duration (ACD).
Instead of selecting a fixed interval for analyzing the data, the interval
between transactions becomes a random variable to be analyzed. Thus the data set
becomes a list of durations and characteristics of each transaction. This
procedure models the time intervals directly without using auxiliary data or
imposing assumptions on the causes of the time flow. The previous grant used the
ACD model to analyze the price, volume and duration process of stock
transactions. The timing of transactions, order submissions and quote revisions
are the focus of new proposed econometric studies. From these analyses it is
possible to infer key behavioral aspects of financial markets. The term
liquidity is often used to describe effectively functioning markets. With more
precise empirical measures of market quality such as the bid ask spread, the
depth of the market and the price impact of trade, it is possible to examine the
ebb and flow of market liquidity. This is clearly important for assessing the s
tability of markets and for institutions seeking to trade large volumes. Using
TORQ, TAQ, QEX options, S&amp;P Futures and potentially other data sets, this
project measures various dimensions of market liquidity, examines the time
series behavior, forecastability, and economic determinants of these measures.
??