* 9730143
* Children's Spontaneous False Memories for Traumatic Medical Experiences
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Farrell Lloyd, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul J. Wahlback
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,275.00

Children's spontaneous false memories have been the subject of considerable
heat and little light recently. This research is testing several hypotheses
about false memories for doctor visits that are accompanied by trauma to answer
questions that bear on the accuracy of children's witness testimony. Prior
research by these investigators has produced a theoretical framework (fuzzy-
trace theory) that makes counterintuitive predictions about such important
issues as: age variability in spontaneous memory falsifications, age variability
in the effects of delay on memory falsification, the persistence of false
memories over time, the tendency of mere memory testes to falsify the contents
of memory, and the features of experienced events that are most prone to memory
falsification. Three experiments will use a false-recognition procedure and will
consist of four sessions. Participants will be 180 children between the ages of
23 and 8. Children's experiences to urgent-care clinics will be the focus of
subsequent memory interviews to occur 1-3 days after the child sees the
physician. Subsequent interviews occur at 6 month and 1 year intervals. Memory
interviews will query events that the child did and those that her or she did
not experience. False-recognition effect will be used to index spontaneous
memory falsification. Differences in spontaneous memory falsification are being
tracked as a function of several variables that have forensic relevance:
frequency of experience with events, amount of prior interviewing, whether
inferences have been made about events, whether inconsistent version of evens
have been experienced. These data will resolve tow uncertainties in current
scientific knowledge about children's false memories. These are that mere memory
tests can create false memories that are stable over time and whether
spontaneous false memory increase with age or delay between exposure to events
and memory tests. %%% Children's spontaneous false memories have been the
subject of considerable heat and little light recently. This research is testing
several hypotheses about false memories for doctor visits that are accompanied
by trauma to answer questions that bear on the accuracy of children's witness
testimony. Prior research by these investigators has produced a theoretical
framework (fuzzy-trace theory) that makes counterintuitive predictions about
such important issues as: age variability in spontaneous memory falsifications,
age variability in the effects of delay on memory falsification, the persistence
of false memories over time, the tendency of mere memory testes to falsify the
contents of memory, and the features of experienced events that are most prone
to memory falsification. Three experiments will use a false-recognition
procedure and will consist of four sessions. Participants will be 180 children
between the ages of 23 and 8. Children's experiences to urgent-care clinics will
be the focus of subsequent memory interviews to occur 1-3 days after the child
sees the physician. Subsequent interviews occur at 6 month and 1 year intervals.
Memory interviews will query events that the child did and those that her or she
did not experience. False-recognition effect will be used to index spontaneous
memory falsification. Differences in spontaneous memory falsification are being
tracked as a function of several variables that have forensic relevance:
frequency of experience with events, amount of prior interviewing, whether
inferences have been made about events, whether inconsistent version of evens
have been experienced. These data will resolve tow uncertainties in current
scientific knowledge about children's false memories. These are that mere memory
tests can create false memories that are stable over time and whether
spontaneous false memory increase with age or delay between exposure to events
and memory tests.