* 9730647
* How Important are Regional Processes in Determining the     Local Species Richness of Marine Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Jon Witman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2001
* USD 217,768.00

This study investigates the relationship between the number of species in
biogeographic regions (spatial scale of 10' to 1W kms ) and the number occurring
in local communities (spatial scale of < 1 to 10'm's) of sessile epifaunal
invertebrates from 11 biogeographic regions comprising at least 33 local sites.
The main predictions to be tested are: if local communities are simply a sink
from the biogeographic (regional) species pool, then local species richness will
be positively and linearly related to regional species richness over a broad
range of diversities. Alternatively, if ecological interactions limit the number
of species coexisting in local habitats, then regressions of local richness on
regional richness will level off or saturate. We propose to test these
hypotheses by sampling the species richness of epifaunal communities in
different biogeographic regions with quantitative photographic techniques. Local
diversity will be quantified from 35 mm photo quadrats (0.25m ) taken at random
locations along transects placed horizontally across subtidal rock walls at
approximately 10 m depth. Quadrat photos will be analyzed until a plot of the
cumulative number of species at each location asymptotes, which will comprise
our measure of local species richness. Regional species richness will be
estimated from published species lists and by consulting local experts at each
site. Regression techniques are developed herein to test the predictions of
regional influence vs. local saturation. In addition, four related questions
will be investigated to increase our understanding of 1) the relationship
between body (or colony) size and local species richness 2) the ability of
larval dispersal mode to explain the degree of regional influence an local
richness, 3) the relation between species density, local species richness and
regional species richness and 4) how the nature of the relationship between
local and regional richness varies among different taxa. The preservation of
biological diversity is one of the most pressing environmental issues of the
present and next century. Accurately identifying the nature of threats to
Earth's biotic diversity and designing and implementing sound conservation
strategies requires an understanding of the forces that shape spatio temporal
patterns of biodiversity. The results of the proposed research will greatly
enhance our ability to critically assess the importance of regional processes in
structuring shallow marine hard substrate communities.