* 9730775
* GOALI:  A Fundamental Investigation of the Design,          Processing and Evaluation of a Model, Oxidation Resistant,  Functionally-Graded Coating System for Refractory Metals
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* John Moore, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2001
* USD 389,852.00

9730775 Moore The research program investigates functionally-graded coating
systems that incorporate an amorphous diffusion barrier layer. Past research
identified a functionally- graded molybdenum-silicon based coating system
(MoSi2-SiC), deposited on the refractory metal substrate using physical vapor
deposition as a promising processing route. A sufficiently thick, outer layer of
MoSi2 can be subsequently applied to the functionally-graded layer using plasma
spraying. The earlier research also identified the potential of utilizing
MoSi2-SiC composite targets as compared with elemental targets (e.g. Mo, Si, and
C). However, a suitable diffusion barrier layer between the MoSi2-SiC
functionally-graded coating and the refractory metal substrate must be
identified in order to minimize diffusion of silicon and carbon into the
refractory (Mo or W) substrate. If this barrier is not used, sub-silicides and
carbides of the refractory metals are produced at the coating-substrate
interface, resulting in deterioration of oxidation resistance and mechanical
properties of the coating system, as well as a reduction in the coating life. A
Mo-Si-N-C diffusion barrier has recently been identified that remains amorphous
up to 1260C. Thermal cycling of the MoSi2-SiC functionally-graded coating system
between the service temperature and room temperature can produce stresses in the
coating system. Therefore, finite element modeling will be used to predict the
optimized compositional gradient, and coating architecture, i.e. substrate-
barrier layer-functionally-graded layer-outer thick kinetic layer, consistent
with minimizing the stresses generated, and maintaining oxidation resistance for
prolonged times up to 1600C in air. ? Industrial advisors are Mel Jackson (GE
Corp. Research and Development) and William Allen (UTRC - East Hartford). These
co mpanies have interest in high temperature materials and coatings for
materials used in turbine engines. Students spend time in the industrial
laboratory research facilities and present their research activities at CSM
Center meetings. It is an excellent opportunity for the students to participate
in superb industrial materials laboratories in the United States. The MPS OMA
Office is co-supporting this GOALI activity. %%% The main objective of this
GOALI research program is to explore oxidation-resistant coating systems for
refractory metals for application in high temperature, oxidizing environments.
The coatings are designed using finite element modeling and deposited by
physical vapor deposition using novel MoSi2-SiC or MoSi2-Si3N4 composite
targets. The research program is managed in the Advanced Coatings and Surface
Engineering Laboratory (ACSEL), an industry- university consortium, at Colorado
School of Mines. ***