* 9730695
* Suppliment:  Parasitism of Bloom-Forming  Dinoflagellates:  Host Specificity and Ecological  Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Donald Coats, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2002
* USD 218,957.00

Increasing concern over the global spread of red tides produced by toxic and
non-toxic dinoflagellates has focused research interest on physical and
biological interactions that influence the accumulation, persistence, and demise
of bloom-forming species. The harmful effects imposed by red tides on marine
fauna and associated risks to public health and commercial fisheries have also
prompted interest in means to detect, predict, and potentially control harmful
algal blooms. Recent studies have shown that microparasites, including viruses,
bacteria, and protozoa, are abundant in marine environments. Furthermore,
parasite-induced mortality of bacterioplankton and phytoplankton can cause
population level changes in host abundance on time scales of hours to days.
Infection of red-tide dinoflagellates by their parasitic relative Amoebophrya
ceratii has been linked to rapid declines in host populations. This parasite has
also been implicated as an important factor in preventing bloom formation. while
all such infections of free-living dinoflagellates have been attributed to a
single species of parasite, recent data suggest that A. ceratii is a species
complex composed of multiple host-specific parasites. This research will further
the understanding of red-tide ecology by considering the interplay between host
specificity and parasitism of bloom-forming dinoflagellates in Chesapeake Bay.
It will also help define the complexity of host-parasite interactions in
planktonic systems and provide new insight on the role of parasitism in
microbial food-web dynamics. Five specific hypotheses will be tested using
state-of-the-art morphological and molecular methods.