* 9730319
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Maximizing Law's Impact:   Early Enforcement of Title VII and Institutional            Transformation of the State
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Robin Stryker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 6,050.00

This dissertation project involves testing the relations among law, state
institutional capacity, and societal transformation by conducting and in-depth
historical analysis of early implementation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act. Despite ant initially ambiguous statues and weak enforcing agency,
Title VII was aggressively enforced and has had an enormous impact on the
resources available to minority groups in the workforce. The research explores
primary documents in presidential libraries, EEOC's administrative history from
its archives, and the memos, papers, and correspondences of influential
organizations such as the NAACP will provide data. The results of this research
will advance sociolegal theory about state centered enforcement and state
institutional transformation and offer tests of the conditions under which
'weak' state administrative structures become `strong.` %%% This dissertation
project involves testing the relations among law, state institutional capacity,
and societal transformation by conducting and in-depth historical analysis of
early implementation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Despite ant
initially ambiguous statues and weak enforcing agency, Title VII was
aggressively enforced and has had an enormous impact on the resources available
to minority groups in the workforce. The research explores primary documents in
presidential libraries, EEOC's administrative history from its archives, and the
memos, papers, and correspondences of influential organizations such as the
NAACP will provide data. The results of this research will advance sociolegal
theory about state centered enforcement and state institutional transformation
and offer tests of the conditions under which 'weak' state administrative
structures become `strong.`