* 9730853
* Effect of Cosolvents on Solute Solubility in and            Separability Between Liquid Phases in Liquid-liquid vapor   Equilibrium Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Kraemer Luks, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2001
* USD 190,308.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9730853 K. Luks/U. of Tulsa Support is sought for the experimental
study of liquid-liquid-vapor (llg) equilibria of selected ternary mixtures of
common gas solvents + solutes + cosolvents. This research will contribute to the
understanding of how cosolvents may enhance the capacity of the gas-solvent-rich
liquid phase (l2) for extracting solutes from a solute-rich liquid phase (11) in
an llg subcritical system. Detailed studies of the llg regions of several
ternary mixtures will be carried out to evaluate the roles that cosolvent
polarity and phase concentration may have in enhancing the molar concentration
of a variety of relatively non-volatile liquid solutes in the gas-solvents-rich
liquid l2. It is proposed that the llg phase equilibria be studies for nine
ternary mixtures composed of gas solvent + solute + cosolvent, six containing
the gas solvent carbon dioxide and three containing the gas solvent ethane. The
solute will be selected from species of distinctly different molecular structure
(n-tetradecane, l-methylbenzene, l- decanol), species that have heretofore
exhibited llg partial miscibility with these gas solvents. The cosolvent will be
selected according to it polarity (methanol or acetone, species that has
attracted previous interest with respect to enhancing gas-phase solubility in
prototype supercritical extraction systems). The studies will be performed in
the temperature range of 250 to 325 K at pressure to 90 bars (9 Mpa) in existing
visual cell apparatuses especially designed for and dedicated to the study of
multiphase equilibria phenomena. Subcritical llg extraction systems offer a
dense (i.e., liquid) gas-solvent phase at modest temperatures and pressures. The
data resulting from this study will be of value for suggesting possible new ways
to separate at benign conditions certain molecular types of species from complex
mixtures that occur in environmental, manufacturing, and refining applications.
Additionally, these studies will further expand our understanding of multiphase
equilibrium phenomena in general by adding to the limited existing experimental
database of llg systems.