* 9730195
* Marine Reserves and Spiny Lobster: Effects on Male Size     and Reproductive Success
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Mark Butler, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2001
* USD 276,800.00

Changes in the abundance, size structure and sex ratio of populations can have
large and consequential effects on mating systems, and thus on reproductive
output. Yet, we know relatively little about these effects on the large, mobile
marine species commonly exploited by humans. These species are generally
difficult to observe and their populations are not generally amenable to
manipulation at the requisite scale. There is the additional problem that in
most cases the unexploited population was poorly, or never, studied and there
are no unexploited populations with which to make contemporary contrasts. The
advent of marine sanctuaries over the last 30 years and the recovery of
exploited populations within some of them, offers opportunities to contrast the
effects of changes in population structure on reproductive dynamics at
appropriately large scales. Spiny lobsters (Palinuridae) are excellent models
for such studies. Spiny lobsters are widely distributed and heavily exploited,
and although mobile, their movements are limited enough that their populations
respond to the protection afforded by many marine sanctuaries. Male spiny
lobsters grow substantially larger than females, and although both male and
female size is reduced by exploitation (fishing), male size declines more
precipitously. The reproductive output (clutch size) of females is exponentially
related to female size, so a shift toward smaller females in exploited areas has
clear implications for reproductive potential. Less clear is the effect of
reduced male size on lobster reproductive dynamics and this unfamiliarity
extends to ecology as a whole. We have evidence from laboratory experiments on
two species of spiny lobsters (Caribbean spiny lobster and New Zealand Rock
Lobster) that the availability of large males has a large, direct effect on
female fecundity. In both species, clutches fertilized by small males are
significantly smaller than clutches fertilized by large males. There also is
strong evidence for gamete limitation and it applies to two species in separate
genera that dwell in very different habitats on opposite comers of the world.
Male size effects on mating systems are known in only a few systems, primarily
insects, but the population-level consequences are poorly understood. We propose
a series of laboratory experiments to describe more fully the mating system of
the Caribbean spiny lobster, with special reference to the effect of male size
on reproductive success, and then to utilize field studies of exploited and
unexploited lobster populations and simulation modeling to investigate the
population-level consequences of reduced male size on reproductive dynamics.