* 9730556
* Fundamental Experimental and Analytical Studies in Ultra Wideband Radio With Application to Wireless Multimedia Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Robert Scholtz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mari Maeda
* 08/31/2002
* USD 700,660.00

In this proposal a complete study of fundamental issues, both experimental and
analytical, in ultra-wideband (UWB) radio is presented. The proposed work
involves a strong interaction between experimental and analytical components, so
that experimentally derived models can be used to design optimized algorithms,
which can in turn be tested. For this purpose, radio, video, and test equipment
is requested to complement existing facilities in the ultra-wideband radio lab
(UltRa Lab). This equipment will be used for closely related research projects
that support the development of fully mobile indoor video communication systems.
The motivating wireless technology is spread-spectrum impulse radio which
alleviates multipath problems, but must coexist in the same spectrum with
signals in the frequency range from roughly 500 MHz to 2 GHz. The experiments
are aimed at (1) quantifying the ability of different radio systems to coexist
in the same band without mutually interfering, (2) quantifying the distortion
properties of ultra-wideband antennas and propagation environments, and (3)
measuring the effects of indoor radio performance anomalies on video
transmissions. The equipment requested includes anechoic chamber components, a
flexible software video compression system, high quality LANs that can be
utilized in both the video and radio interference experiments, and a bit error-
rate tester and other components necessary for interference and coexistence
tests. These experiments will result in a database of channel measurements,
which characterize propagation, antenna, and interference effects. The database
will be used to extract statistical models which, in turn, will be used to
develop algorithms for receiver signal processing and video rate control. This
process of experimentation, model extraction, and algorithm development will be
iterated throughout the duration of the requested support. Each of these
experiments is briefly described below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Interference
Rejection and Coexistence Experiments and Analysis (Scholtz and Chugg). This
experimental work will explore the ability of impulse radio with power spectrum
thinly spread roughly from 500 MHz to 2 GHz to coexist over short range channels
with the myriad of other electronic systems in that broad spectrum. This effort
will test coexistence with LANs, cordless phones, microwave ovens, wireless TV
links, etc. The processing gain of the spread-spectrum techniques employed in
the impulse radio will be checked and the dynamic range of current impulse
radios will be tested. These experiments will determine the direction of
research efforts on impulse radio implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Characterization of ultra-wideband antennas and propagation environment (Prata,
Chugg, Scholtz). The experimental work to be carried out in the controlled
environment of an anechoic chamber supports the characterization of ultra-
wideband antennas for impulse radio, and the characterization of narrower-band
antennas to evaluate their ability to receive/reject impulses. This environment
will be used to evaluate new UWB antenna designs that provide more robust
spatial coverage, better pulse shaping characteristics, polarization diversity,
and to study the propagation of UWB signals through different kinds of
materials. The equipment purchased under this grant is destined for an anechoic
chamber atleast 15' (w) x 15' (h) x 30' (l) to be constructed in the near future
(architectural work on the building containing this chamber is beginning
now).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Experiments with Software-Compressed Asynchronous
Video over UWB Wireless Links (Ortega, Chugg). Two stages are planned in the
experimental work with robust asynchronous video transmission. In a first stage,
laptops and wireless LAN equipment will be used to test techniques, which are
currently under study for rate control over a time varying channel. All video
functions (compression, rate control, error correction, retransmission, etc.)
will be implemented in software. In a second stage the algorithms will be
adapted to operate over an experimental impulse radio link. At that point the
results from the initial stage will be incorporated and also changes needed for
the particular transmission conditions of impulse radio will be
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the student researchers supported
under the requested funding will be involved in all three of these aspects. This
research will be further supported by the UltRa Lab infrastructure, which has
been developed recently under the support of NSF and through the Integrated
Media System Center ERC and our industrial sponsors. The infrastructure includes
laboratory space, equipment, a team of undergraduate merit scholars to assist in
laboratory procedures, and access to circuit and semiconductor process expertise
from both USC collaborators and industrial partners. The research described in
this proposal is a portion of the fundamental investigations required to develop
and demonstrate UWB indoor radio multimedia systems (complementary
investigations into integrated circuit design are also necessary, but are not
part of the research proposed herein). The original equipment budget for this
proposal has been revised to reflect equipment acquisitions from other sources
and no other proposals for this work are currently
pending.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;