* 9730176
* Experimental Investigations of Laboratory Markets Under     Conditions of Substantially Increased Time Frame, Scope and Scale
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Charles Plott, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2000
* USD 400,000.00

9730176 Plott This project explores the properties of experimental markets that
operate on a time frame, scope and scale substantially beyond market systems
that have been studied to date. Advances in technology, coupled with significant
scientific progress, have made possible the implementation and control of
laboratory experiments that could not be imagined a few years ago. The number of
markets will be increased from the two or three market maximum, typical of
current studies, to dozens of markets. The time devoted to an experiment will be
increased from two or three hours to days and possibly weeks. The number of
subjects will be increased from the dozen or so typical of current laboratory
experiments to several hundred. The purposed research removes constraints, opens
new economic phenomena for study by laboratory experimental methods, develops
new methodology and enhances the relevance of laboratory experimental results
for applied purposes. The first phase of research involves the creation of large
scale/scope experiments that incorporate critical aspects of well researched,
small scale experiments. While the purposed large scale experiments are
substantially new, the links to previous work will make them "anchors" than can
be used for orientation in a variety of different experiments in large
environments. This phase concentrates on three areas of laboratory
experimentation of interest in their own right: single market equilibration,
information aggregation and multiple market (general equilibrium) systems. The
second phase depends importantly on the first phase. Completely new research
topics and variables will be addressed, once some of the possible influences of
limited time, scope and scale are better understood and the anchor experiments
have been established. Both classical theory and applied theory involve the
interaction of multiple markets, interdependencies and multiple organizations.
However, experimentation on such topics has been limited because appropriate
environments could not have been created. This next phase creates them. Some of
the specific topics to be explored are: multiple moneys and general equilibrium;
price controls; information aggregation; local non-convexities in general
equilibrium experiments; networked systems and smart markets; and competing
organizations. ??