* 9730072
* Effects of Island-induced Circulation on Localized Heavy    Rainfall
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Yi-Leng Chen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2002
* USD 204,642.00

9730072 Chen It has been known for some time that orography plays a substantial
role in the production of heavy rainfall. Orographic induced flash floods are a
problem world- wide. In 1987, the U.S. in conjunction with Taiwan executed a
research project aimed at investigating the dynamics of heavy rainfall in
mountainous terrain. This project, known as the Taiwan Area Mesoscale Experiment
(TAMEX) produced a wealth of data which is being used to understand the
interactions between environmental and orographic induced flows and their impact
on precipitation production. In this study, the Principal Investigator will
continue analysis of TAMEX data in conjunction with modeling studies using an
advanced mesoscale numerical model. Specific objectives include to investigate
1) the structure and dynamics of the barrier jet along the northwestern coast of
Taiwan under the pre-frontal southwesterly monsoon flow; 2) the role of
mesoscale convergence generated by the deflected airflow and environmental flow
on the occurrences of localized heavy rainfall along the northwestern coast. In
addition, with the dense surface and rain gauge networks that are already in
place, the Principal Investigator will study the diurnal evolution of island-
scale airflow and rainfall distributions over the island. Successful completion
of this research should lead to a better understanding of critical dynamical
structures of orographic induced flash floods and may lead to better forecasts
of such life-threatening events. ***