* 9730804
* Building Blocks--Foundations for Mathematical Thinking,     Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 2:  Research-based Materials      Development
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2005
* Douglas Clements, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* David C. Royster
* 05/31/2005
* USD 999,807.00

9730804 Clements The State University of New York at Buffalo plans to develop
exemplary PreK-grade 2 curriculum materials, which will enable young children to
build solid content knowledge and to enhance their higher-order thinking skills.
The approach is that of "finding the mathematics in," and "developing
mathematics from, children's activities." Activities will be designed based on
children's experiences and interests, with an emphasis on supporting the
development of mathematical growth. The materials will emphasize the development
of basic mathematical building blocks - organized into two areas: (a) spatial
and geometric competencies and concepts and (b) numeric and quantitative
concepts. There will be three mathematics sub-themes, patterns and functions,
data, and discrete mathematics. The materials will be progressively layered so
that users will be able to "dig deeper" into them in order to reach increasingly
rich, but demanding, pedagogical and mathematical levels. The "Building Blocks"
will be developed for a wide variety of situations according to a research-based
design model. These materials will support and complement the new NCTM PreK-2
Curriculum and Evaluation Standards. This project has the potential to develop
pedagogically efficacious materials that will serve as tools of content and
pedagogical reform, to conduct formative and summative evaluations at multiple
levels, and to have a positive effect on learning of young children from a
variety of settings.