* 9730680
* In Situ Measurements of Sound Speed and Density of Live     Zooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2002
* USD 285,964.00

Applications of acoustic techniques to marine biological surveys provide a more
efficient way to map the spatial distribution, abundance and temporal variation
of marine organisms in the ocean compared with traditional sampling techniques
involving pumps and nets. Since acoustical methods are remote sensing
techniques, they are only indirect measurements. In order to correctly infer
useful biological information from raw acoustic data, reliable, robust, and
accurate acoustic models are required. To date, various acoustical models have
been developed and much progress has been made both in laboratory experiments
and field applications. To accurately interpret acoustic data, no matter what
model is chosen and whether the model is simple or sophisticated, one needs to
select appropriate acoustic properties of the biological scatterers, such as
sound speed and density contrasts ( and ). We have found that even using the
same model, the target strength or volume scattering strength can vary as much
as 6 dB or a 2 fold bias for a 2% variation in sound speed and density
contrasts. Differences in target strength predictions due to biases of sound
speed contrast, , and/or density contrast, , could be as large as or greater
than those due to the choices of different acoustic models. In addition,
variations in and result in not only different scattering levels, but also
different scattering patterns as a function of frequency and orientation angle.
We propose to develop a reliable and robust method to conduct in situ
measurements of acoustic properties co-registered with the acoustic data, i.e.,
to provide time varying and corresponding to the actual positions of the animal
where the acoustic data are collected. A laboratory version of an in situ
measuring system, Acoustic Properties Of Plankton (APOP), will be developed and
evaluated. The proposed method involves measurement of the backscattering from a
water-zooplankton mixture. By using a broadband backscattering acoustical setup,
the frequency response due to the acoustical interferences from two interfaces
bounding the mixture layer is directly related to the effective sound speed and
density contrasts ( and ) in the mixture. With the assistant of conductivity
measurement which provides volume fraction of the zooplankton and the use of the
theory of `effective medium`, the sound speed and density contrasts ( and ) in
the zooplankton can be inferred. The proposed research is divided into two
phases: (1) initial laboratory development of the measuring system and
preliminary system performance evaluation, and (2) more extensive laboratory
measurements using a variety of different zooplankton species to test the
robustness and consistency of the system performance, and some refinement of the
system. The effort of phase two is very important and necessary to achieve a
much smoother transition from the laboratory version to the one that will be
used for the actual field applications. Throughout the proposed experiments,
error analysis will be conducted to guide the experiments. In addition, the
concept of the `effective medium` based on different theoretical considerations
will be examined thoroughly.