* 9730162
* Learning and the Design of the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1998,10/31/2001
* Scott Shenker, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 10/31/2001
* USD 357,644.00

ABSTRACT NCR-9730162 Eric Friedman Rutgers University with a subcontract to
Scott Shenker Xerox PARC Learning and the Design of the Internet This project
will study some foundational issues in the application of game theoretic ideas
to the design of the Internet and other decentralized networks. Many researchers
apply game theoretic ideas to the analysis of the modern Internet and in
particular assume that Nash equilibria will arise in this setting. Based on
recent theoretical analyses and simulations, the PIs on this project have found
that convergence to Nash equilibrium is not guaranteed in Internet-like
environments, due to limited information, noise, and asynchrony. This calls into
question the application of the Nash Implementation" on the Internet and makes
the design of mechanisms, which are robust to learning by adaptive agents, much
more problematic. The goal of this project is to understand precisely what kinds
of mechanisms are learnable on the Internet and use this to design protocols and
price mechanisms that implement socially desirable outcomes under this
constraint. For example, preliminary results show that the FIFO queuing protocol
is not learnable while fair queuing can be learned quite easily by adaptive
agents. In particular, the PIs previous work has begun to identify the set of
outcomes that are attained by adaptive learners. This set contains the
Stackelberg undominated actions and is contained within the serially
unoverwhelmed set. Several important mechanisms work in these settings, e.g.
fair queuing, the uniform mechanism, fixed path methods, and also many problems
with enough players and capacity, in addition the PIs have just begun to analyze
the general implications of these results for general design problems. For
example only strictly coallitionally strategy-proof social choice functions are
implementable on the Internet. However, there still remain many open questions,
which this project will attempt to resolve. This project also has i mplications
for Economics and Game Theory. Besides the Internet, there are many
decentralized systems in Economics for which we believe these results are
applicable. In particular, oligopolists, joint producers, and polluters operate
asynchronously with limited observability and often with little knowledge of the
underlying payoff matrix. This project should increase our understanding in
these settings. This project will utilize three complementary methodologies: i)
A continuing theoretical and analytical study of these issues ii) this will be
complemented with computer simulations, and iiii) experiments with human
subjects who will be studied under settings designed to mimic the scenarios
faced by actual users on the Internet. The interplay of these three approaches
should help create a robust and realistic theory for designing learnable
mechanisms for the Internet.