* 9730483
* A Political Economy Model
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Michael Keane, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 346,489.00

A fundamental question in political economy is: What are the returns to an
individual from a career in politics? The main goal of this project is to
provide at least a partial answer to this fundamental question. To achieve this
goal, a dynamic model of career decisions of a member of the U.S. Congress is
developed and this model is estimated using a new data set that is being
collected. The study of Congressional careers has a long tradition in American
politics. However, existing empirical studies of Congressional careers suffer
from two main limitations. First, they estimate static models using pooled time
series data from the post war U.S. House of Representatives. Second, they ignore
the possibility that representatives may decide to leave Congress to pursue
alternative professional careers. This research will overcome both these
limitations and will provide a new framework for the empirical analysis of
Congressional careers. A key innovation of this framework is that the potential
career opportunities of politicians outside Congress is modeled explicitly. In
particular, it is assumed that when a politician exits from Congress, he or she
can choose among a set of employment options, and the wage the politician would
receive in each of these options is a function of the politician's age,
education, congressional experience , and whether exit is voluntary or a
consequence of an electoral defeat. In addition, it is assumed that politicians
differ with respect to their ability, which together with their other
characteristics affect both their probability of winning an election and their
post congressional payoffs. To estimate the model a new data set which is being
collected. This data set contains detailed information on complete career
histories of approximately 2,000 House and Senate members from the 80th to the
103rd Congress (1947 1994). A novel feature of this data set is that it
incorporates information about post congressional employment of former members
of Congress and their salaries in these occupations. This crucial piece of
information is used to estimate the value of a Congressional career. This
framework is also used to sort out the relative importance of two key factors
that may induce people to pursue a political career: the utility politicians
derive from being in office and the monetary returns to a career in Congress.
Finally, the model is used to evaluate the effects of various policy experiments
on the value of a Congressional seat and on the career decisions of politicians.
Such policies include the introduction of term limits, changes in the pension
regime, changes in the wages in Congress, changes in the seniority rule for
committee appointments, etc.