* 9730489
* Dynamic Factors and Robust Economic Forecasting
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Mark Watson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2002
* USD 426,234.00

9730489 Stock This project pursues a research program to develop new methods for
forecasting economic time series and to apply these methods to U.S.
macroeconomic data. The research program is based on four premises. First, data
availability has increased dramatically over the past decade; now literally
thousands of series are available for real time forecasting applications. Yet,
the small and , arguably, highly structured large models that dominate economic
forecasting fail to exploit this vast array of data. Second, recent empirical
studies using formal statistical tests confirm conventional wisdom that many
economic time series relations are unstable over time. This is an obstacle to
many standard forecasting methods, but it also presents an opportunity: properly
accounting for this time variation would improve economic forecasts. Third,
recent algorithmic and computational advances permit the development of robust
forecasting methods based on nonGaussian filtering that can accommodate a wider
range of time variation in parameters than conventional linear or state space
models. Fourth, economic forecasting is an important practical contribution to
the economics profession to society, and as such improved methods for economic
forecasting constitute a valid end in themselves. This said, experience over the
past several decades has shown that the tools and results of economic
forecasting have had significant positive spillovers into applied and
theoretical macroeconomics. This project consists oaf two main projects. The
first is to use the tools of modern time series analysis to reexamine the
construction of diffusion indexes and their use for forecasting. In traditional
business cycle analysis, a diffusion index is a measure of the extent to which
an expansion or recession has spread across sectors or regions of the economy.
Because they are based on many series, these indexes hold out the possibility of
providing useful information for forecasting that is not contained in th e main
macroeconomic aggregates that dominate modern academic investigations of
economic forecasting. They approach developed in this project is to use a
dynamic factor model to define diffusion indexes. Preliminary results indicate
that, with sufficiently many series, these indexes can be estimated precisely
even in the presence of time varying parameters. Promising results are reported
here for an initial forecasting experiment, in which factors extracted from 183
macroeconomic time series are used to forecast four main economic aggregates.
The second main project on robust forecasting seeks to develop and to implement
forecasting procedures that are robust to out-of-sample changes in the process
followed by the series and/or to in-sample mispecification. The effort draws on
large literatures on robust signal extraction and on nonGaussian filtering.
Evidence is presented that these and new, related tools have the potential to
result in significant improvements in macroeconomic forecasts relative to linear
models with conventional Gaussian time varying parameter uncertainty. ??