* 9730783
* Encouraging the Use of Risk Concepts in Performance-Based   Building and Fire Regulation Development
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Roger Kasperson, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 04/30/2000
* USD 149,733.00

The intent of current building and fire regulations used in the United States is
to provide an acceptable level of safety, health, and welfare during the design,
construction and use of buildings. However, the current regulations, with their
hundreds of pages of prescribed measures, do not provide explicit indications of
the level of safety they are intended to achieve. To address this concern,
specific goals and objectives, reflecting acceptable levels of safety, could be
incorporated into the regulations. Furthermore, as building and fire regulations
are intended to satisfy the public mandate for managing risks, these goals and
objectives should ideally be based on the level(s) of risk acceptable or
tolerable to society. To address these concerns, a mechanism is needed to obtain
a better understanding of the risks to people and property from fire and natural
hazards, and to better address the risks within the building regulatory system.
The objective of this Joint NSF / Private Sector Initiative effort is to outline
a process for developers of building and fire regulations that will aid in the
identification, characterization, and incorporation of risk concepts and
analysis methods into building and fire regulations. In meeting this objective,
this effort will review the use of risk concepts over a broad range of
regulations, review various approaches to identifying and characterizing risk
problems, identify fire risk issues in building and fire codes, and outline a
process for identifying, characterizing, and incorporating risk concepts and
analysis methods into performance-based building and fire code development. This
research will improve the understanding of risks and associated costs from fire
and natural hazards, address the impact of uncertainty on the development and
use of risk-based building and fire regulations (with a focus in the areas of
application of new technologies and indeterminate uncertainty related to future
human actions), assist codes and standards developers view, understand, and
address building and fire regulation development as risk issues, and provide a
basis for further development of risk- and reliability-based analysis and design
tools for building and fire safety design. The information, examples, and
decision-making process that will result from this effort will be a valuable
addition to the area of risk-based decision making. Furthermore, by focusing on
risk issues in building and fire regulation development, the private sector
partners from the building and fire communities will be provided with a tool to
help them better assess and address the technical risks from fire and natural
hazards, to better understand values issues associated with risk decisions, such
as risk perception and cost-benefit implications, and to better incorporate
these concepts into the regulatory development process. Ultimately, the product
of this effort will encourage changes to the building and fire regulations that
will better address the risks to people and property from fire and natural
hazards, resulting in safer buildings and fewer losses from fire and natural
hazards.