* 9730087
* Science Education During Recreation in Wilderness Parks:    Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks, New York
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 04/30/2000
* USD 41,976.00

9730087 Gates ABSTRACT: The Department of Geological Sciences at Rutgers, in
collaboration with the Liberty Science Center, the New York State Museum,
Palisades Interstate Park Commission, Appalachian Trail Conference, and ABS-
Capital Cities, Inc., has a planning grant to develop a universal model that
will encourage science education in conjunction with outdoor recreational
activities in wilderness parks near urban centers. The initial effort will focus
on the Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks and the Sterling Forest lands, all
near New York City. Current plans for the full project include development of:
1) an illustrated guidebook describing the features chosen as "exhibits" at the
sites, 2) a map showing locations of the "exhibits", 3) plaques marking the
features of the exhibits, 4) proposals for new trails to access outstanding
botanical and geological features, 5) a web site with virtual reality filed
trips of the sites chosen, 6) museum displays and media programs at Liberty
Science Center, the New York State Museum, and other sites, 7) regular field
trips from Liberty Science Center, New York State Museum, and Bear Mountain
Trailside Museum, 8) workshops for high school teachers, and 9) special project
to get more public use of the park resources. During the planning stage the
project will gather data on public interest, determine the most effective means
of dissemination, identify and contact other organizations and scientist that
could contribute to the full project, and develop a coordination plan and
schedule for this complex project. Small examples and/or written descriptions of
the web-site, the guidebook stops, museum displays, and field trips will also be
produced in the planning phase.