* 9730003
* Genetic Analysis of Neuropeptide Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Paul Taghert, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 142,098.00

9730003 Taghert Neural communication leads to information processing and
ultimately to the command of behavior. The chemistry of the brain is the
currency by which communication is exchanged by brain cells. That chemistry is
complex and includes several hundred different compounds that are used at
different times and different places in the brain. In particular one class of
"neural transmitters" are small peptide hormones called neuropeptides. These are
very important for the direct regulatory control they appear to have on a
variety of specific behaviors including appetitive and reproductive behavior,
mood, stress, and anxiety. Dr. Taghert uses a model invertebrate system, the
fruit fly Drosophila, to employ genetics to study the relation between
neuropeptides and behavior. This use of genetics is important because it
provides the means to manipulate gene expression in the animals and Drosophila
offers the most comprehensive and sophisticated set of genetic tools. Indeed by
manipulating these mechanisms genetically, Dr. Taghert can address neuropeptide
functions in vivo. Given that neuropeptides rely on proper post-translational
modifications for their correct structure and hence for their functions, he will
examine a specific enzyme that is necessary for the synthesis of nearly all
neuropeptides, and only neuropeptides. Since animals that are deficient in this
enzyme die early indicating the importance of neuropeptides for development and
survival, Dr. Taghert has devised two independent means to make animals that are
mosaic for the enzyme. Using biochemical, anatomical and behavioral tools, he
will fully evaluate these mosaics. The results from these studies will shed new
light towards understanding the role that neuropeptides play in modulating how
neurons communicate information.