* 9730918
* Reconstructing Vertebrate Exploitation and Resource Focus at Ujuxte, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Thomas Wake, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1999
* USD 34,735.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thomas Wake will analyze faunal
remains excavated at the archaeological site of Ujuxte in Pacific coastal
Guatemala. Ujuxte dates to the Formative period and thus documents the rise of
complex social organization in Middle America - the stage at which societies
shifted from a mobile hunting and gathering way of life when small groups moved
frequently over the landscape to a more settled existence with aggregation into
large settled villages. Associated with the process is the development of more
complex political forms of organization in which the egalitarian hunter gather
lifestyle is replaced by a more hierarchical form which is subsumed under the
term `chiefdom.` While this transformation has been well documented on a
worldwide basis, archaeologists do not understand just what factors led to the
emergence of high status chiefs, the extent to which social stratification
extended across entire societies or the factors which allowed chiefs to maintain
their power. Ujuxte covers a considerable time span within the Formative period
and has yielded a large series of faunal remains. These result from the
consumption of food and through the analysis of their spatial distribution
across the site they provide insight into issues of social stratification. It is
possible to determine whether the choicest cuts of meat from highly desirable
species such as deer are spatially concentrated and associated with a small
number of dwellings or whether they are more evenly distributed across the site.
When viewed in a diachronic perspective, these data will provide insight into
changes in the nature of status over time. This research is important because it
addresses a central anthropological question. It will provide information of
interest to many archaeologists and will increase understanding of the
prehistory of Middle America.