* 9730535
* SGER: Exploratory Study on Low Temperature Synthesis of     Nanostructured Particles by a Novel Aero-Sol-Gel Process
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Gregory Beaucage, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 10/31/1998
* USD 49,977.00

SUMMARY CTS-9730535 Exploratory Study on Low Temperature Synthesis of
Nanostructured Particles By a Novel Aero-Sol-Gel Process G. Beaucage, Asst.
Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, PI S.E. Pratsinis, Professor of
Chemical Engineering, Co-PI University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0012
The goal of this project is to investigate the feasibility of novel, room
temperature process for synthesis of nanoparticles by carrying our sol-gel
reactions in the aerosol phase. A first experimental base will be created with
silica and titania nanoparticles. Preliminary experiments have resulted in pure
silica nanoparticles (by mass spectroscopy) with specific surface areas
comparable to aerogels. These analyses show primary particles smaller than 1.5
nm in diameter aggregated into classical diffusion-limited-aggregates of
approximately 30nm with a mass fractal dimension close to 2.5. Such aggregates
have long been sought in the hope of developing catalysis supports with the
maximum possible surface area. Conventional pyrolytic methods (e.g. flame
reactors) are not capable of such morphologies since the primary particles are
about an order of magnitude larger. The proposed process involves an exceedingly
simple and cost effective approach which borrows from both sol-gel chemistry and
laminar flow, pyrolytic (flame) aerosol techniques. In preliminary experiments,
sol-gel precursors such as tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) along with other reactants
are dispersed in the gas phase in a closely controllled mode using a flow
chamber similar to those encountered in flame reactors. Here, however, there is
no flame and the entire apparatus is constructed form PVC plastic tubing, rather
than quartz of alloys, costing only about $100. In spite of the simplicity of
the initial set-up, some degree of control has already been achieved on the
nanoscale by variation of the precursor concentration, type and flow rates.