* 9730183
* Arithmetic Analogue of Differential Algebraic Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1998,12/07/1998
* Alexandru Buium, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Murray M. Schacher
* 12/07/1998
* USD 105,300.00

9730183 Buium In previous research, Buium investigated an analogue of algebraic
geometry in which algebraic equations are replaced by algebraic differential
equations. This geometry may be called differential algebraic geometry, and its
commutative algebra counterpart is the Ritt-Kolchin differential algebra.
Applications of Buium's work include the ``effective geometric Lang
conjecture.'' In subsequent research, Buium developed an arithmetic analogue of
differential algebraic geometry. Applications of the latter included a proof of
the "effective Manin-Mumford conjecture" and an arithmetic analogue of Manin's
theorem of the Kernel. The main theme of this project will be continuing this
line of investigation, especially in the arithmetic direction. This is research
in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest
parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in
the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that could be
defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the
field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and
topology, and conversely is finding application in those fields as well as in
physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.