* 9730757
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of Haemophilus   Influenza Type B/Tetanus Toxoid Conjugate Vaccine
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Mary Mikhail, U.S. Naval Medical Research
* Interagency Agreement
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 8,968.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Mary M.
Mikhail, Senior Investigator, Enteric Microbiology, at the Naval Medical
Research Unit -3 (NAMRU3) in Cairo, Egypt, and Alaa Eldin Shehata Aly, Senior
Chemist, Biomedical Research Center, Egyptian Organization for Biological
Products and Vaccines (VACSERA), in Cairo, Egypt. The two collaborators plan to
synthesize a new vaccine for the protection of infants against Haemophilus
influenza type b (Hib) diseases. The polysaccharide of Hib will be prepared and
purified then depolymerized and uniterminally coupled to a carrier protein
(150KD fraction of tetanus toxoid). This will improve its immunogenecity
specially in infants and lead to a better protection and longer duration of
immune response with T-cell dependent characters. The conjugate produced will be
of high hapten load so will be more active in priming infants, and more active
in adults. The improvement of the immune response of the conjugate will be
tested in laboratory animals. Scope: This project will involve two laboratories
with complementary capabilities to conduct research in an important industrial
and health research field. Part of the research work will be conducted at
VACSERA, including the purification of Hib CPS and the preparation of the
conjugate. The steps of TT fractionation, Hib CPS depolymerization, periodate
oxidation and chemical coupling will be jointly reviewed by VACSERA and the
NAMRU3 teams. The chemical testing of the conjugate also will be carried out
jointly. The animal immunization will be done at NAMRU3. Dr. Mikhail is an
expert in biological chemistry and animal clinical testing. The Egyptian
researcher is an expert in the field of polysaccharide protein conjugated
vaccine preparation, and has experience in purification and testing of bacterial
capsular polysaccharides. This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. The project was generated
as a result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government. NIH was involved in the evaluation
of the project and in recommending its support. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of
State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out cooperative activities.