* 9730688
* Collabarative Research: Making Semiparametric Methods       Operational: Bridging the Gap between Theory and            Application
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Hidehiko Ichimura, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 108,902.00

9730688 Ichimura Much recent work in econometrics has been directed towards
developing non-parametric and semi-parametric estimation approaches. These
methods improve on traditional methods by allowing researchers to better uncover
relationships in the data without having to make as many a priori modeling
assumptions. They can also be used to test for the validity of parametric
restrictions. Yet despite the potential broad applicability of these new
estimation methods in empirical economic research, they are not widely used.
This project addresses the reasons these methods are not used by: (1) resolving
arbitrariness left in many semi-parametric procedures; (2) deriving general
approximation results for data-dependent smoothing and trimming methods; (3)
developing methods and software that overcome difficulties in computation with
large data sets and (4) demonstrating how semi-parametric methods are useful for
empirical work. The arbitrariness left in many semi-parametric procedures, which
takes the form of parameters left unspecified, is addressed by developing
effective, data-driven methods for choosing unspecified parameters. A
preliminary Monte Carlo study comparing alternative methods demonstrates the
effectiveness of the new methods. New asymptotic approximation results, needed
to justify estimators that use data-dependent smoothing and trimming methods,
are developed. Computational problems are resolved by adapting highly effective
approximation techniques for use in estimating semi-parametric models. Two
classes of empirical problems are shown to be promising areas to apply semi-
parametric models: regression comparisons of two or more groups and the binary
choice model. ??