* 9730937
* Outcome and Process Parallelism in Mock Witness             and Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Roy Malpass, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

The Mock witness Paradigm asks mock witnesses - `witnesses` who have been given
a verbal description of an offender but who have never seen him - to view a
lineup or photospread and try to choose the suspect. If the suspect is chosen
more often than expected by chance, the lineup or photospread is said to be
biased towards the suspect, and thus unfair. Since 1973 the Mock Witness
Paradigm has been used in various forms for two important purposes: as the basis
for evaluation of the difficulty of the fairness of lineups and photospreads in
studies of eyewitness identification, and as the basis for post hoc assessments
of fairness by the defense in a variety of legal cases. The basic validity of
the mock witness paradigm has been widely assumed but never specifically
evaluated or demonstrated. Studies in the laboratory demonstrate that when
applied to sequential presentations, the outcomes of mock witness evaluation do
not follow the pattern expected of eyewitnesses under similar conditions. These
results raise a series of questions including the following: What are the
important differences between mock witness and eyewitness identification
decision making contexts and processes? Do these differences lead the
psychological processes in the two types of witnesses to diverge from each other
- a failure of process parallelism? Do differences in social contexts and
judgment processes lead to contrasts in the rates and accuracy of choosing the
offender? And do they result in contrasting judgments of the fairness of lineups
or photospreads? These seem to be important questions. To the extent processes
and outcomes differ and lead to different outcomes the mock witness paradigm is
called into question. If it is invalidated we would be left with only very
cumbersome ways to evaluate lineup/photospread fairness in research and in the
legal process. The methodology employed in this study is based on videotaped
crime scenes, varying in the quality of the viewing conditions for the observer,
and providing for the use of multiple `offenders`. Pilot studies calibrate the
quality of the viewing conditions in the videotaped crime and calibrate varying
levels of photospread bias. Photographs of the `offenders` and those to be used
as foils come from the procedures and files of the El Paso Police Department.
Historically, data from eyewitnesses has focused on choosing, accuracy and other
classifications of the witness's lineup/photospread choice, while data taken
from mock witnesses has been used in the aggregate to estimate the bias toward
the defendant and the appropriateness of the foils employed in the
lineup/photospread. This investigation is in a position to examine both sets of
dependent variables for eyewitnesses and mock witnesses, providing a common
basis for examining outcome parallelism. Witnesses who have viewed the
videotaped crime provide a verbal description of the offender. A mock witness
will be yoked with each eyewitness and will be given the eyewitness's verbal
description, thereby preserving the range of variation in both sets of witnesses
and providing a stronger basis for comparison of outcomes. This research will
clarify the conditions which are appropriate for mock witness evaluation and
thus combine solid basic research with high potential for application.