* 9730044
* Equipment to Support Transgenic and Stem Cell Gene Transfer in Mice
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1998,06/30/1999
* Adrian Hayday, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/1999
* USD 90,000.00

The use of transgenic mice has been instrumental in the characterization and
understanding of the genetic basis of mammalian development and physiology. The
genetics group at Yale University in particular has utilized transgenic mice to
study the evolution of the HOX genes that are essential for normal development,
the role of the transcription factor AP-2 in vertebrate morphogenesis, and the
role of T-cells in immune system function and development, among other projects.
This proposal requests funds to augment the transgenic mouse facility at Yale
University. The facility presently has one old transgene injection set-up and
one modern set-up for blastocyst injection of stem cells. The transgene
apparatus is now 20 years old and despite mechanical wear and tear is used at
capacity. This project proposes to add a new transgene injection station, to
repair and upgrade the existing apparatus, and to add ancillary equipment that
will generally support the overall program in transgene research and education.
As transgene techniques continue to expand, the facility comes under even
greater use by the faculty and students at Yale. The sheer volume of
experimental studies necessitates the acquisition of new instrumentation. New
instruments will enhance the efficiency of both research and teaching
activities. Additional equipment will also make possible the development of new
techniques such as the controlled expression of transgenes, fluorigenic reporter
constructs, and the modification of endogenous genes by "knock-in" procedures.
The requested equipment will be accessible to a broad spectrum of investigators
and students both within and outside of Yale University. Access if facilitated
by housing the equipment in an Animal Research Facility managed by a consortium
of faculty investigators rather than within a single investigator's group. The
facility is self- contained and integrates both animal care and housing and
transgene laboratory space.