* 9730690
* An Economical AUV for Routine Deep Ocean Surveys
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1998,06/30/2005
* Albert Bradley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 06/30/2005
* USD 2,016,363.00

9730690 Bradley Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will continue development
of a deep sea autonomous vehicle (AUV) capability that will provide a platform
for a variety of sensors of interest to the ocean science community. A new
undersea vehicle builds on the work and experience gained during development of
the Autonomous Benthic Explorer (ABE) which is a prototype, designed and
constructed to test engineering concepts while attempting to provide a useful
capability for the deep sea research community. The ABE vehicle has
characteristics which make it ideally suited for long term deployment of a
variety of off-the-shelf sensors coupled with the precision navigation and
control capabilities necessary to obtain a complete co-registered data set.
However, ABE is not well suited for short-term routine utilization. Based on
scientific and logistical requirements, there is a need for an ABE-like AUV
specifically designed for routine short-duration operations to occur
simultaneously with more traditional scientific vehicles, such as ALVIN, Jason
and towed instrumentation platforms. Significant design changes are required to
create a vehicle that will meet these requirements, including 1) improved
floatation, durability and efficiency of design to allow for frequent launch and
recovery, and 2) alteration of the navigation system to allow many vehicles to
operate simultaneously using the same transponder net. A second-generation ABE
will be suitable for continuous daily operations and will be economical to
operate. This project is to design and construct a second generation ABE vehicle
(called "Sentry ) along with continued development of capabilities desired by
the science community. The new vehicle will maintain the characteristics needed
by science community. However, Sentry will be better suited for routine
deployment by a small operations team for longer periods of time than with the
present vehicle. Sentry should be able to m eet the requirements of the science
programs presently hoping to utilize ABE and, its operational costs should be
low enough to attract additional investigators.