* 9730899
* Ceramic Based Multi-Site Electrode for Electrochemical      and Electrophysiological Recording
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1998,10/13/1999
* Greg Gerhardt, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 10/13/1999
* USD 224,600.00

The major goal of these studies is to design and develop ceramic- based
multisite microsensors. At the present time, microsensors are being used
primarily in the area of neuroscience to study neurochemicals and to measure the
electrical properties of brain cells. The advantages of microsensors are the
abilities to rapidly (<lsec) measure molecules or electrical potentials on small
spatial scales (microns) to understand biological signaling processes directly.
In addition, such methods can be miniaturized to be used directly in the field.
Current designs of such microsensors have been expensive, fragile, subject to
failure and limited in their scope of applications. We plan to develop a new
type of sensor based on the concepts of the micromachining of ceramic. The
resulting sensors may be cheaper to manufacture, stronger, and more inert, and
capable of measuring chemicals and electrical potentials at the same time. The
potential uses of these microsensors for chemical measurements may be extensive.
It is possible that low cost ceramic-based microsensors can be used to measure
chemicals in a variety of situations such as brain recordings, used to control
fermentation processes, for determinations of the purity of drugs, for
determining harvest time information regarding fruits and vegetables, and they
will likely have a variety of additional biological sensing applications. These
microsensors could have a global impact on neuroscience, agriculture, industry,
government and private labs, and the general public.