* 9730231
* Coordinated Analysis of Fully Polarimetric CSU-CHILL Radar  Signatures with Surface and Airborne Hydrometeor Images
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2002
* V. Bringi, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 12/31/2002
* USD 336,180.00

Abstract ATM-9730231 Bringi, V. N. Colorado State University Title: Coordinated
Analysis of Fully Polarmetric CSU-CHILL Radar Signatures with Surface and
Airborne Hydrometeor Images

Coordinated analysis of CSU-CHILL polarimetric radar data and insitu hydrometeor
measurements from two instrumented chase vans, airborne imaging probe, and other
auxiliary surface observations is proposed for evaluating and improving bulk-
hydrometeor classification schemes and precipitation estimation algorithms. The
T-28 aircraft equipped with the High Volume Particle Spectrometer (HVPS)
obtained high quality hydrometeor images in three convective storms and one
bright-band event during a deployment in June 1995. One chase van was
instrumented with the 2D-video disdrometer obtained on lease from Joanneum
Research, Graz, Austria. Numerous storm cell intercepts were made with this van
providing high quality image data (front and side views, vertical speed) in
intense rain mixed at times with hail. During the 1996/97 winter season, the
disdrometer was located for one period at the CSU campus site, and for another
period at the NCAR Marshall field site where a variety of winter precipitation
was sampled in conjunction with other auxiliary measurements (snow gauge,
formvar replication). A second chase van was equipped with a roof-mounted hail
catcher net (of NCAR design) and a capacitance rain gauge. Numerous hail
intercepts were made enabling the determination of time-resolved hail rates and
size distributions. Recently developed optimal area algorithms which address the
problem of comparing radar measurements aloft with surface instruments will be
further refined and evaluated. This proposal seeks funding for a comprehensive
analysis of these insitu hydrometeor data to advance polarimetric-based
hydrometeor classification schemes and more fully evaluate polarimetric rainrate
algorithms in mixed phase precipitation.