* 9730465
* Visualization and the Process of Modeling: A Conceptual     Approach
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Thomas Willemain, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Frisch
* 05/31/2002
* USD 272,690.00

Wallace Visualization is becoming an increasingly important part of modeling as
a result of the integration of computer graphics into modeling software. In
addition, technological advances are making it possible for rapidly growing
numbers of the general population to become modelers, for example, by using
spreadsheet software. The proposed research is based upon our previous
experimental work, our theory of the role of visualization in modeling, and the
literature on visualization and cognitive science. We have selected as the
target of our visualization a component that is central to the modeling process
and to our understanding of it: the heuristics sued in constructing models. In
order to assess our theory, we intend to build visualization systems for two
different types of modeling tasks, one in a physical domain, and the other in an
abstract domain. The first experiment will be conducted in the physical domain
of groundwater modeling with the Where Next heuristics visualization system. The
second experiment will be conducted in the physical abstract domain of machine
learning as applied to consumer credit. As part of our experimentation, we will
construct a `modeler's assistant` for each of the problem domains. The
contributions of the research are to better understand the process of modeling
and the role of visualization in this process, and to integrate visualization
techniques into the process of modeling in order to capitalize upon advances in
computer graphics technology. ╣¢ ┤Á¢╣À&gt;Á┤ ¥? ▓Á _┐%¥╣ ┤╣¢│╣║%╣&gt;/╝` ╣&gt;
&gt;/¥┐╝Á &amp;/╝¥╣│╣║/&gt;¥¢ ┴╣%% │?_Á Â╝?_ / ┴╣┤Á ╝/&gt;ÀÁ ?Â /│/┤Á_╣│ /╝Á/¢
╣&gt;│%┐┤╣&gt;À Á│?&gt;?_╣│¢ ║?%╣¥╣│/% ¢│╣Á&gt;│Á /&gt;¥©╝?║?%?À`
/┤_╣&gt;╣¢¥╝/¥╣└Á ¢│╣Á&gt;│Á /&gt;┤ %/┴ ¿&gt; /┤┤╣¥╣?&gt; ║╝/│¥╣¥╣?&gt;Á╝¢ Â╝?_
▓?¥© ¥©Á ó/&gt;/┤╣/&gt; /&gt;┤ ¡ ½ À?└Á╝&gt;_Á&gt;¥¢ ┴╣%% ▓Á ╣&gt;└?%└Á┤ /¢
║╝Á¢Á&gt;¥Á╝¢ │?__Á&gt;¥/¥?╝¢ /&gt;┤ ┤╣¢│┐¢¢/&gt;¥¢