* 9730761
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Cooperative Development of   Molecular Diagnostics: Application to Severe Hereditary SkinDiseases
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Sherri Bale, National Institutes of Health
* Interagency Agreement
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2000
* USD 25,184.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by a US team
including by Dr. Sherri Bale and Dr. John G. Compton of theGenetic Studies
Section, Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, MD, and Dr. John DiGiovanni of
Brown University Department of Dermatology, and an Egyptian team led by Dr.
Nemat Hashem, Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics, and Chief, Ain Shams
University Medical Genetics Center in Cairo, Egypt. They plan to pursue genetic
studies to identify the genes that cause a number of severe skin disorders. This
work is facilitated by the high incidence of recessive disorders affecting the
skin which occur in an inbred Egyptian population. They also plan to develop
superior methods for detection of genetic mutations which cause these disorders.
These methods will be refined and eventually transferred to clinical
laboratories at the medical schools at Ain Shams University and Brown University
in Providence, RI Scope: This project will involve strong teams in each of the
two countries. These include human geneticists and clinical physicians at Ain
Shams University and at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The
opportunities available in Egypt include the relatively less mobile population,
and the marriage patterns which allow a fairly uniform genetic database for the
Egyptian population. Dr. Hashem has maintained an extraordinary database of
pedigrees on patients with inherited diseases, which will be used in this work.
The US scientists have extensive experience in the genetic and clinical
examinations required for this research. The two sides have had joint activities
in the past, and will be able to resume their collaboration smoothly. This
proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of
mutual benefit. The project was generated as a result of a workshop on
biotechnology organized by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the
Egyptian Government. NIH was involved in the evaluation of the project and in
recommending its support. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of State, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative
activities.