* 9730348
* The Impact of Damage Caps on Civil Litigation: Experimental and Field Analyses
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1998,10/31/2000
* Linda Babcock, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra L. Schneider
* 10/31/2000
* USD 160,485.00

A major issue in the current debate over litigation reform concerns whether to
limit the amount a plaintiff can recover in a lawsuit. Approximately thirty
states now employ some type of `damage cap` that limits payments for pain and
suffering, punitive damages, and other non-economic damages. However, very
little research has examined their effect on the litigation process. This
research uses experimental and field analysis and draws on the disciplines of
economics, psychology, and law to explore the effects that damage caps have on
the filing and settlement of lawsuits. In the first stage of the research, we
conduct three pre-trial bargaining experiments to explore the behavioral
mechanisms by which damage caps affect the prospects for settlement. Preliminary
evidence suggests that when the damage cap is relatively low, it increases the
likelihood of settlement. However, a very high damage cap can actually reduce
the prospects for settlement by providing plaintiffs with an upward `focal
point`. This implies that in a particular state, a cap statue will improve
settlement rates for big cases and worsen them for small cases. Further
experimentation will explore the sensitivity of these findings with respect to
the level of the cap and allow a description of the behavioral processes
underlying settlement. In the second stage of the research we collect extensive
field data on the damage caps that are operable in the U.S. and estimate their
impact on the number of claims filed and settled out-of- court. This empirical
work significantly expands on previous work that has been conducted. First, the
data collected covers a substantially longer time period than has been
previously studied and it identifies the types of caps that are most effective.
Second, our analysis improves on previous research by comparing the pre- and
post-cap filing and settlement of cases covered by the cap (the `treatment`
group) to those not covered by the cap (the `control` group). The combination of
experimental and field methodologies provide a more complete understanding of
the impact of damage caps on the litigation process. The experimental analysis
helps to understand the behavioral changes induced by a cap, examine their
ensuing effect on settlement, and explore the sensitivity of the results to the
level of the cap. The field data analysis complements the experimental analysis
by estimating the magnitude of the effect of caps and identifying the types of
caps that are particularly influential. Both analyses will inform the debate
about the effect of damage caps and suggest how cap statutes can be designed to
comport with policy goals.