* 9730015
* Dissolved Organic Nitrogen and Brown Tide Blooms in Long    Island Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2002
* USD 365,386.00

Blooms of the `Brown Tide` unicellular algae (Aureococcus anophagefferens) have
occurred sporadically since 1985 in coastal waters of Eastern Long Island and
have devastated the local commercial scallop fishery. Analysis of a 10 year time
series data set from the Peconic Estuary indicates that bloom intensity is
inversely correlated with the discharge of high nitrate groundwater and
associated with higher salinities. Laboratory and field data suggest that
salinity is unlikely to represent a direct physiological control on Brown Tide
blooms. However budget calculations indicate that nitrogen supply from
groundwater is 1 2 orders of magnitude higher than other external sources for
this ecosystem. Data collected in 1995 demonstrated that Brown Tide blooms
utilize dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) for growth as evidenced from the large
decrease in DON parallel with cell increase. We hypothesize that bloom
initiation is regulated by the relative supply of inorganic and organic
nitrogen, determined to a large extent by groundwater flow variability. An
appropriate first step to test this hypothesis is the demonstration that there
are compounds in the DON that can be efficiently utilized by A. anophagefferens
giving it a competitive advantage over other endemic species. We will identify
the source of DON that is available to A. anophagefferens via field and
laboratory studies. The laboratory work will involve the identification of the
DON components from the Peconic Estuary that can support growth of the alga and
characterization of the DON uptake systems and utilization mechanisms that make
this alga competitive at utilizing nitrogen. Immunological probes to major
proteins involved in the utilization of DON will be prepared. In the field we
will characterize the DON fraction utilized by A. anophagefferens during a bloom
as well as follow the nitrogen nutrition of this algae using immunological
probes. Weekly nutrient bioassays and analysis of various dissolved and
particulate nitrogen pools will complement the more detailed field sampling.