* 9730182
* The Subjective Value of Information in high-stakes domains: An Analysis of Patient Decisions to Obtain Diagnostic       Testing
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1998,10/31/1999
* Barbara Kahn, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 10/31/1999
* USD 90,219.00

Health care in the United States is rapidly changing. In particular, two
dramatic trends characterize this change: (1) the rise of the patient as a
consumer and decision-maker and (2) the introduction of innovative technologies
including a tremendous proliferation of both clinical and home diagnostic
testing procedures (e.g., HIV testing, mammograms, prostate cancer tests, pap
smears, genetic testing, pregnancy testing, sexually-transmitted disease tests,
etc.). The proposed laboratory and survey research investigates how patients
make these types of diagnostic testing decisions. Such an understanding of
patient decision making should have important public policy implications. For
instance, an understanding of the systematic decision making biases patients
exhibit should allow for the development of interventions helping them to make
better decisions. In making the decision as to whether or not to get tested, the
patient has to decide what the value of the information is to him or to her in a
rational, normative way. However, the potential life or death outcomes of
medical decisions may generate negative emotion and stress and thus patients may
react non-normatively to the provided information in order to cope. For example,
normatively irrelevant, but emotionally salient, factors, such as testing
errors, may influence one's perceived vulnerability to a disease. Patients'
assessments of test information are expected to reflect this richer, emotionally
perceived vulnerability rather than the more objective prior probability
estimates that should be used to determine vulnerability. Investigation of three
issues regarding diagnostic testing decisions will be conducted. First, research
will investigate how patients interpret and use information regarding test
accuracy; reactions to both test accuracy rates (i.e., overall false positive
and false negative error rates for a particular test) and case information
(i.e., the description of a particular false positive test result) will be
considered. For instance, initial results indicate that a false positive result
might inappropriately increase the patient's perceived vulnerability, and
therefore subsequent test compliance, if the patient mis-attributes this
erroneous test result to personal factors. Second, research will be conducted to
identify what factors affect perceived vulnerability. Again, a particular focus
will be on factors that are normatively irrelevant to one's prior probability of
disease, but may influence the subjective value of test information. Finally,
the research will assess patients' willingness to integrate both monetary and
non-monetary costs across testing and treatment situations.