* 9730908
* Tunneling Studies of Ferromagnetic Junctions and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Jagadeesh Moodera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2002
* USD 361,198.00

9730908 Moodera This experimental research project is concerned with electron
tunnel junctions with electrodes of magnetic metals conceived in such a way that
the tunneling current is controlled in a sensitive fashion by an applied
magnetic field. Well characterized ferromagnetic tunnel junctions and interfaces
will be prepared under clean and ultra high vacuum conditions to allow accurate
and reproducible tunneling measurements, particularly on structures with 3d and
4f ferromagnetic metals. Spin polarization of the same films that make up the
tunnel junction will also be measured by superconducting tunneling spectroscopy.
The main thrust is to understand the physical mechanisms responsible for the
observed magnetic field sensitivity. It is expected that this research will
additionally lead to new results and techniques in condensed matter physics and
new applications for magnetic technology.This research program is
interdisciplinary in nature and has typically involved several undergraduate and
high school students in its activities. These involvements are beneficial in the
preparation of students for further study and for careers in industry,
government laboratories or academia. %%% This experimental research project is
concerned with a new class of electronic devices that the PI has discovered in
his previously supported work, which are highly sensitive to magnetic field. The
electrical resistance of the device, which is called a tunnel junction, changes
when the device is placed in a magnetic field, and is said to exhibit
magnetoresistance. This discovery has created interest worldwide because of the
potential for improvements in technology. The main technological applications
may be in magnetic sensors for computer hard drives, possibly for magnetic
computer memory or logic elements, and for miscellaneous applications s uch as
sensors to measure rotational speeds, eg, a tachometer. The basic tunnel
junction is a capacitor-like device with a thin insulating oxide between two
metal plates. In this case the oxide layer is so thin that electrons can
transfer from one plate to the other by the quantum mechanical tunneling
process. This process was firmly established and understood in detail in the
late 1960's by basic physics researchers who realized that a tunnel junction
device, if it could be fabricated with a sufficiently thin and homogeneous oxide
layer, could be instrumental to understanding the nature of superconductivity.
Ivar Giaever won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1973 for his experiments on
superconductivity which were based on his development of improved fabrication
techniques and a more complete understanding of the physical behavior of tunnel
junctions. The present PI has gone on from these earlier basic research results
to find the magnetic effects which are very promising for applications in
computers and other technologies. As in the earlier case, the PI here has
perfected new and more careful experimental methods to clearly reveal the
theoretically expected physical effects, in this case magnetic in nature. This
project focuses on careful and systematic measurements on junction structures
with metal electrodes of different ferromagnetic compositions, in order to
better understand and maximize the sensitivity to magnetic field. This research
program is interdisciplinary in nature and has typically involved several
undergraduate and high school students in its activities. These involvements are
beneficial in the preparation of students for further study and for careers in
industry, government laboratories or academia. ***