* 9730405
* Theory of Liquid Crystals and Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Tom Lubensky, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/2001
* USD 291,000.00

DMR-9730405 Lubensky Liquid crystals are materials that possess properties, such
as the ability to flow, associated with liquids, and properties, such as optical
anisotropy, associated with crystalline solids. New liquid crystalline
materials, new realizations of familiar phases, and even entirely new liquid
crystalline phases are continually being discovered. In this grant theoretical
research will be carried out on two general aspects of the physics of liquid
crystals: chirality and layered structures. Chirality of the mesogens is
reflected in a rich variety of equilibrium phases that include the cholesteric
phase, the blue phases, ferroelectric smectic-C* phase, and the A and C twisted
grain boundary phases. This research seeks to elucidate the relationship between
the structural chirality of these phases and chirality at a microscopic level.
Other problems that will be studied that are related to chirality include:
chiral structures in columnar phases, chiral pathways from the nematic to
smectic-A phase, and phase transitions to the twisted grain boundary C phase. A
major part of the reseach will be devoted to the study of 2D smectic lattices
that form from DNA segments that are intercalated between lipid bilayers.
Coulomb forces lead to interactions between lattices in adjacent layers. These
structures are important in gene-therapy research. A major focus of the proposed
research will be to study the statistical and structural properties of these
complexes. Models for these phases that interpolate between one- dimensional
smectic and two-dimensional columnar phases and show promise of predicting new
equilibrium phases characterized by orientational but not positional
correlations between 2D DNA lattices will be explored. Phases exhibited by free
standing smectic films will also be studied. %%% Liquid crystals are materials
that possess properties, such as the ability to flow, associated with liquids,
and properties, such as optical anisotropy, as sociated with crystalline solids.
New liquid crystalline materials, new realizations of familiar phases, and even
entirely new liquid crystalline phases are continually being discovered.
Lubensky will continue his theoretical inquiry, in close connection with
experiments, into traditional and novel new liquid crystalline materials. A
central theme of this research involves the investigation of many of the rich
variety of phases that occur in these materials and how fundamental symmetries,
such as whether or not a molecule can be superimposed on its mirror image, and
properties at the molecular level, influence macroscopic properties of observed
phases. Of particular interest are novel phases involving DNA segments that play
a major role in gene- therapy research and how a phase responds to an externally
applied electric field. This research will also contribute to the training of
the next generation of experts in these technologically promising materials. ***