* 9730745
* Ecological and Biogeochemical Characterization of a         Dominant Lineage of Coastal Ocean Bacterioplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Mary Ann Moran, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2003
* USD 287,422.00

A phylogenetic cluster of marine bacterioplankton has been identified that is
numerically abundant in coastal seawater and estuaries of the southeastern U.S.
These bacteria, termed the `marine alpha` group, consistently account for up to
30% of the bacterial ribosomal DNA (rDNA) in coastal seawater and in high
salinity reaches of major southeastern estuaries, and may constitute the single
most dominant bacterial lineage in these systems. Marine alpha bacteria can be
readily isolated from seawater samples using low nutrient culturing techniques,
and thus some indications of their potential biogeochemical roles have emerged.
Many marine alpha isolates are capable of growth on lignin related compounds and
humic substances, two types of naturally occurring aromatic compounds found in
high concentrations in southeastern U.S. salt marshes and in riverine material
exported to the coastal ocean. Other isolates are capable of metabolizing
organic sulfur molecules, such as DMSP and methanesulfonic acid, which are
important compounds in oceanic sulfur cycling and atmospheric processes. This
proposal describes an investigation into the ecology, biogeochemical roles, and
physiological capabilities of these numerically dominant coastal marine
bacteria. We will determine the distribution and abundance of marine alpha
bacterioplankton in southeastern U.S. waters and other selected coastal sites
around the U.S., to construct a clone library of marine alpha sequences, to
isolate and characterize culturable members of the group, and to use molecular
techniques (based on in situ PCR and 16S rDNA approaches) to study the
biogeochemical roles of the group in natural seawater.