* 9730821
* The Bureaucratic Construction of Legal Meaning:             Welfare, Work, and the Rights of the Poor
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Evelyn Brodkin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2002
* USD 89,556.00

Welfare law substantially affects the scope and content of rights accorded to
poor families, both a claimant on the state and a citizens subject of state
protection. In August 1996, Congress passed the Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families program that profoundly alters the legal status of poor families,
ending the federal guarantee of case assistance and shifting welfare's
fundamental purpose from that of assuring income to transforming welfare
recipients to workers. Yet, formal provisions of law do not fully define welfare
rights or settle rights questions. They establish new boundaries within which
struggles over the elaboration, interpretation, and production of practical
legal meaning occur as law is translated into actions. Practical legal meaning
refers to law as it is produced by the public bureaucracies that implement and
interpret law: the politics of informal lawmaking. This research seeks to
understand the bureaucratic construction of legal meaning, the factors that
shape it, and its substantive implications for the rights of the poor under new
welfare law. The study uses field interviewing and observation in four welfare
offices in Chicago. The offices are categorized to represent differences in
caseload demographics, location, caseload size, and the research sites then
randomly selected . Patterns of practice and social explanations of behavior
will be used to test theories of the development and implementation of informal
legal meaning. %%% Welfare law substantially affects the scope and content of
rights accorded to poor families, both a claimant on the state and a citizens
subject of state protection. In August 1996, Congress passed the Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families program that profoundly alters the legal status of
poor families, ending the federal guarantee of case assistance and shifting
welfare's fundamental purpose from that of assuring income to transforming
welfare recipients to workers. Yet, formal provisions of law do not fully define
welfare rights or settle rights questions. They establish new boundaries within
which struggles over the elaboration, interpretation, and production of
practical legal meaning occur as law is translated into actions. Practical legal
meaning refers to law as it is produced by the public bureaucracies that
implement and interpret law: the politics of informal lawmaking. This research
seeks to understand the bureaucratic construction of legal meaning, the factors
that shape it, and its substantive implications for the rights of the poor under
new welfare law. The study uses field interviewing and observation in four
welfare offices in Chicago. The offices are categorized to represent differences
in caseload demographics, location, caseload size, and the research sites then
randomly selected . Patterns of practice and social explanations of behavior
will be used to test theories of the development and implementation of informal
legal meaning.