* 9730932
* Carbon Isotope Constraints on Benthic Carbonate             Dissolution in the Eastern Equatorial Atlantic and          The North Carolina Continental Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Daniel McCorkle, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2002
* USD 250,315.00

Pore water and benthic flux chamber concentration (ECO2) and isotopic
composition (o13C) measurements will be used to investigate the factors which
control the rate of carbonate dissolution at the sea floor. The major goal of
this work is to document the occurrence and impact of "metabolic" carbonate
dissolution, dissolution driven by benthic decomposition reactions in sediments
above the calcite saturation horizon, where the bottom waters are supersaturated
with respect to calcite. Pore water samples will also determine the /\14C of
dissolved inorganic carbon and dissolved organic carbon. The field work for this
project will be carried out during two upcoming process studies of benthic
carbonate dissolution. PIs. R. Jahnke, W. Martin, and F. Sayles have been funded
to carry out coordinated dissolution studies in the eastern equatorial Atlantic
Ocean (Cape Verde Plateau and Sierra Leone Rise) in 1998 and on the continental
margin off North Carolina in 1999. Jahnke will carry out direct flux
measurements (oxygen, nutrients, alkalinity, and calcium) using benthic flux
chambers, and Martin and Silks will use in situ sampling techniques to measure
pore water profiles of oxygen, nutrients, alkalinity, ECO2, calcium, iron, and
manganese. Samples from Jahnke's benthic flux chambers and from Sayles and
Martin's in situ pore water will be analyzed in this study using del C-13. These
samples will provide independent estimates of the relative contributions of
decomposition-derived CO2 (o13C = -20 o/oo) and dissolution- derived CO3 -2
(o13C = 0 o/oo) to the flux of ECO2 out of the sediments. It is particularly
important to make these independent isotopic estimates because alkalinity and
calcium flux estimates from Jahnke's benthic flux chamber and from Sayles' and
Martin's in situ pore water sample yielded conflicting results in a previous
dissolution study on the Ceara Rise (western equatorial Atlantic). In that Ceara
Rise s tudy, both pore water and benthic flux chamber o13C results agreed with
the pore water alkalinity and calcium data (and with microelectrode profiles of
pore water pH and oxygen), indicating substantial metabolic dissolution at and
above the saturation horizon.