* 9730577
* Fundamental Experimental Properties of Mesoscopic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Richard Webb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2001
* USD 380,000.00

9730577 Webb This is a condensed matter physics project that investigates the
quantum mechanical properties of electron transport through submicron
conductors. In these very small structures the phase of the wavelength of the
electron wave function are important variables that are probed by a variety of
subtle experimental arrangements. The project will systematically explore the
phase coherent transport properties of mesoscopic system on time scales much
shorter and much longer than the phase coherence time. State- of-the-art dc
superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) will be used to study the
size dependence of the magnetic response of both single and arrays of metal
rings. The object is an understanding of why the persistent current in phase
coherent loops appears to have quantum fluctuations which are orders of
magnitude larger than expected. In addition, magnetic and transport properties
of mesoscopic systems whose size approaches that of the Kondo screening length
will be studied. The project provides exceptional educational opportunities for
graduate students and post-doctoral associates. They are involved in
intellectually challenging research at the frontiers of condensed matter
physics. The experiments require the latest fabrication and measurement methods
and prepare the students for a wide range of scientific or technical careers.
%%% This is a condensed matter physics project that employs state-of- the-art
micro-fabrication methods to prepare ultra-small structures. Much of the work is
focused on understanding how electrons flow through the nanoscale structures.
Conventional ideas of current flow do not apply, and the wave-mechanical
properties of the electron dominate the response of currents in loops, arrays of
loops, films, etc. The project addresses currently unsolved problems in the
quantum mechanical behav ior of the nanostructures. These problems are relevant
to those involved in the microelectronics industry where the size of transistors
is steadily decreasing to the so-called mesoscopic realm where quantum mechanics
becomes important. An additional project deals with the properties of nano-wires
containing magnetic impurity atoms. The impurities influence the electron
transport in surprising and poorly understood ways. The project provides
exceptional educational opportunities for graduate students and post-doctoral
associates. They are involved in intellectually challenging research at the
frontiers of condensed matter physics. The experiments require the latest
fabrication and measurement methods and prepare the students for a wide range of
scientific or technical careers. ***