* 9730758
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development and Evaluation   of Various Novel Probes to Detect Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Said Goueli, Promega Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2000
* USD 4,403.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Said A.
Goueli, Team leader of Technology Development at Promega Corporation, in
Madison, Wisconsin, and Dr. Mostafa Kamel El Awady, Chairman, Dept. of Human
Genetics at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt, and Acting
Director of the Medical Biotechnology Program at the Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology research Institute, Mubarak City, Alexandria, Egypt. The two
scientists plan to synthesize distinct peptides, and generate antigen-specific
polyclonal antibodies that are useful in detecting the presence of virus in
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)-infected population using ELISA-based system. The system
to be developed will be less sensitive to variations in hygienic conditions and
fluctuations in handling procedures, and thus more useful in the environment in
less developed countries. The specific aims in this project are : develop in-
house an ELISA-based assay to screen the general HCV-infected population. This
is to be validated against reference kits commercially available and against the
performance of kits base on RT-PCR technology; and develop in-house RT-PCR kit
for subtyping the general HCV-infected population, and validating the results
against reference kits. Scope: This project will involve two laboratories with
complementary capabilities to conduct research in an important field for both
countries. Most of the research work will be conducted by Dr. El Awady's team,
with US participation through a visit by Dr. Goueli to Egypt, and visits by the
Egyptian scientist to Goueli's laboratory in Wisconsin. This proposal meets INT
objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. The
project was generated as a result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government. NIH was
involved in the evaluation of the project and in recommending its support. This
project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered
by the US Department of State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out cooperative activities.