* 9730882
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Ecophysiology of Coastal  Halophytes of Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Irwin Ungar, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 30,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Irwin
Ungar of Ohio University in Athens, and Dr. M. Ajmal Khan, Department of Botany
at the University of Karachi in Pakistan. The two will conduct research to study
the comparative response of halophytes, the leaf succulent (Suaeda fruticosa),
stem succulent (Haloxylon recurvum) and the grass (Halopyrum mucronatum) to
various levels of salinity and drought under field and laboratory conditions at
different stages of their life cycle. Investigations will be carried out on the
germination, establishment, growth, reproduction, plant and soil relationship,
variation in the ion content of tissue and soil, osmotic relations, and
mechanism of salt and drought tolerance to determine the tolerance limit of
species and their ecological responses under field conditions. The differential
effect of salinity and drought on germination and growth will be followed
throughout the growth season. Physiological markers of salt tolerance will be
investigated so that plants can be bred to acquire such characteristics. Scope:
This project will involve two scientists who had worked together in the past in
an effort to address one of the more pressing ecological problems in many of the
world's poorer countries, namely the ever-decreasing resources and the dwindling
fresh water supplies as well as the increasing salinity of soils. They plan to
increase our knowledge of the ecology and physiology of salt-tolerant plants
through the study of halophytes of Pakistan. Pakistan is particularly suitable
for this research because it has a large coastal line adjacent to large
mangroves, with many varieties of salt tolerant plants, in several areas. The
rest of the coastline is adjacent to vast deserts. The two scientists possess
complementary skills and facilities, and their research would be enhanced
through this collaboration. This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. This project is jointly
funded with the Division of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience.