* 9730019
* Synthesis of GA-Nitride Nanoclusters by Precursor Dispersion in Block Copolymer Cavities
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2003
* USD 525,548.00

9730019 Risbud The goal of this project is to develop new synthesis science for
III-V nitride nanoclusters applicable to quantum dot structures. The approach is
to combine inspirations from the synthetic chemistry of block copolymers and
precursors to nitride compounds to process nanocrystals of III-V nitride
materials sequestered in polymeric matrices. Parallel investigations of the
microscopic, optical and electronic properties of nitride quantum dots will be
pursued. Transmission electron microscopy and electron diffraction will be
employed to study the structure, size distribution, and defects of the quantum
dots. Optical spectroscopies will be used to characterize the band gap of the
quantum dots, quantum confinement, and- emission processes (photoluminescence
and time resolved spectroscopy). The effects of synthesis parameters, defects,
surface passivation, and impurities on the behavior of the III-V nitride quantum
dots will be studied using these primary measurement and characterization
methods. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowledge and understanding
gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the performance
and stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental understanding and a
basis for designing and producing improved materials, and materials
combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area.