* 9730692
* America's First Securities Markets, 1787-1836: Emergence    Development, Integration
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Richard Sylla, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 182,245.00

In 1790, Congress enacted the plan of Alexander Hamilton to restructure
Revolutionary War debts into long term securities with quarterly interest to be
paid in specie, an action that created the U.S. national debt in more or less
its modern form. The following year Congress enacted Hamilton's plan for a Bank
of the United States, a large public bank owned mostly by private investors who
subscribed for four fifths of its capital stock. Historians generally have
viewed these actions in terms of their effects of enhancing the credit of the
U.S. government and giving a major boost to the country's banking system, which
at the time consisted of only three banks. Much less studied, though no less
important for the country subsequent economic development, is the effect these
actions had in creating securities markets that allowed American governments and
corporations to raise capital and investors to benefit from the liquidity of
active trading markets for bond and stock issues. This project invloves
extracting a detailed quantitative record of early U.S. securities markets,
mostly from newspapers of the era and to a lesser extent from archival
manuscript sources and public records, and for preparing studies analyzing the
efficiency characteristics of these markets and their implications for economic
growth. The principal investigators have surveyed these sources in connection
with a study of the market for U.S. debt from 1790 to the mid 1830s, when that
debt was briefly eliminated. In the process they discovered that active markets
for debt and equity sprang up immediately at the time of Congress's enactments
in the cities of New York, Philadelphia, and Boston, and shortly thereafter in
Baltimore. In each of these cities newspapers reported, usually with weekly
frequency, the prices of the three U.S. debt issues of 1790, as well as the
price of U.S. Bank shares. These were the `national market` securities of the
day. At the same time, markets for `local` issues bank and insurance company
shares, state and municipal debt issues, and transportation and other corporate
enterprises were also reflected in newspaper price quotations. Analysis of end
of month quotations for the national market securities indicates that the
domestic city markets quickly exhibited a high degree of intermarket
integration, and that their existence contributed to a flow of U. S. securities
overseas and a corresponding inflow of foreign capital to the United States. The
project will create a coded, computerized data base of weekly securities price
quotations along with periodic interest and dividend payments. This data base
should be of interest to others, including economic historians and financial
economists. The investigators will apply the data base to investigations of a
number of issues, including integration of domestic and overseas securities
markets; patterns revealed by construction of more detailed asset price, yield
and return indexes than currently exist; and relationships between securities
markets and the development of the banking system and, more generally, corporate
enterprise. The project will explore the larger question of the relationship of
financial development to economic growth. The United States was fortunate to
have a financial system that compared favorably with those of other nations at
the beginning of its history. It is likely that this financial system made a
major contribution to the country's early start on economic modernization and
growth.