* 9730759
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Solid Waste Management       (Recycling of Rubber Waste)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Mary Ann Aglan, Technology Resources Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2002
* USD 23,600.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Laurand
Lewandoski, President of Lewandoski Consulting Group in Colorado Springs, and
Dr. Abbas A. Yehia, of the National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt. The two
scientists plan to examine and test novel ideas to recycle rubber waste. They
plan to convert scrap rubber into powder; convert the powder into thermoplastic
material; apply surface modification techniques by creating functional groups on
the surface of the powder to be used as ion exchange resin; and by testing the
properties of the produced material, for use as a component of road pavement.
Scope: The US scientist is an experienced researcher in the polymers and rubber
industry, and also in environmental research. The Egyptian scientist is a senior
researcher in the Chemical Industries Research Division of the NRC, and has
experience in chemical processing and testing. Also to be involved in the
project is MARSO CHEMICALS, a chemical company in Egypt that has the facility
and capability to carry out work not easily possible in the NRC. This proposal
meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual
benefit. The project was generated as a result of a workshop on environmentally
clean technologies that was organized, in 1996, by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and the Egyptian Government. EPA was involved in the evaluation of
the project and in recommending its support. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of
State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out cooperative activities.