* 9730440
* Uncovering Long-Run Economic Relationships in High-Frequency Financial Data
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Tim Bollerslev, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2003
* USD 242,109.00

9730440 Bollerslev This project enhances the ability of researchers to extract
useful information about important economic phenomena from high-frequency
financial data. The increased availability of intraday financial data has
spurred a tremendous growth in empirical research on the cross-sectional and
intertemporal dependencies across financial instruments and markets. However,
only recently has it become clear that the analysis of such high-frequency data
necessitates the introduction of novel modeling paradigms relative to the
standard methodologies employed at the daily and lower frequencies. The reliance
on conventional time series techniques invariably results in the intraday-
specific features dominating the inferred statistical properties of the observed
high-frequency data, whereas any evidence concerning longer-run dependencies
tend to be distorted or disappear altogether. These facts have effectively
divorced the empirical studies of high-frequency data from the remainder the
literature, and a near dichotomy has arisen between so-called microstructure
studies and the more mainstream empirical literature in asset pricing finance.
This project bridges this gap by developing new econometric time series models
and tools and using these to improve our understanding of the type of
information that induces dramatic price responses, and the forces shaping the
intensity of price movements and their relation to underlying market
microstructure. The empirical research is based on a long time span of
intradaily exchange and interest rates. It provides a direct window to the
market expectations and the importance of macroeconomic announcements across
different policy regimes. The project also develops new and more accurate risk
measurements based on high-frequency data and these should have immediate
practical implications for the management and monitoring of financial market
risks. The general results of the project should be of relevant to applied
macroeconomists, time series econo metricians, financial researchers,
regulators, and practitioners alike. ??