* 9730442
* Business Cycles and Industry Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Jeffrey Campbell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2000
* USD 90,319.00

At the same time that theoretical work sought to understand the cause of counter
cyclical job reallocation, new empirical work has shed doubt on the proposition
that all job reallocation is counter cyclical. There is good evidence that job
reallocation is procyclical in many non manufacturing industries. This new job
creation and destruction evidence challenges all theories of counter cyclical
job reallocation. This research addresses this challenge by applying the dynamic
microeconomic theory of a competitive industry to study differences in cyclical
dynamics between young and old plants and to study the industry dynamics of a
single service industry, restaurants. This study consists of two projects. The
first analyzes observed life cycle differences in cyclical behavior between
young and old plants. The hypothesis is that one difference between young and
old plants, (their adjustment costs), is responsible for the many measured
differences in their employment dynamics. Rather than assume that young plants
have lower adjustment costs then old plants in an ad hoc fashion, such a
difference are derived endogenously by giving managers a choice of
organizational technology. Because of their simplicity, competitive models of
industry dynamics make stark predictions regarding the effects of demand shocks
on prices and quantities. If entry can occur quickly and congestion does not
affect costs, then demand shocks have no effect on prices or incumbent plants.
In this case, the dynamics of individual producers and that of aggregate
variables have no connection with one another. If entry takes time or if
congestion increases costs, demand shocks affect both prices and incumbent
plants. The second project will determine which competitive model best describes
the restaurant industry; and it will provide a more detailed characterization of
the response of net entry, average firm size, and other size distribution
statistics to a demand shock than can be gained from theory alone. The approach
is to identify local demand shocks with local military basing and defense
contracts and estimate their impact on restaurant prices and quantities,
revealing whether the short run supply curve is flat or increasing.