* 9730220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rush to Judgement:         A Schema Priming Model of Political Persuasion
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Kathleen Knight, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/2000
* USD 5,318.00

Inquiry into the dynamics of persuasion is axiomatic to political science,
psychology, and communication studies. This dissertation project argues that
persuasion is not so much about convincing others to change their minds as much
as it is about framing the terms of the debate - - getting people to think about
issues in desired terms (e.g. defining the debate over abortion in terms of
women's rights rather than `life`). Visceral appeals enhance prospects for
persuasion in that they distract the message receiver from the propagandist's
manipulation. Thus, the most persuasive rhetoric should incorporate elements of
both cerebral, `hard` arguments and emotionally laden `easy` arguments. This
hypothesis is tested by analyzing the relationship between talk radio listening
and public opinion/political behavior. Content analysis and surveys are used to
discern the extent to which talk radio hosts activate particular mental maps to
induce listeners to resist governmental activism, oppose Democratic candidates,
and participate in various political activities. Survey based results indicate
that negative, humor-laden messages that `prime` some values over others (e.g.
personal responsibility over philanthropy), succeed at moving opinions and
engendering participation. The dissertation executes a careful experimental
design and promises to enhance substantially our understanding of the topic.