* 9730016
* Surface-Controlled Nanoscale Materials for High-Added-Value Applications - Symposium  FF - 1997 MRS Fall Meeting to be  held December 1-5, 1997 in Boston, Massachusetts
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1998
* USD 5,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9730016 Robert Pachavis/MRS This proposal is being submitted for
the support of Symposium FF: Surface Controlled Nanoscale Materials for High-
Added-Value Applications at the Fall Materials Research Society Meeting During
Dec. 1997 in Boston. Nanoscale materials have attached wide attention due to
their superior properties. One of the main initial, now achieved, goals has been
the development of scalable synthesis methods of nanosized powders, essentially
for promising sintering and mechanical applications. However, as the size of the
grains further decreases, the surface-to-bulk ratio dramatically increases,
conferring to he first atomic layer a major role in the overall properties of
the material. Indeed the chemical composition of the reactive particle surface
becomes different from that of the bulk upon exposure to air contaminants. It
has been realized recently that, not only clean synthesis processes are needed
to obtain reproducible high purity nanosized powders, but also that tools and
techniques to adequately characterize and monitor the very surface of the
nanoparticles, in situ, independent of any bulk characterization are necessary.
Moreover, the preservation or recovery of the desirable chemical properties of
the surface of the grains need to be developed to facilitate and thus increase
the industrial use of the nanosized powders in current technological processes.
The major objective of this cross-disciplinary symposium is twofold. The
fundamental aspect is to emphasize the relationship between the surface chemical
composition of the nanoparticles, that of the grain boundaries, and the
macroscopic physical properties of the consolidated material. The technological
objectives is to evaluate new approaches of surface purity control and surface
chemical modification to engineer superior nanostructured materials and
composites. A complete tailoring of the surface properties is expected to lead
to perfectly controlled consolidated materials and to have a g reat impact on
the nanofabrication of electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic devices as well
as biomedical-oriented compounds. ***