* 9730211
* A Research Program for Autoadaptive Media in Complex        Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Mete Sozen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 03/31/1999
* USD 54,690.00

This project is for organizing two workshops to study the potential of
autoadaptive media in civil engineering and to define targets and types of
needed university-based, cross disciplinary research for broad applications in
civil infrastructures. Autoadaptive media are materials, mechanisms, devices,
and structures that can modify, monitor, or control their own characteristics to
respond appropriately to external stimuli. The slow adoption of autoadaptive
media by civil engineering is attributed mainly to three perceptions; lack of
relevant information, concern about maintenance of the materials and devices in
the field, and cost of materials. A directed research initiative will help
alleviate and possibly even eliminate the first two perceptions and will exploit
the vast potential of these media fully. A research initiative targeting the
civil engineering uses of autoadaptive materials is desirable because (1) in
relation to consideration of `added value` to the knowledge base it will have a
substantial impact, (2) to leave it to serendipitous development is to delay any
possibly application, and (3) even if the current prognostications are negative,
it is a strategic mistake not to explore an opportunity that may revolutionize
many segments of civil engineering. The project activity will explore the
potential of autoadaptive media for civil engineering applications and to
develop a program of appropriate actions. It is predicated on the belief that
the knowledge base already developed by material scientists and control
engineers must be tapped and redirected by engineers intimately familiar with
the demands of civil-engineering application.