* 9730098
* Coping with Darkness: The Physiological Responses of Marine Microalgae to Aphotic Conditions and their Ecological       Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Hugh MacIntyre, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2002
* USD 264,598.00

This research is designed to test the effects of extended darkness on the
photosynthetic competence of benthic and planktonic diatoms. Lagrangian models
of estuarine light fields surrounding phytoplankton and benthic algae indicate
that exposure to darkness for from 2 5 days is a common occurrence. Preliminary
evidence indicates that there is considerable species variation in the
physiological competence after several days of darkness but the factors
accounting for these differences are unknown. Metabolic and physiological
changes during extended darkness are hypothesized to alter the photosynthetic
apparatus and the subsequently ability of the cell to respond to light. The
research focuses on two time scales of photosynthetic regulation. The extended
time scale of hours days will be studied using measurements of the change in
photosynthetic components including photosynthetic and quenching pigments,
ribulose1,5 bisphosphate carboxylaseloxygenase (Rubisco), carbohydrate and
protein. Short time-scale (minutes) responses will be evaluated using
measurements of the kinetics of photosynthetic induction and of Rubisco
activation and deactivation. Short time scale experiments will be interpreted in
the context of the ability of cells to withstand brief exposures to bright light
subsequent to prolonged darkness. It is anticipated that this research will lead
to a more relevant framework for interpreting fluctuating light effects in
estuarine habitats than can be had without considering the physiological 'costs'
of periodic confinement to darkness.