* 9730402
* Time Preference and Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2002
* Robert Barro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/2002
* USD 210,867.00

The standard long run model of the macroeconomy-the neoclassical growth model-
assumes a simple form of household preferences in which the rate of time
preference is constant. However, some recent experimental evidence suggests that
households are myopic in the sense that rates of time preference are very high
over the near term but much lower between dates advanced some time in the
future. This project will assess the theoretical implications of this form of
preferences for observable macroeconomic behavior and then test the hypotheses
on cross country data. The neoclassical growth model is modified to allow for a
non constant rate of time preference. If the household cannot commit future
choices of consumption and if utility is logarithmic, then an equilibrium is
found that resembles the standard results of the neoclassical model. In this
solution, the effective rate of time preference is high, but constant. Although
this model has potentially important implications for institutional design and
other policies- because households would benefit from an ability to commit
future consumption-there is a sense in which the results are observationally
equivalent to those of the conventional growth model. When the framework is
extended to allow for partial commitment ability, then some testable hypotheses
emerge. Steady state results are obtained for more general utility functions,
and some properties of dynamic paths are worked out for the case of isoelastic
utility. Further theoretical research will assess the uniqueness of the
equilibria. Multiplicity of equilibria have been found in analogous contexts by
other researchers but only when the household's horizon is infinite. The
properties of the transitional dynamics will be worked out numerically for the
case of isoelastic utility, and further testable hypotheses will be derived from
the theory. The theory will also be linked with existing analyses that
endogenize population growth and technological progress. Previous cross country
empirical work on the determinants of economic growth will be extended to
evaluate the macroeconomic significance of the kinds of time preference analysis
that form the theoretical part of this research. The analysis will consider
institutional and cultural elements that affect people's ability to make and
enforce commitments. The institutional side will consider measures of the rule
of law and political stability and other features of the legal environment that
affect people's ability to organize financial markets and enter into contracts
and other market relationships. The cultural side will assess aspects of
religion, language, and ethnicity as possible influences on thrift, a propensity
for honesty, and a willingness to work hard. In each case, the hypothesis to be
tested is that the explanatory variables have joint influences across a group of
dependent variables, including the rate of economic growth, the saving rate, the
extent of financial market development, fertility decisions, and the intensity
of investment in human capital ½ñ+¼^úá¼