* 9730646
* Retrofitting Steel Frame-Infill Masonry Walls Using         Fiberglass Composite Laminates
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Ahmad Hamid, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2003
* USD 164,596.00

9730646 Elgaaly Brick and concrete block masonary infill walls are used
extensively in steel frame buildings. They are often considered as non-
structural elements. Which has led to poor performance of infilled frame
structures when subjected to strong lateral forces. Observations of post-
earthquake damages indicate their vulnerability. A retrofitting technique that
is easy to apply and that enhances the strength and deformation characteristics
of infill masonary walls could potentially reduce the number of failures of
infilled frames under earthquake loading. Existing retrofit techniques have
several disadvantages such as considerable increase in building weight,
difficulties for connection to existing buildings, and high construction cost.
In this project, a new technique for retrofitting infill hollow masonry walls
utilizing external reinforcement with Fiberglass Composite Laminates (FCL) is
proposed. It had several advantages over the existing techniques. A quantitative
evaluation of the effectiveness of FCL as a retrofitting technique for steel
frames infilled with hollow concrete masonry walls will be conducted.
Characterization of material properties of reinforced infill masonry walls will
be obtained and used for the analysis and design of retrofitted infilled frames
under seismic loads. Further testing and analytical studies will be conducted to
examine the interaction between the steel frame and the reinforced infill wall.
Through this effort the effectiveness of FCL will be demonstrated and its use as
a retrofitting material to enhance the seismic performance of existing infilled
frame buildings will be advanced. ***