* 9730408
* A Laser Sensor for Direct Eulerian Measurement of Rates     and Statistics of Turbulent Kinetic Energy Dissipation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Yogesh Agrawal, Sequoia Scientific, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 04/30/2003
* USD 350,115.00

9730408 Summary: The proposed instrumentation project requests funds to develop
a sensor that can be used to determine the Eulerian or profiled measurement of
turbulent kinetic energy rates in high energy environments such as the bottom
and surface boundary layers. The new sensor will offer the capability to measure
the full dissipation spectrum directly via backscatter. It will also permit the
analysis of statistics of the dissipation variable. Initial development of the
single-axis laboratory prototype of this sensor was funded via an NSF SBIR grant
(95-60930), and follow-on funding for final development was recommeded by the
Phase II SBIR technical panel (see reviews for 97-10425), but was not ultimately
obtained. This proposal is a collaborative proposal with Dr. John Trowbridge at
WHOI (9812514). First, the Pi proposes further development of the instrument,
which is necessary since a two (2) axis system will be required for a field
instrument and the PI plans to incorporate a new fast Doppler signal processor
and data storage media. Secondly, the PI and Dr. Trowbridge (WHOI) will conduct
a bottom boundary layer inter-comparison experiment on the south shore of
Martha's Vineyard. The object of this experiment is to examine dissipation as
measured directly by the laser sensor, and as deduced from turbulent spectra
using an acoustic Doppler velocimeter.