* 9730445
* Analyzing the Effects of Formal Position and Leader         Legitimacy on Leader-Subordinate Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Cathryn Johnson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2001
* USD 17,983.00

This project involves an experimental test of the effects of formal authority
and legitimacy on leader-subordinate interaction in organizations. Previous
field and experimental studies on leadership and legitimacy in organizations
suggest that the legitimacy of individuals in authority positions affects the
nature and quality of interaction with their subordinates. However, we know
little about how superiors lacking in legitimacy interact with their
subordinates compared to highly legitimated superiors, and how a leader's
legitimacy affects the subordinates' responses to their superior or the
subordinates' perceptions of the leader's competence and power. An experimental
study will test the effects of formal authority and legitimacy of the superior
on leader-subordinate interaction within an organizational context. The
objectives are to: 1) develop new measures of legitimacy of formal leaders; 2)
separate the effects of formal authority from those of legitimation; and 3) test
theoretically-derived predictions for the effects of formal authority and leader
legitimacy on leader-subordinate interaction. Results should inform (1) the
effects of leader legitimacy on leader-subordinate interaction independent of
the effects of formal authority; (2) the relationship between a superior's
legitimacy and the subordinates' perceptions of the superior's competence; (3)
how legitimacy affects leader-subordinate conversations.