* 9730493
* Sequential Voting Models
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2002
* USD 192,067.00

Project Abstract The proposal contains two parts. The first and main part is
joint work with Michele Piccione. In voting models, which underlie much recent
research in political economy, the voting can have two roles: it can aggregate
private information and / or preferences. Whereas in most voting models the
electorate votes simultaneously on each issue, we analyze sequential voting
games. This makes it possible to address many interesting questions on both
roles of voting. For example, concerning aggregating information, which
mechanism is better: simultaneous or sequential voting? When the electorate can
choose when to vote, will they choose a method that is efficient for aggregating
information? We also study the implications of two opposing considerations in
voting earlier or later: early voters are more likely to determine the set of
`relevant` alternatives and later voters will know which alternatives are
relevant and hence are less likely to `waste` their vote. What sequential
structures will then occur when voters can chose when to vote? Will voters who
expect to have similar preferences choose to vote close together or far apart in
time? The project addresses these and other questions that arise from
considering sequential voting environments. This sheds light on the implications
of states `gaming` on when to have their primaries, or of announcing the
outcomes of votes in some districts before voting is completed in others. The
second part contains two projects on the foundations of game theory (but that
are otherwise unrelated). The first, joint with Bart Lipman and Aldo Rustichini,
derives unique subjective probabilities for the model of unforeseen
contingencies proposed by Kreps* and further extended by the three of us in
earlier work. The second, joint with Drew Fudenberg and David Levine, develops,
for games of incomplete information, solution concepts that are based on
learning, such as the notion of self-confirming equilibria, and that incorporate
rationality as well. *D. M. Kreps (1979): `A Representation Theorem for
'Preference for Flexibility',` Econometrica 47 565 - 576.