* 9730844
* Spectroscopic Studies of Partially Bound Lewis Acid-Base    Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 02/28/2002
* USD 291,077.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Ken Leopold of the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities Campus in his Fourier-transform microwave
(FTMW) spectroscopic studies of the structural and electronic properties of
Lewis acid-base complexes. In these studies, he will focus on complexes in which
the donor-acceptor bond is only partially formed, i.e., a bonding regime
intermediate between van der Waals and chemical interactions. In previous work,
Prof. Leopold observed that gas phase species which lie in the intermediate
regime between van der Waals and chemical bonding undergo enormous changes in
structure upon crystallization. In these studies, he will (1) extend this work
to a wider number of complexes to investigate the effects of Lewis acidity and
basicity on the nature of the donor-acceptor bond, (2) measure dipole moments of
partially bonded molecules, and (3) characterize larger clusters containing a
partially bonded unit. Partially bonded species are important in a variety of
areas of chemistry. One of the most interesting aspects of partially bound
systems is their hypersensitivity to a surrounding medium. The phenomenon is
most apparent when comparing gas phase species with their crystalline analogues.
These studies will provide an experimentally grounded complement for a growing
body of theoretical work aimed at further understanding the nature of the
electron pair donor-acceptor bond.