* 9730952
* RUI:  Chemical Defense by Marine Phytoplankton against      Protozoan Grazers
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2002
* USD 385,424.00

Chemical deterrence has long been recognized as an important strategy by which
terrestrial macrophytes defend themselves against herbivores. Chemical defense
also has been documented extensively for marine multicellular organisms. By
comparison, we know astonishingly little about chemical defenses by planktonic
microbes. The proposed study focuses on chemical defense by marine
phytoplankton, which are responsible for roughly half the photosynthesis on
Earth, against protozoan grazers, their dominant consumers. It is well known
that potent phytoplankton-derived toxins, such as the saxitoxin synthesized by
the dinoflagellate Alexandriwn, can kill or incapacitate predators. We argue
that less severe chemical interactions, which merely deter feeding on specific
prey, may be more common and may strongly influence predator-prey interactions
within the microplankton. We present a recently-discovered model for subacute
chemical defense by the coccolithophorid alga Emilianiahuxleyi. In this species,
enzymatic cleavage by dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) lyase to form dimethyl
sulfide (DMS) and acrylate is activated by protozoan grazing, and at least one
protozoan species feeds preferentially on E. huxleyi clones with low lyase
activity. Since production of DIVIS and acrylate is widespread among bloom-
forming algal taxa, we propose to build on the above observations to understand
the mechanisms by which this reaction influences protozoan herbivory. We will
also investigate in detail how the reaction serves to communicate the chemical
message `don't feed on me`. Using this defense model, we will begin to evaluate
how prey chemistry alters predator choice and feeding dynamics, and how these
responses might in turn affect the evolution of prey populations.