* 9730637
* A 3-D Seismic Investigation of the Sediment-to-Rock         Transition and Its Relationship to Nankai Subduction Thrust Seismicity:  U.S.-Japan Collaborative Program
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1998,12/31/2004
* Thomas Shipley, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 12/31/2004
* USD 1,157,491.00

9730637 Bangs this award will support a seismic reflection, refraction and
passive seismicity program to study underthrusting of oceanic crust along the
Nankai Trough off the east coast of Japan. The primary feature to be examined in
this experiment is the subduction thrust fault from its aseismic zone in the
Trough (trench) to a depth of at least 15 kilometers beneath the continental
margin where the thrust is marked by significant seismic activity. The goal of
the study is to examine changes in physical properties along the thrust as it
changes from aseismic to seismic expression. Understanding this transition from
compaction and aseismic slip to brittle failure is a major unknown in
understanding lithospheric consumption and earthquake dynamics. This Nankai
seismogenic zone marks the location of major destructive earthquakes along the
Japanese margin. The project is a collaborative experiment. United State
scientists will be responsible for acquiring and interpreting 3-dimensional
seismic reflection data from the thrust fault and accreting margin. Japanese
colleagues will be responsible for deploying ocean bottom seismometers for
seismic refraction and passive seismicity studies. In addition t the basic
scientific interpretation to be derived from the data, the experiment is
critical to the development of the MARGINS initiative and will provide necessary
site location data for future drilling by the international Ocean Drilling
Program. ***