* 9730958
* International Travel Grant: Bio-Transport '98, June 8-12,   1998, Kusadasi, Turkey
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 01/31/1999
* USD 10,500.00

9730958 Diller This grant provides travel support for US participants in an
international symposium on heat and mass transfer in biological tissues. This
conference will provide a forum to bring together scientists and engineers from
around the world involved in bioheat and mass transfer research, for an in-depth
discussion and exchange of the state-of-the-art of related theory, experiments,
and applications. The topic of heat and mass transport in biological systems is
an area of burgeoning interest from both the scientific and applications
perspectives. Transport phenomena govern many processes in both biotechnology
and bioengineering. The program includes technical sessions in a broad array of
topics which includes: (1) heat and mass transport in tissue engineering
processes, (2) energy based surgical modalities including; microwave,
ultrasound, radio frequency, laser and cryosurgery, (3) thermally coupled
phenomena in living systems including; laser tissue optics, hyperthermia cancer
therapy, burn injury processes, and tissue and organ cryopreservation, (4) mass
transport limited function in the design and operation of artificial organs, (5)
measurement and modeling of the thermal influence of blood perfusion in living
tissues; thermal methods to measure blood perfusion, (6) microscale and
molecular heat and mass transport phenomena in biological systems, (7) design
for commercial scale tissue processing protocols, and (8) temperature- triggered
drug delivery in living tissues. Participation in this conference will be
international and will include biomedical engineers, mechanical engineers,
chemical engineers, biochemical engineers, medical scientists, biologists,
chemists, and physicists. ***