* 9730505
* Democracy, Conflict Management, and Militarized Interstate  Disputes
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* William Dixon, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2002
* USD 107,502.00

This project is directed at improving our understanding of the interplay of
democracy and third party intermediaries in shaping the contours an outcomes of
international conflict. Four empirically testable hypotheses are derived from an
evolving theory of democratic norms positing that democratic leaders operate
within certain normative constraints to regulate and resolve political conflict
both at home and abroad. These hypotheses contend that democracy, working
through norms instilled in political leaders, will both influence states'
acquiescence to third party conflict managers and condition the effectiveness of
their management efforts. The primary objective of the research is to
systematically evaluate these hypothesized relationships against the historical
record of militarized interstate disputes. Because there were so few fully
democratic states in existence prior to World War II, the temporal domain of the
study begins in 1946 and extends through 1992, the last year of recorded
interstate disputes. Militarized interstate disputes provide a novel and
important test bed for these hypotheses, not only because much of what is known
about international conflict has been derived from studies of militarized
disputes, but also because they constitute the most widely used and thoroughly
investigated compilation of interstate conflict episodes currently available.
Empirically based answers to the questions raised by these hypotheses are
expected to have both theoretical and practical implications for how we
understand and deal with international conflict. But this empirical evaluation
cannot proceed without systematic identification and documentation of conflict
management by third parties, information that does not now exist within the
conceptual and operational context of militarized disputes. This collection of
new data constitutes a secondary objective of the research, but also entails a
side-benefit in the form of a new data resource on international conflict
management with potential application well beyond the present study. Thus what
is new and distinctive about this effort is that it extends explicit
consideration of conflict management to the heretofore uncharted territory of
militarized interstate disputes.