* 9730119
* Studies of Stratocumulus and Fair-Weather Cumulus Clouds Using a 94 GHz Droppler Cloud Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Roger Lhermitte, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 05/31/2003
* USD 558,389.00

Abstract/Albrecht Many climate and forecast models are not able to account for
shallow boundary layer clouds properly. The result of this deficiency is
uncertainty in climate and long-range weather predictions. To provide an
observational basis for improvement of cloud parameterizations and to increase
understanding of key cloud processes, a 94 GHz Doppler radar will be used with
other remote sensing systems and in situ aircraft observations to study
continental stratocumulus and fair-weather cumulus clouds. This study will focus
on processes that affect cloud lifetime and the production of large drops that
serve as precursors to the formation of precipitation. A key, unique feature of
this work is the deployment of the 94 GHz radar on a helicopter to enable
researchers to study the entire life cycle of cumulus clouds. The continental
stratus studies will use an extensive data set (more than 250 hours of cloud
observations) from the cloud radar, a microwave radiometer, a ceilometer, and
supporting meteorological observations that were collected over central
Pennsylvania under prior NSF support. This will include investigations of large-
eddy structures, entrainment processes, and the production of large drops and
drizzle. An extensive set of observations of shallow cumuli will be made using a
single-dish 94 GHz radar that has recendy been developed and constructed at the
University of Miami. A ceilometer, a micropulse lidar, a microwave radiometer,
an IR radiometer, and a video camera will be used to support the cloud structure
measurements from radar operations at shoreline and inland sites in south
Florida. The environment in which the clouds form will be characterized using
rawinsondes and a 915 MHz wind profiler. In addition, an infrared interferometer
will be available during some observing periods for the retrieval of boundary
layer temperature and moisture profiles. The radar on a helicopter will be used
to sample the dynamics and microphysics of clouds over their en tire life cycles
as wind shear, stability, and aerosol conditions vary. This has not been tried
and has great potential to improve the description of the spatial distribution
and evolution of large-drop concentrations in fair-weather cumulus clouds and to
determine whether the lifetime of small cumuli decreases when drizzle is
produced. P:\Pmet\pmet awds, f7 &amp; abst\Albrecht.abs