* 9730298
* High Field ESR Studies of Fulleride Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* John Fischer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 174,000.00

9730298 Fischer This interdisciplinary experimental research project, involving
a major collaborator in Budapest, Hungary, is concerned with electronic
conduction in fulleride compounds such as A3C60, where A is an alkali metal. A
novel, cavity- less, high magnetic field electron spin resonance spectrometer
developed by the Hungarian collaborator, A. Janossy, will for the first time
allow measurement of the conduction electron spin resonance below Tc. The
American PI Fischer has considerable experience in synthesis, characterization
and structure-property correlations in superconducting fulleride salts.
Characterization will routinely make use of NSLS at Brookhaven National Lab. The
goals of the combined effort will be to solve important unanswered questions in
fulleride superconductors and polymers: the nature of the electron-phonon
coupling, importance of electron-electron correlations, the identity of the
antiferromagnetic resonance in AC60 (spin density wave vs. 3-D magnetic order)
and the importance of interchain coupling. This highly interdisciplinary project
will involve a graduate student who will pursue thesis research at both
laboratory locations, and will receive excellent training beneficial to a future
career in industry, government or academia. %%% This interdisciplinary
experimental research project, involving a major collaborator in Budapest,
Hungary, is concerned with electrical conduction in novel compounds solid
compounds known as fullerides. These compounds have as basic building block the
carbon-60 (C60) molecule, commonly referred to as the Buckyball. To make the
conducting compounds alkali metals such as Rubidium, which easily give up an
electron, have been used. It has been found that the resulting compounds can be
superconducting up to about 30K, which is higher than any of the convention al
familiar superconductors such as Pb or NbTi, and the reasons for this
interesting and potentially useful behavior are imperfectly understood. The
collaborative research project is especially appropriate because one PI is
expert in making and characterizing these compounds, and the other, who is
located in Budapest, has developed and is expert in the use of a novel electron
spin resonance instrument which will be especially useful to study the
electronic conduction processes. The collaborative research will involve
training of a graduate student who will work in the laboratories of both PI's,
and thereby obtain an unusually international educational experience. This
student, and others that may also be involved, will receive excellent training
beneficial to a future career in industry, government or academia. ***