* 9730762
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Production of Rift Valley    Fever Diagnostic Reagents for Laboratory Use
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* B. Botros, U.S. Naval Medical Research
* Interagency Agreement
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1999
* USD 23,600.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Boulos
A.M. Botros, Acting Head, Virology Branch, at the Naval Medical Research Unit -3
(NAMRU3) in Cairo, Egypt, and Dr. Ahmed Mahmoud Daoud, Director, Veterinary
Serum and Vaccine Research Institute (VSVRI), Agricultural Research Center,
Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt. The two collaborators plan to establish
the technology for the production of Rift Valley Fever (RVF) diagnostic
reagents. NAMRU3 will develop required protocols for the production of antigens
and control antisera for the diagnosis of RVF infection in humans and animals.
NAMRU3 will also conduct quality control tests of produced reagents. The VSVRI
will propogate RVF virus in susceptible cell cultures and prepare the required
antigens and control antisera according to developed protocols. Scope: This
project will involve two laboratories with complementary capabilities to conduct
research and development work of mutual benefit to the USA and to Egypt as well
as to other developing countries. There is definite need for antigens and
control antisera for RVF diagnosis in emerging disease epizootics. The VRF virus
is extremely biohazardous, so the work requires high containment facilities to
handle live virus in the preparation of reagents. The VSVRI has long experience
in this area. NAMRU3 staff has been involved in preparation and modification of
existing protocols, and is therefore in a good position to advise in the
production of targeted RVF diagnostics, and in carrying out quality control and
safety testing of the products. Targeted diagnostics include: RVF cell lysate
antigen (CLA) for the detection of anti-RVF IgM antibody; RVF virus infected
cell supernatent antigen (SA) for the detection of RVF IgG antibody; and hyper-
immune specific anti-RVF control serum. This proposal meets INT objective of
supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. The project was
generated as a result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government. NIH was involved in the
evaluation of the project and in recommending its support. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US
Department of State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out cooperative activities.