* 9730689
* Workshop on the Present Status and Future Direction of Solid State Chemistry and Materials: NSF; Arlington, VA;         January 15-16, 1998
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Jurgen Honig, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2002
* USD 49,031.00

9730689 Honig The symposium Workshop on Present Status and Future Direction of
Solid State Chemistry and Materials will deal with the present status and likely
future directions of research, development and education in the solid state
chemistry and materials area, and it will address the needs of this community.
Academic, industrial and government laboratory educators and researchers will
consider four topical areas together with another three areas to be addressed by
panel discussion. The four topical areas are: (1) Strategies for New Materials
Discovery; (2) Structure / Property Relations and Theory; (3) Hybrid Materials
and Interfaces; (4) Societal Needs and Technological Opportunities. The three
areas to be discussed by panels are: (1) Education and Training; (2) What is
Materials Chemistry? (3) Facilities and Resources. The Workshop will be held as
an open meeting at NSF on January 15-16, 1998. A document summarizing the
findings will be prepared by the Solid State Chemistry and Materials Planning
Committee on January 18-19, 1998. This document will be made public and
circulated among government agencies such as NSF, ONR, DoD, and DOE for their
internal use. %%% The present workshop arose in response to a recent review
process at NSF. A committee of visitors (COV) consisting of Susan Kauzlarich (UC
Davis), Jack Johnson (Exxon), and Thomas Bein (Purdue U) was selected to study
the procedure by which proposals are reviewed and selected for funding within
the solid state chemistry program at DMR. Susan Kauzlarich represented this
group in a larger COV, which consisted of representatives from all DMR programs,
and this larger committee prepared a report for the Assistant Director of NSF in
April, 1996. In that report the COV voiced concern over the lack of continuity
between this and previous COVs which had been drawn from the Materials Research
Advisory Committee (MRAC). The COV recommended that the Division find ways to
benefit from c ommunity input and also to provide the needed continuity for the
COVs. Thus, the Division of Materials Research is responding to a recommendation
by the MPS Advisory Committee to enhance the COV process. This will be
accomplished through a three year plan: (1) In the first year, hold a seies of
topical workshops tied to each of the programs within the Division of Materials
Research. This would provide a focus for the exacting scientific opportunities
within a particular subfield. Near the end of the year, a workshop would be held
calling together some of the members of these workshops to set priorities among
the various new opportunities. (2) In the second year, hold a series of
workshops on areas at the periphery of the Division's interest. The interfacial
areas would be identified through community input and from outgrowths of the
first year workshops. For continuity, some of the workshop members from the
first year panels would be invited to attend this series of workshops. (3) The
Divisional COV would then be held in the third year. The members of the COV
would be drawn, although not exclusively, from the attendees at the workshops
held the previous two years. Also, the COV noted in their report to the
Assistant Director that funding statistics by scientific area were not
available, and in response to this DMR is now developing a taxonomy of the field
of materials research and the programs. This taxonomy will be useful in
evaluating the balance of scientific effort in the programs and across the
Division. ***