* 9730073
* Proximate Factors Affecting Vertical Migrations in          Mesopelagic Organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Tamara Frank, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2001
* USD 329,229.00

This proposal seeks to continue ongoing studies by this laboratory of proximate
factors triggering vertical migrations in midwater organisms. While this
phenomenon is known to be one of the dominant behavioral patterns on earth, and
has a profound influence on the structure of marine ecosystems, little is known
about the factors which cue the daily timing of this behavior. Studies conducted
in the last three years have definitively eliminated one of the hypotheses
regarding which characteristic of light might cue these migrations. These
studies demonstrated that it is not the change in the spectral distribution of
light, which occurs at twilight, that is serving as a trigger to cue these
migrations. In addition, photosensitivity to near-UV light was not found to be a
common characteristic of vertically migrating crustaceans, and therefore, the
role of UV light in triggering these migrations in most species has also been
discounted. This proposal will continue to address questions about what factors
at twilight are cueing vertical migrations in mesopelagic organisms in
Oceanographer Canyon in the Gulf of Maine. Potential cues that will be addressed
are 1) exposure to a threshold value of absolute light intensity, 2) tracking of
an isolume, 3) relative increase or decrease in downwelling light, and 4) if the
rate of change in light intensity has an effect on migration speeds. The visual
physiology of some of these migrating species will also be examined to determine
if 1) there are differences in photoreceptor sensitivity between the various
species that can be correlated to differences in their migration patterns, and
2) if endogenous rhythms in photoreceptor sensitivity are present in mesopelagic
species that can be correlated to a migratory lifestyle. Combining in situ and
net studies of animal distribution patterns with studies of their photoreceptor
physiology will make a significant contribution to determining what proximate
factors are important in controlling the daily timing of vertical migrations in
the mesopelagic realm.