* 9730196
* Dissertation Research:  Islam, Science, and Modernity:  A  Multi-Site Ethnography of the Islamization of Knowledge Debate
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Paul Magnarella, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 03/31/2001
* USD 12,674.00

The purpose of this dissertation project is to describe the post-colonial
negotiations among contemporary Muslims by using science as a case. The project
will contribute to both science and technology studies and the anthropology of
science by improving knowledge of the practice and perception of science outside
the Euro-American context. Specifically, this project will examine the
Islamization of knowledge debate concerning the legitimacy and relevance of
Islam and science as means to address the particular needs of the Islamic world.
This debate constitutes one locus for Muslim intellectuals' re-evaluation of the
meaning and relevance of `Islam,` `science,` and `modernity` in the wake of the
perceived failure and collapse of pan-Arabism, the main alternative to Islamism,
during and after the 1967 Arab-Israeli War. Based on preliminary research, the
project hypothesizes that individuals' debate positions will broadly cluster
into three groups which the researcher labels modernization, indigenization, and
nativization; however specific intellectual orientation will be strongly
interrelated with local and national contexts and personal backgrounds.
Methodologies include participant-observation at institutions and conferences;
semi-structured and life history interviews; and analysis of technical and
popular literature.