* 9730053
* SGER: A Distributed Hybrid Optimization Technique for       Protein Structure Prediction
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Yinyu Ye, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 07/31/2000
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract Optimization problems arise naturally in many areas of science,
engineering, and busi-ness. Some of these problems are discrete, where the
solution involves finding the best configuration over a finite number of
possible conformations (for example, production scheduling problems in
operations research or circuit minimization problems in computer engineering).
Other optimization problems are inherently continuous, where the solution
involves finding the best solution in some infinite space (for example, entropy
minimiza-tion in physics, portfolio allocation problems in finance, or
elasticity studies in civil engi-neering). Often, useful abstractions exist
which convert one type of problem into a simpler problem of the other type. Some
of the most compelling optimization problems in the biological sciences also
dis-play this same kind of duality. An obvious example is the problem of
predicting a protein's (continuous) three-dimensional shape- and, consequently,
its biological function-from its (discrete) primary structure, expressed as the
sequence of constituent amino acids { Friesne~6 . Curren~y, protein structure is
most accurately determined by experimental means, such as X-Ray crystallography
or NMR spectroscopy. A primary goal for compu- tational biologists is to be able
to predict the tertiary structure without resorting to experi-mental
observation. This project takes a new approach to the problem of predicting
protein structure. In partic-ular, the merger of a novel distributed search
technique for discrete (combinatorial) opti-mization, and an efficient,
polynomial time, interior-point algorithm for solving continuous optimization
problems. Each approach will operate using separate, albeit related, energy
models, with the discrete system "proposing" conformations for the con-tinuous
model to evaluate. The goal is to increase the efficiency of the computation by
exchanging information between the two approaches while exploiting parallelism
in order to solve realistically-sized proteins. Specifically the project will
construct a prototype hybrid computational tool, apply the prototype to a
protein conformation problem, and evaluate the solution by comparison to both
existing computational approaches and physi-cal reality.