* 9730756
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Studies on Air Quality       Modeling and Its Application
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Rohit Mathur, MCNC
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2000
* USD 29,241.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Adel F.
Hanna, Chief Scientist, Environmental Programs, MCNC, North Carolina Super
Computing Center, and Dr. Magdy El Messiry, Vice Dean, Faculty of Engineering,
Alexandria University, in Egypt. The two scientists plan to address the use of
advanced air quality modeling and analysis techniques. Among the models to be
used are: a mesoscale meteorology model, an emission model, and an atmospheric
chemistry-transport model. Two workshops are planned, one in the United States
and one in Egypt. The first will demonstrate and review state of the science
modeling tools as discussed earlier. In the second, the participants will
establish the requirements, resources, and priorities that will facilitate the
application of modeling systems in regulatory air quality management in Egypt.
The participants will include scientists and engineers from academic,
government, and private sector organizations in Egypt, in addition to the US
participants. Scope: The US team includes mathematical and environmental
analysts, and computer modeling specialists, while the Egyptian side includes
atmospheric scientists and industrial environmentalists. The US team is expected
to benefit from the testing of US-developed models and techniques in a new
environmental setting. The Egyptian side will learn new modeling techniques and
become equipped and prepared to apply them to air pollution problems in that
country. This proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign
collaboration in areas of mutual benefit. The project was generated as a result
of a workshop on environmentally clean manufacturing that was organized, in
1996, by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Egyptian Government.
EPA was involved in the evaluation of the project and in recommending its
support. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
administered by the US Department of State, which provides grants to scientists
and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative activities.