* 9730334
* Biological and Chemical Controls on Fe Uptake by Marine     Phytoplankton and Bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2002
* USD 391,838.00

Iron limitation of phytoplankton growth is now widely accepted, but we know
little about the use of iron (Fe) by heterotrophic bacteria. Limited published
and preliminary data indicate that bacteria can account for a large but variable
fraction of biological Fe uptake. Because so few studies have been conducted,
however, we do not understand what controls the relative amount of Fe uptake by
bacteria and phytoplankton. Recent reports also suggest that Fe may limit
bacterial growth and affect the efficiency of dissolved organic matter (DOM)
utilization. If so, then Fe availability could control not only carbon fixation
by primary producers, but also the mineralization of DOM by heterotrophic
microbes in some oceanic regimes. This project describes research using an
interdisciplinary approach to answer the question: What is the relative
importance of bacteria and phytoplankton in Fe uptake, and what biological and
chemical factors control Fe uptake by each group? We hypothesize that the
important biological factors determining the partitioning of Fe include biomass,
production and Iron:Carbon (Fe:C) ratios of phytoplankton and bacteria. The
critical chemical factor is the degree and nature of organic complexation of
dissolved Fe. Field work will be carried out in three contrasting regimes:
Delaware Bay (high Fe, nutrients and biomass), the oligotrophic Sargasso Sea
(moderate Fe levels, low nutrients and biomass) and a recently discovered Fe
limited region off the coast of California (a low Fe, high-nutrient, low-
chlorophyll regime). Trace metal clean radiotracer experiments will measure Fe
uptake by bacteria and phytoplankton to give us a complete picture of Fe uptake
in a broad range of oceanographic regimes. In order to explain the expected.
variation in relative Fe uptake, we will also measure several biological and
chemical parameters. The biological parameters include Fe:C ratios, bacterial
and phytoplankton abundance, and primary and bacterial production. Simultaneous
electrochemical measurements will examine the relationship between organic
complexation kinetics and biological Fe availability. We hypothesize that slow
dissociation kinetics of Fe organic ligand complexes will result in lower
phytoplankton Fe uptake but high relative Fe uptake by siderophore utilizing
prokaryotes. This research is a logical and necessary first step towards
unraveling the unique roles of heterotrophic bacteria and phytoplankton in
marine Fe biogeochemistry, and will contribute to our understanding of the
processes which ultimately control the cycling of major nutrients and carbon in
marine ecosystems.