* 9730999
* Magnetic Tweezers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Gabor Forgacs, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 24,119.00

This grant will support the development of a magnetic tweezers apparatus to
measure local viscoelastic and structural properties of the cell cytoplasm and
the extracellular matrix. The magnetic tweezers produce a magnetic field of
known magnitude and direction. The field exerts a magnetic force on spherical
magnetic particles with definite geometric and magnetic properties, which are
injected into the cytoplasm or matrix. The motion of the magnetic particle is
monitored using optical methods. The trajectory of the particle is recorded on a
computer. Simultaneously, the motion of the particle is also described in terms
of standard models. The local viscoelastic parameters of the cytoplasm or matrix
are obtained from the matching of the model trajectory and the experimentally
obtained trajectory. The knowledge of these parameters provides information on
the local structure of interconnected networks of biological macromolecules that
exist in the cytoplasm (i.e. cytoskeleton) and the extracellular matrix. The
magnetic tweezers will also be used to study intracellular stress propagation.
At present the magnetic tweezers are the only apparatus that allows the
measurement of local viscoelastic properties of biological systems in a non-
destructive way. By combining several magnetic tweezers, effects similar to
those produced by optical tweezers could be generated. The laser traps in the
latter case are analogous to magnetic traps in the former case. At the same
time, the costs associated with the development and operation of a magnetic
tweezers are significantly lower.