* 9730326
* Heterogeneity and Adjustment: Fixed Costs, Renovation, and  Diffusion of Ideas - An Accomplishment Based Renewal
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Ricardo Caballero, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2002
* USD 238,738.00

ABSTRACT Ignoring the ebullient nature of the microeconomic world and the
problems within it is likely to hamper severely our ability to give meaningful
quantitative---and sometimes even qualitative--- answers to questions as central
as: What are the costs of recessions? How do financial and contractual factors
hamper aggregate economic performance? What is the natural rate of unemployment?
What is a ``reasonable` level of job destruction and unemployment in the
aftermath of structural adjustment? What is the cost and why do some countries
experience technological sclerosis? Why are methods of production (e.g.,
capital/labor ratios) so different across economies that are, otherwise, at a
similar stage of development? Why do some countries build social institutions
that are later perceived as obstacles to flexible adjustment? Why do poor
countries with cheap labor so often fail to attract capital and grow? What is
the likely impact of investment incentives? Will workers benefit from such
incentives? Why are capital flows so volatile? How should international
liquidity be managed during currency and systemic crises? and so on. This
purpose of this project is to address some of these questions, and to provide a
macroeconomic framework of analysis which builds from a realistic description of
microeconomic institutions and behavior. This project incorporates three closely
connected themes. First is the connection between individual microeconomic
decisions, many of which occur intermittently, and aggregate economic activity.
This project develops and applies a methodological apparatus designed to keep
track of the impact of aggregate shocks on underlying cross-sectional
distributions and vice versa. Second is the relationship between microeconomic
decisions, economic restructuring, and macro dynamics - the Churn. The process
of creation and destruction of production sites depends on technology,
adjustment costs, and institutional factors. Third is the problem of the
decoupling of job creation and job destruction in many economies, and the
institutional and other factors contributing to it. Six interrelated goals are
pursued in this Accomplishment Based Renewal.