* 9730060
* A Force Measuring Apparatus For The Study of Intermolecular Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Jianxun Mou, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 07/31/2002
* USD 270,000.00

Specific interactions between complementary macromolecules play a critical role
in most biological processes, from signal transduction, to gene regulation and
motor activities. Although such interactions have been studied with many
biochemical and biophysical methods, a direct examination with single molecular
pairs was only realized recently with the advent of the atomic force microscopy
(AFM). However, our ability to study intermolecular interactions or recognition
at great detail is still severely limited at present, because with the AFM
technique, only a single rupture force, which is related to the maximum binding
force, can be directly measured, due to the lack of control of the cantilever
position and movement. The relationship of such measurements to those measured
thermodynamically can only be inferred and is often far from clear. It has been
recognized that this limitation may be technical in nature and might be
eliminated with a properly designed apparatus. The primary objective of this
project is to develop a force measuring apparatus based on the AFM, but
incorporating a magnetic force to the force sensing cantilever, in order to
control its position and motion. In this system, the cantilever should remain
during the approach/retraction cycle of the measurement, allowing the
determination of both the interacting force and the distance between the two
molecules. Because the position of the cantilever does not move during the
entire measurement, other problems due to the lateral swing of the cantilever
which has the potential of introducing artifacts are also eliminated. To further
improve the precision in position, the thermal motion of the cantilever will be
compensated with a fast response coil, branched from the main feedback. When
this technique is fully implemented, the entire force- distance curve of a
molecular pair can be measured at sub-A intervals under physiolo gical
conditions. A simple integration will yield the potential curve that can be
directly compared with the parameters obtained with thermodynamic measurements,
such as the binding free energy. This will provide unprecedented details of
intermolecular interaction, which will be invaluable for our understanding of
this important process, especially when carefully selected mutant proteins are
studied in comparison.