* 9730004
* TECO: Patterns and Controls of Temporal Variation in CO2    Sequestration and Loss in Arctic Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/2001
* USD 1,000,000.00

9730004 Oechel This research will elucidate the short- and long-term responses
of arctic tundra ecosystems to climate change and associated changes in soils
water content and active layer depth. These objectives will be accomplished by a
combination of field observations, manipulative experiments, and modeling.
Northern latitude temperature records and permafrost temperature profiles
indicate that average annual temperature has increased by 2-4 C over the last 30
years. Associated with this warming has been an increase in growing season
length, a decrease in surface soil water content, and a decrease in the extent
and distribution in snow and ice cover. These physical changes have altered
arctic ecosystem function, which could result in a significant positive or
negative feedback to global atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Much of the net CO2
flux data is from growing season measurements of terrestrial surfaces, however,
aquatic systems are known to be net sources of CO2, and substantial cold season
CO2 losses have recently been demonstrated. This project will measure net CO2
exchange over annual cycles using eddy covariance methodology, which allows
direct measurement of hectare-scale exchanges in CO2, H2O vapor, and energy.
These measurements will be conducted over the annual cycle to determine both the
warm- and cold-season contribution to annual net CO2 exchange in arctic tundra
ecosystems. In addition, in-situ manipulative experiments will allow
determination of short- and long-term responses of whole ecosystem net CO2
exchange and the physiological components that drive net CO2 flux to alterations
in soil temperature and water table depth. These studies will help elucidate
important mechanisms involved with plant- and whole-ecosystem responses to
alterations in climate, as well as long-term trajectories of potential
compensatory responses. Observations to date indicate that the long-term
response of arctic ecosystems to climate change may be quite different than
initial short-term response s.