* 9730034
* Cross Regulation and Central Metabolism in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Barry Wanner, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2002
* USD 330,000.00

Wanner 9730034 Cross regulation is the regulatory interactions that occur
between different global systems. These interactions may be key information
integrators, directly linking different pathways in a network to coordinate
growth and metabolism. The most compelling evidence for cross regulation is
found in the phosphate (Pho) regulon of E. coli. The Pho regulon is comprised of
a large number of co-regulated genes encoding uptake systems and degradative
enzymes required for the use of various environmental phosphorus (P) sources.
This system is controlled primarily by the PhoR/PhoB two-component regulatory
system; its control responds to the extracellular inorganic phosphate (Pi) level
and is coupled to a Pi transporter but not Pi uptake per se, the first step of
Pi metabolism. Cross regulation of PhoB involves two additional signal
transduction pathways that are coupled to the incorporation of Pi into ATP, the
primary phosphoryl donor in metabolism. One signaling pathway leads to
activation of PhoB by the catabolite regulatory sensor kinase CreC (formerly
called PhoM). CreC and its partner response regulator are thought to control
genes of central metabolism, although no target gene was previously known. The
other leads to activation of PhoB by acetyl phosphate, an intermediate of the
phosphotransacetylase-acetate kinase (Pta-AckA) pathway of substrate level
phosphorylation for entry of Pi into ATP. Accordingly, cross regulation links
the control of genes for P assimilation with those for central carbon and energy
metabolism. New genetic tools have been developed to identify genes controlled
by a regulatory protein of unknown function. These tools were used to identify
CreC/CreB-regulated genes. One such gene is especially interesting as it encodes
a protein that is highly conserved in diverse bacteria (E. coli, Haemophilus
influenzae, Bacillus subtilis, and Methanococcus jannaschii), suggesting an
important, although unidentified, function. Other recent results suggest that
high energy com pounds in addition to acetyl phosphate are involved in the in
vivo activation of PhoB. New studies have been designed to further investigate
these results. Specific Aim 1 is to define the genetic regulation of the newly
identified CreB-regulated (cbr) genes and, as feasible, to identify additional
cbr genes using similar or new strategies, including ones based on genomic
techniques. Specific Aim 2 is to define the function of one or more cbr genes
using newly developed genetic and genomic techniques. Specific Aim 3 is to
define the role of one or more high energy compounds in global regulation of
gene expression using similar approaches. These studies will be valuable both in
gaining a deeper understanding of cross regulation and the control of genes in
central metabolic pathways in bacteria and in developing strategies for studying
global regulation of gene expression in the new era of bacterial genomics.