* 9730981
* Corporate and Managerial Liability:                         Empirical and Experimental Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Jennifer Arlen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2001
* USD 108,444.00

This project involves two separate empirical analyses of corporate and
managerial liability. The first analyzes criminal sentencing of corporations
under the new federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations. The research
compares the new Guidelines to existing practice and to optimal corporate
liability. The project also analyses the use of corporate probation (nonmonetary
sanctions) as well as the fate of the individuals responsible for corporate
wrongdoing. The second project focuses on wrongdoing by managers against
shareholders. The research examines the nature of fiduciary duties imposed on
managers to induce them to perform their jobs diligently (take `due care`) and
not misappropriate the firm's assets for their own purposes (`duty of loyalty`).
Economic theory suggests that these duties are the same, yet the law treats them
differently. This second subproject will test the legal distinction using
experimental methods. Experimental subjects serve as principals or agents,
randomly determined, and play a two-stage game. In the first, the pairs of
participants decide if they will combine their assets in a joint project. In the
second, the agent has an opportunity to misappropriate assets. The central
proposition will be tested by evaluating whether subjects establish different
penalties when withholding their own assets than when misappropriating the
assets of the other (care vs. Loyalty). The first subproject will use a database
on corporate sentencing prior to the enactment of the Guidelines and create an
analogous dataset on sentencing since. The results of this research will advance
sociolegal theory about corporate criminal sentencing in federal courts and
advance or knowledge of how people's behavior does or does not conform to legal
notions of managerial duty. %%% This project involves two separate empirical
analyses of corporate and managerial liability. The first analyzes criminal
sentencing of corporations under the new federal Sentencing Guidelines for
Organizations. The research compares the new Guidelines to existing practice and
to optimal corporate liability. The project also analyses the use of corporate
probation (nonmonetary sanctions) as well as the fate of the individuals
responsible for corporate wrongdoing. The second project focuses on wrongdoing
by managers against shareholders. The research examines the nature of fiduciary
duties imposed on managers to induce them to perform their jobs diligently (take
`due care`) and not misappropriate the firm's assets for their own purposes
(`duty of loyalty`). Economic theory suggests that these duties are the same,
yet the law treats them differently. This second subproject will test the legal
distinction using experimental methods. Experimental subjects serve as
principals or agents, randomly determined, and play a two-stage game. In the
first, the pairs of participants decide if they will combine their assets in a
joint project. In the second, the agent has an opportunity to misappropriate
assets. The central proposition will be tested by evaluating whether subjects
establish different penalties when withholding their own assets than when
misappropriating the assets of the other (care vs. Loyalty). The first
subproject will use a database on corporate sentencing prior to the enactment of
the Guidelines and create an analogous dataset on sentencing since. The results
of this research will advance sociolegal theory about corporate criminal
sentencing in federal courts and advance or knowledge of how people's behavior
does or does not conform to legal notions of managerial duty.