* 9730307
* Enlivening Genetics Education: Bridging the Gap Between     Software &amp; Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Paul Horwitz, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2002
* USD 847,077.00

9730307 Bjork "BioLogica" (TM) is a Java-platform, computer-based manipulative
that enables students to explore a variety of different genetic phenomena
building their own knowledge through direct observation and manipulation. As the
successor to GenScope, it allows high school and middle school students to
conduct real experiments in a virtual environment through the observation and
study of Mandolin genetics in real or imaginary organisms at six different
levels: DNA, chromosome, cell, organism, pedigree, and population. This project
develops scripted software called interactivities that applies the BioLogica
engine to different organisms. These interactivities can be customized to
treatments in specific texts and provide alternative learning consistent with
wet labs and other hands-on activities. The project integrates software with
biology curricula to produce materials that allow teachers to introduce the
software into their practice and students to reap the benefits of using
complementary ways to learn. Teachers can use the scripts to develop their own
materials or use them in conjunction with proven texts. The materials also
provide teachers logs of student work and embedded assessments. The new
materials are developed with the input from teachers and tested in schools. An
extensive evaluation provides data on student learning.