* 9730371
* Experimental Determination of Equilibrium and Kinetic Fractionation of Boron, Carbon, and Oxygen Isotopes during  Carbonate Precipitation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Abhijit Sanyal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2002
* USD 347,061.00

Istopic fractionation of boron, carbon and oxygen will be evaluated under
controlled conditions. Accurate equilibrium fractionation factors from these
inorganic calcification experiments will provide a common yardstick against
which to evaluate the potential magnitude of biogenic disequilibrium
calcification. Simutaneous experimental analysis of 8 11 B, 8 13 C, and 8 18 O
fractionation during inorganic calcificaiton is attractive because a recent
theory of biogenic calcification proposes correlated kinetic dissequilibria in 8
13 C and 8 18 O as a function of calcification rate. According to this model,
isotopic disequilibrium arises from rate dependent inorganic hydration and
hydroxylation reactions during calcification. Because calcification rate is
controlled to some extent by solute pH at the site of calcification, 8 11 B
fractionation, which is pH sensitive, should be correlated with 8 13 C, and 8 18
O kinetic disequilibrium. A pH controlled, continuously stirred tank reactor
(CSTR) will be used to evaluate the effects of temperature and precipitaiton
rate (solute chemistry) on the isotopic composition of seeded inorganic calcite
precipitation. Carefully selected reagent grade calcite seed material with XRD
confirmed mineralogy and known isotopic composition will be employed during
these experiments to control for fractionation effects due to minerological
differences (e.g. aragonite vs. calcite).