* 9730277
* Topics in Econometric Methods
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2002
* USD 230,630.00

9730277 Andrews This project involves research in three different areas of
econometrics: (1) Extremum Estimators in Non-Standard Scenarios. A standard
assumption for estimators and test statistics is that the true parameter is in
the interior of the parameter space. This assumption is convenient because it
allows one to make use of the fact that first order conditions hold, at least
asymptotically. There are numerous cases of interest, however, in which the true
parameter is on the boundary of the parameter space. This project develops
methods for testing, model selection, bootstrap and subsampling procedures and
Bayesian asymptotics for problems where this standard assumption no longer
holds. (2) Moment and Model Selection for the Generalized Method of Moments
(GMM). Empirical researchers using GMM often find that not all moment conditions
are correct. At the same time, it is often the case that researchers have some
uncertainty regarding the precise specification of the model of interest. For
example, they may not know how many lags of a variable to include in the model
or whether a variable should be included in the regressor or not. This project
develops selection procedures for GMM estimators that simultaneously select
correct moments and correct model specifications. These model/moment selection
procedures are applied to dynamic panel data models with unobserved individual
effects, an important area of applied econometrics. (3) Accelerated Bias-
Corrected Confidence Intervals. Bootstrap methods have gained a great deal of
popularity in empirical research. Although the methods are easy to apply,
determining the number of bootstrap repetitions to employ is a common problem in
the existing literature. Typically, this number is determined in a somewhat ad
hoc manner. This is problematic, because one can obtain a different answer from
the same data merely by using different simulation draws if the number of
bootstrap repetitions is too small. This project develops a method of
determining the number of bootstrap repetitions for accelerated bias-corrected
confidence intervals. ??