* 9730136
* Modelling Repeated Categorical Responses
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Alan Agresti, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2001
* USD 162,689.00

Variables in social science studies often are measured on categorical scales.
Many studies have multiple response variables in the form of repeated
measurement of the same or similar variables. One example is in longitudinal
studies, which measure a response variable repeatedly over time. Another is the
measurement of various facets of an opinion or attitude in a battery of related
questions, such as in the annual General Social Survey. This research deals with
the development of statistical methods for modeling and analyzing repeated
categorical responses. The investigator will develop and apply generalized
linear mixed models for binary, multiple-category, and count data. Mixed models
extend ordinary linear models by adding random effects, which are unobserved
terms that can account for subject heterogeneity, sample clustering, omitted
explanatory variables, or measurement error. Random effect terms provide a
mechanism for explaining the correlations typically observed among the repeated
responses. This research will deal both with technical aspects of model-fitting
and with formulating and interpreting new models for a variety of social science
problems. An important application is the modeling of responses to similar items
in a survey having the same categorical scale, both in terms of comparing
responses to the items for different groups of interest and modeling how each
response depends on a set of covariates. Another potential application is
accounting for subject heterogeneity in estimating population size in census
work using capture-recapture experiments.