* 9730602
* Assessment of Ecological Roles of Cyanophages in Aquatic    Environments using Molecular Approaches
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,10/31/2000
* Robert Hodson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2000
* USD 304,411.00

High concentrations of morphologically diverse marine Synechococcus cyanophages
(viruses which infect Synechococcus spp) are found in nature. Co existence of
such abundant and diverse cyanophages and cyanobacteria in aquatic environments
has been thought to be an important factor in regulating the community diversity
of both groups. Some recent studies suggest cyanophages may account for 30% of
Synechococcus mortality in marine ecosystems. However, other studies suggest it
is unlikely for cyanophages to be major contributors to Synechococcus mortality
in either inshore or offshore waters. The evidence supporting these two
different opinions was based on data collected from bacterial cultures in the
laboratory; at conditions which may be quite different from what occurs in
nature. So far, there are no biological means to detect and quantify in situ how
many Synechococcus cells are being infected by phages. To assess the effects of
phages on natural microbial mortality, it is important to determine the
percentage of the natural population that is being infected. Development of in
situ molecular detection techniques can provide new insight into the ecological
impact of phages on Synechococcus mortality in natural aquatic environments.
This research is composed of two parts. First, DNA polymerase gene (DNA pol)
sequences from several marine cyanophages which infect representatives of
Synechococcus strains will be characterized and subsequently used for studying
diversity and genetic relationships among Synechococcus cyanophages in seawater.
The second part of the study will develop in situ molecular detection of the
percentage of Syncechococcus cells infected by various strains of cyanophages in
marine environments.