* 9730474
* Political Structure, Demographics and Economic Growth
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Jacek Kugler, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/2002
* USD 240,000.00

This investigation offers a novel approach for understanding the dynamic
interactions between political change, demographic transformation and economic
development. This research is at the forefront of political economy as it
formally integrates dynamic models of economic growth with individual level
demographic decisions and the evolution of political structures. Beginning with
heterogeneous households, the researchers model how choices for savings,
consumption, children and locational preferences are impacted by government
policies. Dynamic analysis of this model shows that political change is a
precursor to demographic transformations which affects the rate of economic
growth. The model also discloses how changes in the distribution of income and
migration shift the development path. The research integrates current work on
the dynamics of economic growth driven by the accumulation of physical and human
capital, with complementary studies linking political effectiveness to
demographic transformations. Previous models of economic growth failed to
account for the effect of politics on fertility, mortality and migration which
in turn, determine the growth rate. In this study the investigators consider
political capacity and economic growth as evolving jointly within a consistent
general equilibrium framework. The analysis characterizes the sequence of
policies and the required political structures that lead countries toward
sustained development. A formal model is used to derive the optimal choices for
consumption, fertility and migration for each household type. Households vary by
the age of the head of household, as well as their income and education.
Household choices, which are optimal responses to the economic and political
environments, are summed across all households to determine aggregate outcomes.
Subsequently, an empirical analysis is conducted to assess the quantitative
effects of changes in political capacity on fertility, migration and economic
growth. Empirical studies for the last half-century will be undertaken for China
and the Asia-Pacific countries, the NAFTA region, and the European Union. The
goal is to understand the political mechanisms that, through demographic
transformation, affect economic development. Decision-makers can use the theory
and empirical results of the research to identify the sequence of policies
required to advance development. The preliminary research of the investigators
shows that consolidating political support precedes the implementation of
population stabilization policies. This is followed by raising educational
levels and controlling migration flows. Understanding the mechanics of this
sequence allows decision-makers to approach the maximal growth rate while
preventing social instability. The research suggests that once a critical mass
of political and economic momentum are achieved, development will be self-
sustaining.