* 9730667
* Substitution and Reallocation Responses to Energy Price     Changes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2004
* John Haltiwanger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2004
* USD 379,596.00

This project involves a structural approach to the study of plant level
substitution and reallocation responses to energy price changes. The role of
plant entry and exit is examined in the determination of aggregate substitution
and factor demand responses to energy price changes. Plant level technology
parameters related to energy intensity and energy substitution are estimated.
Further, the joint distribution of these parameters in the population of
manufacturing plants is characterized, its evolution over time tracked, the
consequences for aggregate outcomes spelled out, and the efficiency costs of
government policies that impede factor mobility quantified. The main focus of
the analysis is a rich source of annual data on U.S. manufacturing plants from
1972 to 1993. The following sorts of questions are addressed: 1. How are plant
level technology parameters (energy intensity and energy substitution
elasticities) related to observable plant and industry characteristics? 2. To
what extent is energy intensity embodied in the capital stock? 3. How has the
plant level distribution of energy related technology parameters evolved over
time? Were large changes in this distribution triggered by the oil price shocks
of 1973 74, 1979 80 and 1985 86? 4. What contribution do plant entry and exit,
between plant factor reallocation, within plant substitution responses and
between industry output shifts make to the aggregate substitution and factor
demand responses to energy price shocks? 5. Does the asymmetric aggregate
response to oil price ups and downs reflect changes over time in the plant level
distribution of energy related technology parameters? 6. How costly are the
frictions in factor reallocation and technology adjustment that slow the
economic response to energy price changes? 7. How large are the efficiency costs
of government policies that impede plant exit and between plant reallocation
responses to energy price changes? 8. How have spatial and industry differences
in energy prices evolved since 1972? 9. How large were the efficiency costs of
government policies that hampered the spatial arbitrage of energy prices?