* 9730852
* Scaling in Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy:               Core-Nonpenetrating Rydberg States
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Robert Field, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Alfons Weber
* 02/28/2002
* USD 714,500.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Prof. Robert W. Field of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in his continuing investigation of
`scaling laws,` a priori known functions of quantum numbers. Such scaling laws
arise when the coupling between parts of a molecule becomes sufficiently weak.
For example, many properties of hydrogenic eigenstates can be expressed as
simple functions of Z, n and l. Many atom-based scaling relationships remain
useful and instructive, even for polyatomic molecules; for core-nonpenetrating
molecular Rydberg states, in which the coupling between Rydberg electron and the
molecular ion-core is very weak, the resemblance to hydrogenic systems is quite
strong. Field will undertake various types of experiments involving either
resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization or multiple resonance spectroscopies
in an effort to develop experimental methods for spectroscopic studies of core-
nonpenetrating molecular Rydberg states. These studies will yield information on
the electric anisotropies and polarizabilities of molecular ion cores. A few
comments about the practical significance of these experiments are warranted.
Why should we care about the electric multipole moments of cations? All +1
cations have the same monopole, so this dominant aspect of the interaction of
the cation with the outside world is independent of the molecule. Ion-specific
long-range interactions, on the other hand, derive from the higher multipoles
(and their normal coordinate displacement derivatives). These multipoles and
derivatives control the mechanisms and rates of resonant long-range ion-
molecule, ion-electron, and possibly ion-surface energy and angular momentum
exchange. The information obtainable from systematic studies of core-
nonpenetrating Rydberg states would yield valuable insights into a wide variety
of processes occurring in plasmas.