* 9730606
* Enhanced SEPUP Modules, Assessment, and the National        Science Education Standards
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Herbert Thier, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 06/30/2003
* USD 906,407.00

9730606 Thier The thirteen SEPUP (Science Education for Public Understanding
Project) modules, previously developed, are revised to update the science issues
and evidence in the modules, to align them more closely to the science standards
and to develop an authentic assessment system for them. The assessment system is
based on that used in SEPUP developed course, Issues, Evidence and You. At the
request of teachers, an additional module on energy is developed with partial
funding from EPRI. The SEPUP (formerly CEPUP) modules have been used nationwide
to change the way science is taught and learned primarily in the middle schools.
The target of the revised and enhanced modules is grades 7 - 9. A Guide to SEPUP
Modules and the Science Standards correlates each module to the Standards and
Benchmarks and recommends groupings of modules to address different content
areas at different grades. A video on Issue Oriented Science Using SEPUP
illustrates for teachers how the modules address standards for content,
assessment and teaching and how they can provide access for students with
different learning styles. Teachers are involved with the revision and testing.
The modules contain suggestions for including educational technology. LAB-AIDS
continues to distribute the printed materials and kits.