* 9730036
* Role of a Cellulose Binding Protein in the Dictyostelium    Spore Coat
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Christopher West, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2001
* USD 165,824.00

9730036 West Cells construct extracellular barriers (e.g., walls) to separate
cells from each other or from the external environment. A common structural
theme of such extracellular barriers is that they consist of a network of
fibrillar components and an amorphous component. The goal of this project is to
better understand the mechanism of spore coat formation in the slime mold
Dictyostelium discoideum, a eukaryote which diverged from the evolutionary tree
around the parting of plants and animals. An underlying assumption is that
knowledge of how the Dictyostelium spore coat is assembled by the cell will be
relevant, at least in terms of general principles, to cell wall biosynthesis in
other organisms, such as bacteria, plants, and other fungi. Dictyostelium is an
advantageous system for studying the formation of cellulosic barriers, for a
variety of reasons: coat formation is readily manipulable in the laboratory,
since the spore coat forms over a short period of time in a strictly
developmentally-regulated fashion; biochemically useful quantities of material
can be readily isolated; the organism is genetically tractable, and most of the
coat protein genes have already been cloned; and, since sporulation is non-
essential for the life cycle (in the laboratory setting), strains can be
engineered with coat genes can that are mutated and replaced. The Dictyostelium
spore coat contains cellulose fibrils, a galuran polysaccharide, and nine major
proteins. Dr. West has demonstrated that one of these proteins, SP85, which is
known from earlier work to be part of a precoat protein complex, is capable of
binding cellulose. SP85 is abundant, is present at the start of coat assembly,
is uniquely localized in the inner / middle layers of the coat along with
cellulose, is encoded by the pspB gene, and appears to have a modular structure.
Expression of SP85 and protein domains of SP85 in E. coli showed that cellulose-
binding is a property of the C-terminal half of the protein. Dr. West hypot
hesizes that SP85 helps to organize the cellulose and protein components of the
coat by a cross-linking mechanism. Studies of modular cellulose-binding proteins
in cellulolytic systems, and of proteins in other "walls" such as that of the
unicellular alga Chlamydomonas, the spore coat of the bacterium B. subtilis, and
animal basement membranes, suggest that biochemical and genetic approaches will
be informative for analyzing this supramolecular complex. The first aim of the
project is to block expression of SP85 in vivo by gene disruption. In a
complementary approach, the N- and C-terminal domains will be overexpressed in
an attempt to create a dominant negative effect based on the hypothesized cross-
linking activity. Analysis of coat phenotype in these mutants will show whether
SP85 is involved in organizing other coat molecules as anticipated from the in
vitro binding studies. If there is evidence for redundantly encoded functions,
disruptions will be carried out in a background of other coat gene deletion
mutants. The second aim is to determine the binding specificities of SP85 N- and
C- terminal domains through biochemical studies. To facilitate proper tertiary
folding and glycosylation, and to avoid isolating SP85 from a complex, SP85 will
be expressed by growing Dictyostelium cells which do not express other spore
coat proteins. The third aim will be to use epitope tagging to localize the SP85
domains in vivo, to see if they correlate with the known physical distributions
of the putative binding targets identified in the second aim.