* 9730923
* Collaborative Research: A Field Test of Source-Sink Dynamics in Marine System: Linking Recruitment, Dispersal and       Post-Settlement Processes in Space and Time
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Anson Hines, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

Source-sink dynamics may define the patterns in distribution and abundance of
many marine and estuarine species. In source habitats there is a demographic
surplus (births + emigration &gt; deaths + immigration), whereas in sinks a
demographic deficit (deaths + immigration &gt; births + emigration) leads to
local extinction, without immigration from sources. Moreover, total production
in linked sources and sinks may be higher than in either alone, due to subsidies
to sinks by emigrants from sources. Hypotheses based on source sink dynamics
implicitly incorporate recruitment processes, physical transport mechanisms,
dispersal behavior, post settlement demography and habitat heterogeneity across
various scales of space and time. Many of the current paradigms of marine
ecology can be subsumed or applied within the conceptual framework of source
sink dynamics. Matrix population models that incorporate spatial heterogeneity,
age or stage structure, and dispersal provide a theoretical construct for the
generation of hypotheses to test source sink dynamics in the field. The
investigators will perform a comprehensive experimental investigation of source
sink dynamics in a model system for marine and estuarine species. They will use
extensive population data and a stage structured, spatially explicit matrix
population model with dispersal to generate testable hypotheses concerning
survival, growth, reproduction and dispersal between subpopulations in putative
source and sink habitats. Mesocosm flume experiments will begin to examine the
mechanisms underlying the dynamics, with particular regard to post settlement
dispersal and reproductive success in relation to food and population density,
respectively. Matrix models will be used to evaluate the importance of
dispersal, and stage specific growth, survival and fecundity to population
growth rate in linked and independent source and sink habitats. This research
represents a comprehensive test of the existence and consequences of source sink
dynamics in a marine system.