* 9730212
* An Empirical Examination of the Direct Benefits and Costs of Environmental Regulation and the Indirect Effects of       Regulation on Firm Investment Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Kenneth Chay, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 281,073.00

Due to the lack of convincing empirical evidence on the costs and benefits of
environmental regulation, debates about the future direction of environmental
policy are often based on conjecture and hyperbole. The first objective of the
project is to inform the debate by using pollution categories established by the
EPA after the 1977 Clean Air Act Amendment to quantify some of the direct costs
and benefits of primary air pollution regulation. Specifically, the EPA assigned
each county either attainment or non attainment status for four criteria
pollutants if the national ambient air quality standards were met or not met,
respectively. Firms in non attainment counties faced greater regulatory
oversight than those designated as attainment. This division of counties sets up
an interesting quasi experiment for measuring some of the direct effects of
regulation. In principle, it is possible to identify the impact of regulation by
comparing changes in outcomes in non attainment and attainment counties. To
estimate the costs of regulation, the investigators will examine the effect of
attainment/non attainment status on total employment, wages of production
workers, and capital stock. To measure the benefits of regulation, the
investigators will focus on the impact of county level attainment status on
county level air quality, rates of morbidity and mortality related to air
pollution, and property values. One result of the analysis is that it will be
possible to calculate the trade off between the costs of regulation borne by
workers and the benefits received in the form of better air quality and health.
The second objective is to provide empirical evidence on some of the indirect
effects of regulation by analyzing two theoretical firm level investment
behaviors and their responses to regulation. Increased regulation may have
distorted the investment decisions of firms through two indirect channels by: 1)
increasing uncertainty about the return to a project, and 2) providing
incentives for certain firms to invest strategically to gain an economic
advantage. The investigators will evaluate the size of the first effect by
developing a plant level index of regulatory uncertainty and comparing
investment patterns across plants before and after the regulatory regime shift.
The analysis will investigate the second effect by developing an index of
increased regulatory pressure faced by each firm and comparing changes in
investment after the regulatory shift across more and less competitive
industries. The research will contribute to the established literature in a
number of ways. First, it will use cutting edge econometric methods and a
variety of unique and comprehensive establishment level and county level data
sets to provide new empirical evidence on the direct benefits and costs of
regulation. It will also evaluate the potential indirect effects of regulation
on firm investment behavior. In the process, it will identify two theoretical
investment behaviors that have not previously been documented empirically and
measure some of the indirect costs of regulation. The results should provide
guidance on the optimal design of policy.