* 9730189
* Interactions, Dynamics and Phase Transitions of             Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Suspensions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* David Grier, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 285,000.00

9730189 Grier This continuation proposal by Prof. David G. Grier of the James
Franck Institute of the University of Chicago describes a research program to
study the microscopic origins of bulk properties in charge-stabilized colloidal
suspensions. The experimental methods to be employed for these studies will
include the use of a combination of optical trapping techniques in conjunction
with high- resolution digital video microscopy. There are two thrusts. The
primary thrust involves a systematic study of how the pairwise interaction
potential depends on key control parameters already identified in previous work
by the PI. This will involve the use of the "blinking optical tweezer" technique
developed by the PI for measuring colloidal pair potentials. This comprehensive
study will provide a basis for reformulating the theory of colloidal
interactions. A valid theory of colloidal interactions is of major importance
not only for colloid science in general but also for the critical role it plays
in applied, industrial problems, such as the stability of suspensions. The
second thrust centers on the phase transitions in mono-disperse charge-
stabilized suspensions. Previous studies of colloidal phase behavior have taken
as their starting point the basic understanding that like-charged spheres repel
each other. However, systems whose pair potentials are characterized by
attractive tails are predicted to undergo structural phase transitions not
available to purely repulsive systems. Studies of the phase transitions of such
systems are crucial to the understanding of the structure and dynamics of
colloids. %%% This continuation proposal by Prof. David G. Grier of the James
Franck Institute of the University of Chicago describes a research program to
study the microscopic origins of bulk properties in charge-stabilized colloidal
suspensions. The experimental methods to be employed for these studies will
include the use of a combination of optical trapping techniques in conjunction
with high- resolution digital video microscopy. There are two thrusts. The
primary thrust involves a systematic study of how the pairwise interaction
potential depends on key control parameters already identified in previous work
by the PI. This will involve the use of the "blinking optical tweezer" technique
developed by the PI for measuring colloidal pair potentials. This comprehensive
study will provide a basis for reformulating the theory of colloidal
interactions. A valid theory of colloidal interactions is of major importance
not only for colloid science in general but also for the critical role it plays
in applied, industrial problems, such as the stability of suspensions. The
second thrust centers on the phase transitions in mono-disperse charge-
stabilized suspensions. Previous studies of colloidal phase behavior have taken
as their starting point the basic understanding that like-charged spheres repel
each other. However, systems whose pair potentials are characterized by
attractive tails are predicted to undergo structural phase transitions not
available to purely repulsive systems. Studies of the phase transitions of such
systems are crucial to the understanding of the structure and dynamics of
colloids. ***