* 9730355
* Empirical Studies of Self-Employment
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Harvey Rosen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2003
* USD 378,974.00

This project involves empirical investigation of a number of issues pertaining
to self-employment in three broad areas. The first involves tax policy and small
business. Taxes affect the entire life-cycle of an entrepreneurial venture: the
initial choice to pursue self-employment, the entrepreneurial firm's mix of
inputs, its growth over time, and whether and how it is transferred to new
owners. How federal tax policy affects entrepreneurs' choices of labor and
capital inputs is investigated, taking advantage of the changes induced by the
Tax Reform Act of 1986. The next topic is taxes and transitions to self-
employment; how do taxes affect the likelihood that an individual will become
self-employed? The estate tax, an issue that has recently received a great deal
of attention among small businesses, is also considered. Opponents of the estate
tax claim that it forces liquidation of family businesses. To the extent that
this claim is true, the desire to avoid such a forced sale may significantly
distort business decisions. The impact of the estate tax on individually owned
businesses is analyzed. The second area of study involves risk and
entrepreneurship. A basic fact about self-employment is that it is riskier than
wage-earning. It is well documented that the earnings of the self-employed are
highly variable, but the modern literature on consumption suggests that this is
not the most meaningful measure of risk. This issue is analyzed within the
framework of the theory of consumption risk. Another source of risk is change in
regulatory circumstances, particularly environmental regulation. How the
incidence of self-employment across states is affected by differences in
environmental standards is also examined. Finally, the financing of small
businesses is analyzed, with an emphasis on how the riskiness of an enterprise
affects the way in which its financing is obtained. The third area of study is
the demographic aspects of self-employment. Here the focus is on how experience
with self-employment affects the welfare of particular subgroups in the
population like blacks, women, and the elderly. Particular interest is aimed at
determining the extent to which experience with self employment affects earnings
mobility. Is self-employment a sensible strategy for improving the economic
circumstances of blacks and women? How family background affects one's
propensity to become self-employed, and how the impacts of family background
differ by race and gender is analyzed. In the context of older individuals'
decisions, a particularly important issue is the effect of health insurance on
the decision to make a transition to self-employment. Lastly, comparable data
from the United States, Britain and Germany are used to examine the extent to
which tendencies found in the U.S. data are also observed in other countries.