* 9730657
* Life-Cycle Choices and the Evolution of Youth Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2004
* Joseph Tracy, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2004
* USD 239,754.00

The aim of this project is to empirically examine how changes in labor markets
for young workers have affected their marriage, fertility, and housing
decisions. The 1980s and 1990s have witnessed significant changes in the age of
first marriage and the percentage of young households that own a house.
Understanding these developments requires an understanding of how career
developments for young individuals affect these other significant life
decisions. There is a growing literature which documents that the 1980s involved
a dramatic increase in income inequality in the United States. It is argued that
declining real income prospects for workers at the outset of their careers do
not appear to fully explain the new trends in marriage, fertility, and housing
decisions. For example, using Census of Population data it is shown that the
declines in home ownership for young men between 1980 and 1990 occurred across
the income and education spectrum. To reconcile this, other broad changes in
labor market outcomes are examined. This research will add to the emerging
literature which argues that earnings variability increased in the 1980s. The
trends in earnings variability are documented and analyzed using panel data from
the National Longitudinal Surveys and matched Current Population Surveys. The
recent investment literature emphasizes the importance of the option value of
delay for investments that involve irreversibilities and must be made in an
uncertain economic environment. A general prediction is that the option value of
delay increases with the degree of uncertainty regarding the costs/payoffs from
the investment. These option based models apply equally to an individual's
decisions regarding marriage, fertility, and housing. All of these decisions
involve significant transactions costs and other forms of irreversibilities.
Increasing variability of labor market earnings increase the option value of
delaying these decisions. To date, little empirical work has been carried out to
test this prediction. This project will take an important step in the direction
of filling in this gap. The research will also significantly advance the general
statistical modeling used to study housing tenure decisions. Most of the
existing empirical literature on housing tenure decisions is estimated with
cross sectional data. It is argued that using panel data and transition models
provides a much tighter integration between economic theory and measurement.
These models can be simulated to provide meaningful estimates of the stock of
homeowners at any given age. It is shown that for variables such as the user
cost of housing which vary considerably over time, the traditional estimation
methods lead to significantly biased inferences. It is also shown how the
econometric framework can be extended to handle multiple housing transitions,
and allowing household formation, marriage, and fertility decisions to be
endogenous. uÂ»