* 9730472
* Optimal Incentive Contracts for Teams
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Yeon-Koo Che, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 30,217.00

Much of the existing theory of incentives describes a relationship that lasts
for just one transaction. Except for a few recent articles, the view emerging
from these static models promotes incentive schemes that are sensitive to
employees' individual performance measures and encourage competition among
employees through tournaments or relative performance evaluation. The static
nature of these models is not only unrealistic, given that most real world
organizations have long, often open-ended, life spans, but their predictions
appear to be at odds with many (long-term) agency relationships. Incentives for
many employees are often muted, and firms increasingly rely on `self-managed
teams` that encourage cooperative relationships among their members through
mutual accountability, group incentives and delegated authority. While there has
been no firm proof of their benefit, many prominent firms attribute their
productivity gains and high performance records to the successful operation of
work teams. Several recent authors such as Holmstrom, Milgrom and Itoh
demonstrated the benefits of inducing cooperation among workers through team-
based incentives. The static nature of these papers leaves unexplained how
cooperation among agents can be achieved, however. This project remedies this
limitation by focusing on the repeated nature of agency relationships. Doing so
not only enables us to explain cooperation among agents as self-enforcing
behavior, but it also yields much richer, interrelated predictions on various
aspects of internal organization. The new element in the proposed model, absent
in the static models, is the possibility of an `implicit incentive` being
created. Agents can be induced to monitor and punish one another's shirking,
when appropriately motivated by the explicit incentives designed by the
principal. The objective of the study is to explore how the implicit incentives
can be optimally induced by, and combined with, explicit incentives. This
project will provide useful insights on important issues such as the design of
pay-for-performance scheme, task assignment, allocation of authority, and the
role and value of communication. The preliminary research suggests that the
optimal incentive scheme displays many observed features of team arrangements.
Specifically, it predicts that relationships with long life spans and mutual
accountability are likely to be characterized by low-powered, group incentives
and by a high degree of delegation of authority, whereas relationships with
short life spans or no mutual accountability are characterized by high-powered,
competitive incentive schemes such as relative performance evaluation and
tournaments and by a high degree of centralized control and supervision. These
findings show a great deal of promise for a theory that will contribute not only
to the development of the principal-agent literature but also to the
understanding of general incentive issues arising in dynamic agency
relationships. The project has direct applications in identifying the benefit of
team-based organizations but it will also shed light on other institutions such
as group-based lending programs and Japanese subcontracting relationships.