* 9730712
* Estimating Mortality Risks Associated with Starvation for   Atlantic Cod Larvae using Molecular Markers and Cox         Regression Models
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Lawrence Buckley, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2001
* USD 240,115.00

Based on laboratory feeding experiments, this effort focuses on demonstrating
the feasibility of using molecular markers coupled with statistical modeling for
estimation of starvation-induced mortality in larval Atlantic cod. Our earlier
studies have established that bulk RNA, 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and
metallothionein (MT) mRNA levels may serve as specific markers for starvation in
cod larvae. A series of laboratory experiments will be completed to further
characterize the responses of 18s rRNA and MT to changes in feeding, development
and growth in Atlantic cod. Laboratory results (molecular biology and survival
data) will be used to calibrate a Cox regression model for estimation of
starvation mortality risks in larval Atlantic cod. The nonproportional hazards
Cox regression model chosen for this study is commonly used by the life
insurance industry for establishing risks and premium rates. It can accommodate
time-dependent covariates, time-lagged effect, and a stepwise change in hazard
rates over the lifespan of the organism studied. Our earlier work established
that significant decreases18s rRNA levels can be used as a marker for the
initial stages of starvation in Atlantic cod larvae. Dramatic increases in MT
mRNA levels also were shown to be indicative of starvation. Both markers will be
used to pinpoint recovery from starvation after refeeding. The power of
mortality risks estimation will greatly increase if recovery from starvation can
be established. A single marker alone may not be able to define the `point-of-
no-return` in starvation with sufficient confidence. Animal and human studies
have shown that dietary deprivation leads to polysome breakdown and a reduction
in the number and activity of ribosomes. Refeeding after starvation results in
significant increase in the levels of rRNAs. However, when starvation has
exceeded the `point-of-no-return`, i.e. rRNA levels fail to rebound after
refeeding, mortality sets in. To the extent that Atlantic cod is a suitable
model for other fish and invertebrates that produce planktonic larvae, this
effort will provide a picture of the molecular response of larvae to changing
feeding conditions and provide tools to determine growth, starvation mortality
and feeding conditions. These studies should provide insight into the effects of
environmental variability on production of fish.