* 9730985
* Mesoscale Ensemble Forecasting and Predictability Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1998,10/31/2002
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2002
* USD 323,735.00

An ensemble forecast is a technique in which a numerical forecast model is used
to generate several forecasts based on different initial conditions. It has been
found that if the forecasts are consistent, then this indicates a more reliable
forecast than if the forecasts diverge. While such techniques have been
developed for synoptic and climate models, application of ensemble forecasts to
local-scale numerical models is still a very new field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental goal of this research is to investigate the feasibility and
usefulness of an ensemble approach in mesoscale prediction. Specifically, the
Principal Investigator will investigate the advantages and limitations of
ensemble versus deterministic forecasting in mesoscale models at high
resolution. To this end, an advanced numerical forecast model will be used to
address a range of issues pertaining to short-range ensemble forecasting,
including those concerning perturbation strategies, ensemble configuration, and
the structure and evolution of initial errors. The design of an ensemble
forecasting system for mesoscale systems poses many challenges. Perhaps the most
important concerns the initialization of an ensemble. The Principal Investigator
will compare two different approaches for constructing the initial
perturbations: a) the Monte-Carlo method based on observing systems simulation
experiments, and b) the breeding of growing modes method. He will also
investigate the importance of perturbing different parameters and coefficients
in model physics, as well as perturbation of surface fields such as topography
and sea surface temperature. The role of perturbing lateral boundary conditions
will also be examined as part of this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other issues
related to ensemble forecasting, such as minimum size of an ensemble, dependency
of ensemble performance on resolution, and structure and growth of initial
errors will be addressed. The aforementioned ensemble studies will be carried
out on a total of ten cases, split evenly between summer and winter situations.
A number of validation and evaluation techniques will be utilized to document
the performance and characteristics of the ensembles. Particular attention will
be paid to the reliability of ensemble-derived probability estimates and
quantitative precipitation forecasts. Successful completion of this research
will advance capabilities in short-term local weather forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;