* 9730341
* Structural Empirical Research on Temporal and Geographic    Variations in Economic Activity
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2002
* Robert Hall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2002
* USD 200,202.00

9730341 Hall This project studies the economic forces that lead to variations in
the intensity of economic activity over time and across space and, more
specifically, recessions. The research provides the first integrated and
systematic study of the two most conspicuous features of a recession - large
increases in the number of workers seeking new jobs and the release of
inventories into the product market. Recessions are times when there are sharp
increases in the number of plants and other productive units shut down. Two
basic forces lead to these shutdowns. One is an increase in the discount rate
applied by firms in making decisions about the continuation of marginal
productive units. A higher discount rate causes firms to choose immediate
liquidation over a future stream of profits. Measures of internal discount rates
are highly successful predictors of job destruction and inventory liquidation.
The second force is profit. When the profitability of future operation of a
plant falls, either because its product price falls or because costs increase,
shutdown is more likely. Again, industry-level profit measures are successful
predictors of job destruction. This work is extended theoretically and
empirically. It becomes the basis for studying important outstanding questions
in the analysis of business cycles such as: what are the shocks that trigger
recessions? What are the mechanisms that amplify and propagate them? The project
also continues work from the previous NSF grant on geographic variations in
activity. The investigator's work on differences in output per work across
countries has demonstrated the importance of social institutions and
infrastructure. Favorable laws and government performance lead to vastly higher
levels of output. These factors operate through the accumulation of human
capital, physical capital, and productivity. ??