* 9730874
* The Invertebrate 2Na+/1H+ Antiporter:  Physiology, MolecularBiology, and Role in Heavy Metal Sequestration
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Gregory Ahearn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/2000
* USD 160,000.00

9730874 Ahearn The proposed investigation is a request for funds to continue to
study ion transport mechanisms of crustacean hepatopancreatic epithelial cells.
The previous studies identified an apparently unique invertebrate cation
exchanger on the epithelial brush border membranes of gastrointestinal
epithelial cells from arthropods and echinoderms which was amiloride-sensitive,
electrogenic and exchanged either 2 Na+ or 1Ca2+ for 1 H+. This transporter was
shown to be involved in a number of biological activities of the crustacean
hepatopancreas that included 1) transepithelial cation transport, 2) proton
secretion, 3) intracellular calcium storage during the molt cycle, and 4) heavy
metal detoxification. This transport system was one of three apical proteins
involved in the influx of luminal calcium from food and appears to be
responsible for the uptake of potentially toxic heavy metals as well. The
electrogenic, brush border 2Na+/1H+ exchanger works in conjunction with an
electroneutral, basolateral 1Na+/1H+ exchanger to monitor intracellular pH and
sodium concentration. In the proposed continuation of this project we would like
to use a combination of membrane vesicle techniques and molecular biology to
further characterize the function roles that the 2Na+/1H+ and 1Na+/1H+
antiporters have in crustacean hepatopancreatic biology and to determine the
gene nucleotide sequences of these two invertebrate exchangers. Dr. Ahearn will
undertake three different lines of research over the next grant cycle to attain
these goals: 1) The investigation of cellular regulatory mechanisms controlling
the functions of each transporter for comparison with what is currently known
about Na+/H+ exchangers of mammals; 2) The application of PCR and expression
cloning techniques to determine both gene sequences; and 3) The continued
investigation of the transport processes for divalent cations by this organ
system by describing the mechanisms for heavy metal uptake across the brush
border and basolateral m embranes and how these cations are sequestered in
mitochondria and lysosomes as part of a detoxification process common to many
invertebrates. From these physiological and molecular studies, the PI should be
able to clarify the functional role(s) of these antiporters in ion transport
regulation and sequestration and compare their gene sequences with those of the
analogous mammalian Na+/H+ antiporter isoforms.