* 9730130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: First  Do No Harm; Elections, Political Parties and Human Rights
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* David Cingranelli, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1999
* USD 8,000.00

This Doctoral Dissertation research project provides a refined and useful
analysis of democracy's ability to protect human rights via national elections.
Previous research demonstrates that democracy is reliably associated with
government respect for human rights. the relationship between human rights and
the presence of national elections is important, as for some time, US policy-
makers have implied that democracy and national elections are the same thing.
This may not be the case, however. For instance, Peru has had successively
elected civilian governments since 1980, but at the same time, has suffered tens
of thousands of political killings. Thus, it may be that the states which
formulate foreign policy using elections as a proxy for democracy do a
disservice to all those who are potential victims of human rights abuse around
the world. The dissertation has five specific goals: 1) to examine the
relationship between the presence of national elections and government respect
for human rights; 2) to examine to what extent the role a viable, competitive
political party representing the poorest sector of society plays in accounting
for observable difference in government respect for human rights; 3) using an
innovative scaling technique , to produce a new measure of human rights that is
a significant improvement on the way human rights have been measured; 4) to
produce a new variable measuring the viability and competitiveness of political
parties for both presidential and parliamentary systems; and, 5) to introduce
the presence of refugees as an important control variable for empirical studies
of government abuse of human rights. Qualitative as well as quantitative
measures will be used to examine the relationships of interest in this study. A
case study of the United States is used to develop the theoretical framework of
this study in respect to government repression and the incorporation of
repressed groups into the political system. Quantitative tests will be applied
to this framework.