* 9730608
* Conference on Income and Wealth to be held in               Washington, D. C., Spring 1998
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/1999
* Charles Hulten, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1999
* USD 20,000.00

The project analyzes economic and political design features of social security
programs. It includes the construction of a large cross country and time series
data set measuring various dimensions of program design, the size of social
security administrations and their components as well as other related economic
and social measures such as retirement patterns and old age political
participation. A preliminary analysis uncovers a number of empirical
regularities across countries. Four of those findings of the study are: (1) old
age benefit eligibility almost always depends on a person's labor market status,
(2) old age benefit eligibility rarely depends on a person's wealth, (3) social
security appears to grow more than could be accounted by the growth of the
retirement aged population or national income, (4) retirement aged citizens
appear to devote more effort to political activities than do the young. These
regularities indicates that both theoretical and the empirical analyses need to
relate social the origin and growth of the social security administration to
labor markets and to the political behavior of the retirement aged. The project
will expand the data sets in various dimensions. The investigators will expand
the institutional and `design` variables for a number of years and for a larger
cross section of countries, include finer and more comprehensive measures of
social security programs as well as retirement patterns of the retirement aged,
and include measures of political, legal, and economic institutions. The PIs
will also construct measures of `intensity` of political participation and
separate the time intensive from the money intensive forms of participation. The
project will also investigate `pressure group` and other models of collective
choice that might explain why the retirement aged are able to get pensions from
the young and why those pension have the eligibility requirements and other
features mentioned above. A preliminary analysis of a model where the political
power of a particular group depends on the amount of time devoted to political
activities, the investigatorrs show that the retirement aged have incentives to
introduce retirement inducing regulations like the ones observed in the data,
which will reduce the value of the time of the members of their own group. This,
in turn, enlarges their political power and will allow them to extract more
transfers from the young. The model explains why the pension system induces the
retirement aged to retire, why the size of the social security program appears
to be related to the amount of restrictions on the work of the retirement aged,
why the retirement aged are more interested in politics, and why they devote a
larger fraction of their time to political activities.