* 9730102
* Linear and Nonlinear Forecasting and Testing: Theory        and Data Transformation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/28/1999
* Norman Swanson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9730102 Swanson This project investigates linear and nonlinear forecasting and
model specification using time series which may or may not be strictly
stationary. The research will build on the foundation of results obtained to
date, and is meant to extend, broaden, and deepen our understanding of forecast
model construction, data transformation, and artificial networks. The research
consists of two different but related areas: data transformation and
forecasting; and nonlinear model specification, estimation, inference and
forecasting. Preliminary evidence shows that commonly and widely applied
statistical tests are severely biased when data are assumed to follow a linear
model in levels, but logs are taken, and vice - versa. The part of the project
on data transformation solves the problem of choosing appropriate data
transformation in a way that is simple to implement, involving only least
squares regression, unique, and does not require knowledge of whether the
variables are stationary or nonstationary. The research examines a wide variety
of issues related to data transformation, including: (1) the effects of data
transformation on commonly applied statistical tests; (2) testing procedures for
addressing data transformation; and (3) theoretical and empirical implications
of data transformation in forecast model specification and construction. The
part of the project on nonlinear forecast specification focuses on artificial
neural network (ANN) sieves, and the resulting class of estimators called ANN
sieve estimators. The project (1) examines the use of alternative activation
functions for forecasting; (2) obtains convergence rates and normality results
for loss functions other than mean square error, which may be discontinuous; and
(3) obtains pointwise asymptotic normality for ANN models. ??