* 9730777
* Adsorption of Polyampholytes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Michael Rubinstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2001
* USD 165,000.00

9730777 Rubinstein Charged polymers have recently attracted much attention due
to their unique properties and their technological importance as rheology
modifiers, dispersing aids, stabilizers, gelling agents, binders, etc.
Polyampholytes are polymers carrying both positive and negative charges.
Polymers carrying only positive or negative charge are called polyelectrolytes.
The net charge of polyampholytes, e.g., proteins, is determined by the pH of the
aqueous solution. Long-range Coulomb interactions are responsible for the rich
behavior of these polymeric systems and for the difficulties in developing
theories to describe them. While the coherent picture of polyelectrolytes and
their interactions with surfaces is beginning to emerge, the theoretical
description of polyampholytes is lagging far behind. In particular, there is no
satisfactory theory of polyampholyte adsorption. Such a theory is necessary for
understanding the details of interactions of latex particles stabilized by
polyampholytes, adsorption of proteins on cell membranes, complexation of
polyampholytes with polyelectrolytes and related problems. In the current
research both analytical and numerical models of polyampholyte adsorption on
charged surfaces will be constructed and solved. The problems addressed will
include: the adsorption of a single polyampholyte chain, multi-chain adsorption,
and the kinetics of polyampholyte adsorption. %%% Charged polymers have recently
attracted much attention due to their unique properties and their technological
importance as rheology modifiers, dispersing aids, stabilizers, gelling agents,
binders, etc. Polyampholytes are polymers carrying both positive and negative
charges. Polymers carrying only positive or negative charge are called
polyelectrolytes. The net charge of polyampholytes, e.g., proteins, is
determined by the pH of the aqueous solution. Long-range Coulomb interactions
are responsible for the rich behavior of these polymeric systems and for the
difficulties in developing theories to describe them. While the coherent picture
of polyelectrolytes and their interactions with surfaces is beginning to emerge,
the theoretical description of polyampholytes is lagging far behind. In
particular, there is no satisfactory theory of polyampholyte adsorption. Such a
theory is necessary for understanding the details of interactions of latex
particles stabilized by polyampholytes, adsorption of proteins on cell
membranes, complexation of polyampholytes with polyelectrolytes and related
problems. In the current research both analytical and numerical models of
polyampholyte adsorption on charged surfaces will be constructed and solved. The
problems addressed will include: the adsorption of a single polyampholyte chain,
multi-chain adsorption, and the kinetics of polyampholyte adsorption. ***