* 9730461
* Berkeley Symposium Economics, Statistics, and Computation   for 1998, 1999, 2000 in Berkeley, California
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Daniel McFadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2002
* USD 224,980.00

9730461 McFadden As computational capacity has grown dramatically in recent
decades, there has been a corresponding explosion in computational activity and
research aimed at improving statistical inferences. Because this activity is
widespread and diverse, new computational methods often permeate slowly among
applied researchers and into instructional courses. The renewal for the Berkeley
Symposium on Economics, Statistics, and Computation will provide a focal point
for the dissemination of research, interaction between researchers in statistics
and econometrics, demonstration of software, and instruction of graduate
students. The intensive use of computation in solving statistical and
econometric problems promises to yield solutions to otherwise intractable
problems. In statistics, for example, bootstrap and related sampling techniques
provide a general method for accurately approximating the sampling distribution
of estimators and test statistics. In econometrics, simulation methods are used
to cover come the intractability of such complex models as high-dimensional
multinominal choice. These are two of many examples. Robust inference methods,
graphical methods, Bayesian analyses, nonlinear time series models and semi- and
non-parametric methods also draw heavily on new computational approaches. This
project continues a program of annual symposia begun in 1993 with a combination
of instructional surveys and research presentations, and a mix of junior and
senior scholars. This grant supports symposia in each of the years 1998, 1999,
and 2000. Each symposium will be about five days in length, and will be held in
facilities at the Econometrics Laboratory and the Department of Economics at the
University of California at Berkeley. The tentative topics are: Nonlinear & Non-
Stationary Time Series Models; Statistical Software: Architecture, Languages,
Algorithms; and Bayesian and Classical Econometrics: Computational
Considerations. A secondary, but substantial, administrative task would be
installation and testing of software provided by conference participants, and
supervision of the documentation and release of this software through the
Econometrics Laboratory Software Archives. ??