* 9730436
* Organometallic Radical Chemistry; Cage Effects and Reactivity in Aqueous Solution
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* David Tyler, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 03/31/2002
* USD 341,000.00

In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program, Dr. David R. Tyler of the Department of
Chemistry, University of Oregon, will continue his studies on organometallic
radical reactivity. The first part of the project involves using time-resolved
pump/probe spectroscopy and `slow` kinetic methods to measure the cage effect
for a series of photochemically and thermally generated organometallic radicals,
including substituted cyclopentadienyl compounds of Mo, titanocenes, and
cobaloximes. The cage effect refers to the phenomenon that the probability of
combination of a radical pair is greater in solution than in the gas phase. Cage
effects are necessary to explain kinetic observations and fundamental reaction
phenomena for chemical reactivity in solution in all areas of chemistry and
biochemistry. Experiments will probe the effect of radical size, shape, and mass
on the cage effect. The concepts of `microscopic inertia` and solvent
`microviscosity` will be probed as they relate to the cage effect. Radicals with
long chains will also be examined as these are directly relevant to polymer and
bio-chemistry. The goal of this research is to acquire a predictive
understanding of the cage effect. The second part of this project will focus on
studies of the reactivity of water soluble organometallic radical species in
aqueous solution. Substitution reactions of photochemically and
electrochemically generated 17-electron species will be studied, as will
oxidatively-induced migratory insertion reactions. The kinetics and activation
parameters of these reactions will be determined by infrared spectroscopy and
chronocoulometry experiments, with the goal of determining reaction mechanisms.
Electron-transfer-chain reactions catalyzed by organometallic radicals will also
be studied with an emphasis on determining the differences in radical reactivity
between aqueous and nonaqueous solutions. Several new water soluble phosphine
ligands will also be synthesized and tested in biphasic hydroformylation and
hydrogenation catalysis experiments using Rh complexes. This project will
provide useful and fundamentally important information on the nature of
reactions in solution that involve radicals, reactive chemical compounds with an
odd number of electrons. Radical reactions are ubiquitous in chemistry and
biochemistry and include polymerization reactions (plastics and fibers) and life
sustaining enzyme reactions. Results of the work with water soluble
organometallic catalysts will be fundamental and practical. Most chemicals
produced in industry involve catalysis and many processes use volatile and toxic
organic solvents. There are compelling environmental reasons to develop
catalysts that can use water as a solvent.