* 9730295
* Nonstationary Economic Time Series and Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2002
* USD 229,898.00

9730295 Phillips This project is concerned with modelling, estimation and
inference for nonstationary economic data. It consists of three parts: nonlinear
and nonparametric analysis for integrated time series data, panel cointegration
analysis, and spurious regression analysis. Each part involves theoretical
research and empirical applications. Nonstationary time series arising from
autoregressive models with roots on the unit circle have been an intensive study
of econometric research in the last decade and there is now a fairly complete
theory available for linear time series regressions. As in other regression
contexts, linear models can be restrictive and they eliminate many interesting
cases of practical importance where there are nonlinear responses. This project
provides the first systematic study of time series with unit root or near unit
root nonstationarity to nonlinear regression, kernel regression and
nonparametric density estimation contexts. The work involves new methodological
developments that utilize discrete time estimates of the local time for
continuous stochastic processes such as Brownian motion, i.e., the occupation
density for the time spent by the process in the spatial vicinity of a certain
part. This quantity turns out to be important in analyzing nonlinear functions
of nonstationary data and in the development of an asymptotic theory of
nonlinear regression. The second part is concerned with the development of a
regression limit theory and associated inferential methods for nonstationary
panel data sets with large numbers of cross section and time series
observations. Several interesting panel structures are possible allowing, for
instance, for no time series cointegration, heterogeneous cointegration,
homogeneous cointegration, or even near-homogeneous cointegration. Since panel
data can distinguish effects that time series of cross section data alone cannot
identify, there are exciting possibilities for the use of such methods in
studying imp ortant empirical economic issues such as the growth convergence
where nonstationary data can play a central role. The third part continues the
investigator's work on spurious regression. His earlier work helped to explain
"spurious" statistical significance in regression by the development of an
asymptotic theory of the regression. More recently, the investigator has shown
than an alternative asymptotic theory can be developed that justifies the same
regression in terms of the representation of one function (possibly, stochastic
function) in terms of others. In this project these tools of analysis will be
extended to develop a theory of approximating regression functions, including
approximately cointegration functions, and to develop an associated inferential
theory. ??