* 9730976
* Fluids and Their Mixtures:  Lattice and Continuum Studies   and Comparisons
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9730976 Lipson This is a renewal grant funded jointly by the Materials Theory
Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. The theoretical
research is targeted at understanding how the microscopic nature of fluids and
their mixtures is correlated with their macroscopic behavior. Systems of
interest include both simple and complex molecules. In addition, a unique
opportunity afforded by this work is the ability to compare the results for a
lattice model with those for a continuum model using the same theoretical
approach. The behavior of complex fluids has been of high interest in recent
years, and this has been stimulated by the increasingly sophisticated kinds of
measurements becoming accessible. In addition, the ability to simulate mixtures
of dense fluids has expanded dramatically within the last decade. Thus, more
data are beginning to appear whcih are capable of testing statistical mechanical
theories, particularly for complex liquid mixtures. The research conducted here
involves an integral equation technique known as Born-Green-Yvon (BGY) theory.
Using the BGY formalism theoretical descriptions of lattice and continuum
systems have been derived, and comparisons between the results using the two
have been initiated. The lattice theory has resulted in simple closed-form
expressions for thermodynamic quantities of interest. The advantages of lattice
theory include its accessibility to non-theorists, and the ability to test it
using lattice simulation results on relatively complex fluids and mixtures,
which are more plentiful than continuum simulation data. The continuum theory is
capable of tackling more subtle issues involving the interplay between local
structure and bulk properties. However, continuum solutions involve numerical
methods and simulation data on mixtures are not yet plentiful. The development
of analogous lattice and continuum theories yields the p ossibility of
determining what kinds of equilibrium properties are expected to be sensitive to
the imposition of a lattice constraint. This research will focus on developing
an understanding of polymer solutions and blends, building on the demonstrated
ability of the lattice BGY theory to describe pure fluids, simple alkane
mixtures and polyethylene solutions. This work will involve analysis of data,
including equation of state information and (new to these efforts) small angle
neutron scattering results, in order to obtain the characteristic microscopic
parameters. Having determined what minimum data set is required to characterize
a system, the goal is then to predict less accessible properties, such as the
pressure dependence of the coexistence curve. Such information is important in
deciding on processing conditions, for example. The BGY theory is also capable
of probing the effects of structural differences (for example polyolefin blends)
and energetic differences (such as ocur in strongly interaacting mixtures) on
miscibility in an effort to understand at a more sophisticated level the balance
between these two. %%% This is a renewal grant funded jointly by the Materials
Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. The theoretical
research is targeted at understanding how the microscopic nature of fluids and
their mixtures is correlated with their macroscopic behavior. Systems of
interest include both simple and complex molecules. In addition, a unique
opportunity afforded by this work is the ability to compare the results for a
lattice model with those for a continuum model using the same theoretical
approach. Research will focus on polymer solutions and blends. Besides providing
fundamental insight on these materials, the results will be of importance in the
processing of these materials. ***