* 9730101
* Dissecting the "Own-Race Bias" in Face Recognition
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* John Brigham, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2003
* USD 261,969.00

This research undertakes a series of seven experiments designed to test
theoretically derived predictions hypothesized to explain the causes and
correlates of the Own Race Bias. The ORB, the tendency for people to be better
at identifying members of their own racial group in comparison to members of
other groups, has been demonstrated empirically for years, but remains
unexplained. The first four studies examine the impact of variables hypothesized
to underlie the ORB. Specifically, perceived typicality, familiarity, and
memorability may interact with race and perceptual expertise to determine facial
recognition accuracy. In addition, the role of racial attitudes, cognitive
strategies people use to search their memories, and their eye scanning patterns
will be examined. The other three studies investigate whether and ORB exists for
descriptions of faces, whether incentive motivation to remember influences
accuracy, and the ORB exists not only for photographs, but for lineups. In each
case, research participants will be shown photographs or videotaped stimuli and
later asked to identify previously seen individuals who have been embedded
within new distractor stimuli. Participants are self-identified African
Americans, of mixed racial ancestry, or white non-Hispanics. Stimuli are African
American or white. Dependent variables common to each of the studies are hit
rate, false alarms, and A' signal detection measures. Data will be analyzed via
MANOVA. This work will not only have direct theoretical relevance to social and
cognitive psychological theories, but applicability at the practical level as
well. For example, the occurrence of an own-race bias to responses in lineup
situations has direct relevance for what should or should not be testified to by
expert witnesses in court cases. %%% This research undertakes a series of seven
experiments designed to test theoretically derived predictions hypothesized to
explain the causes and correlates of the Own Race Bias. The ORB, the tendency
for people to be better at identifying members of their own racial group in
comparison to members of other groups, has been demonstrated empirically for
years, but remains unexplained. The first four studies examine the impact of
variables hypothesized to underlie the ORB. Specifically, perceived typicality,
familiarity, and memorability may interact with race and perceptual expertise to
determine facial recognition accuracy. In addition, the role of racial
attitudes, cognitive strategies people use to search their memories, and their
eye scanning patterns will be examined. The other three studies investigate
whether and ORB exists for descriptions of faces, whether incentive motivation
to remember influences accuracy, and the ORB exists not only for photographs,
but for lineups. In each case, research participants will be shown photographs
or videotaped stimuli and later asked to identify previously seen individuals
who have been embedded within new distractor stimuli. Participants are self-
identified African Americans, of mixed racial ancestry, or white non-Hispanics.
Stimuli are African American or white. Dependent variables common to each of the
studies are hit rate, false alarms, and A' signal detection measures. Data will
be analyzed via MANOVA. This work will not only have direct theoretical
relevance to social and cognitive psychological theories, but applicability at
the practical level as well. For example, the occurrence of an own-race bias to
responses in lineup situations has direct relevance for what should or should
not be testified to by expert witnesses in court cases.