* 9730909
* The Non-Financial Consequences of Financial Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Anil Kashyap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2002
* USD 190,034.00

This research analyzes a newly available database which provides information
from 1982 to 1995 on the income statements and balance sheets of over 27,000
Italian firms. This information can be linked to information on the firms'
relationships with their banks-mainly how much is borrowed from different banks
and an imprecise measure of how long the firm has borrowed from the bank. Data
on the balance sheets of the banks and supervisory reports on the banks are also
available. Consequently, this data base provides a much more comprehensive
picture of bank firm relations than any other available source. The major part
of this project looks at the fallout from a banking crisis. This study documents
what happens to an otherwise healthy firm when its main lender runs into
trouble. These data will permit analyses of the substitution of other sources of
financing; the employment, investment and sales adjustments undertaken by the
firm; and the responses of the firm's competitors. Thus, it is possible to
estimate a much more complete general-equilibrium impact of the shock than is
typical in the literature on liquidity constraints. A companion study will
analyze the role of financial factors in the propagation of idiosyncratic and
industry level shocks. In this study, it is investigated whether firms'
adjustment of employment and investment following these shocks relates to the
structure of the firms' financing. The combination of the large sample size and
detailed data on the ties between firms and banks will allow a significantly
improvement on past estimates of the degree to which financial relationships
shape a firm's response to financial distress. Finally, the role of bank lending
in the transmission of monetary policy is investigated. Whether the impact of
monetary policy in Northern and Southern Italy is influenced by the differences
in the banking markets is analyzed. One goal is to determine the extent to which
lending smoothly flows across regions. Answering this question is important
because an efficient adjustment to a common European monetary policy may depend
on large credit flows across regions.