* 9730103
* Integrated Resource Management for the Integrated Services  Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1998,09/16/1998
* Jorg Liebeherr, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 09/16/1998
* USD 410,334.00

ABSTRACT NCR-9730105 Hui Zhang Carnegie Mellon University Rick Wilder and Chuck
Song MCI Joint with NCR-9730104 Edward W. Knightly Rice University Joint with
NCR-9730103 Jorg Liebeherr Polytechnic University Integrated Resource Management
for the Integrated Services Internet The IETF has defined several key components
for enabling an integrated services Internet: (1) service classes, which define
the service models for supporting end-to-end per-flow QoS, (2) a link sharing
model, which defines how different organizational entities (agencies) can share
the same physical resources, and (3) a resource reservation protocol, which
provides the signaling mechanisms to support these services. While these
capabilities are indeed revolutionary as compared to the current Internet,
serious impediments remain to achieving the vision of a ubiquitous multi-service
Internet. In particular, efficient resource management algorithms must be
available that actually deliver these services to the applications. Packet
scheduling algorithms must be devised that can meet the service requirements of
heterogeneous applications and different agencies while, at the same time,
exploiting statistical multiplexing; admission control algorithms must be
designed to allocate the minimum amount of network resources without violating
any of the service requirements. At present, no set of resource management
algorithms is available that can provide multi-service capabilities while
considering the complex dynamics among connections, services, and agencies. This
project will provide the first truly integrated resource management
infrastructure for multi-service networks. Taking a new and comprehensive
approach at resource management algorithms within the framework of the
integrated services Internet, we propose to develop: (1) A novel hierarchical
link sharing service model and algorithm that simultaneously supports all of the
services proposed by the IETF without sacrificing efficient utilization of
network resources, (2) Traffic control and scheduling algorithms that are
amenable to efficient implementation in high speed and scalable switching
systems, (3) Admission control algorithms for an enforceable controlled-load
service with statistical quality of service guarantees, (4) Robust admission
control algorithms for measurement-based controlled-load services, and (5)
Traffic control algorithms that provide graceful quality-of-service adaptation
in the presence of transient fluctuations of the network load. This project will
develop the theoretical underpinnings of integrated resource management
algorithms for multi-service networks. Moreover, in a collaboration that
involves an integrated services network provider (MCI Telecommunications), a
network equipment vendor (Ascend), and academic researchers (CMU, Rice,
Polytechnic), the PIs will build a complete prototype implementation of the
proposed algorithms on the vBNS national network infrastructure. This reference
implementation will provide a first-of-its-kind platform for experimental
research on the integrated services Internet that will yield critical input to
both practitioners in the field and standards bodies on the effectiveness of
current and newly proposed resource management algorithms.