* 9731859
* Realistic Computer Graphics for Natural Scenes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* William Thompson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 07/31/2002
* USD 366,926.00

This project aims to improve the quality of computer graphic images of outdoor,
natural scenes. To date, renderings of outdoor terrain have had a cartoon-like
quality that significantly distracts from a sense of realism. Partially, this is
due to computational and source data constraints that limit the geometric
complexity of terrain that can be rendered. The thesis of the research described
here is that illumination and material properties play an equally important role
in creating a sense of realism from these scenes. Moreover, there are important
interactions between geometry, illumination, and material properties in a model
of outdoor terrain that should be understood when real-time constraints must
also be satisfied. Significant progress has been made in the last decade in
understanding how to generate realistic renderings of indoor scenes. The general
approach is to analyze the physics of light transport in such environments and
then to embody approximations to the physics in computational algorithms.
Correct modeling of illumination and material properties is vital. It is now
known that a sense of realism depends critically on accounting for shadows,
secondary illumination, and non-uniform reflectance functions. Accurately
approximating the effect of these properties involves great computational
expense. As a result, methods for rendering realistic imagery almost always
exploit assumptions about the nature of the geometric structure and illumination
and materials properties likely to be encountered. Most of these assumptions
derive from a presumption of indoor environments. Outdoor scenes present very
different computational characteristics. While the physics is the same,
geometry, illumination, and reflectance properties are all distinctly different.
Many of the techniques developed to support realistic rendering of indoor scenes
will require substantial modifications for natural, outdoor environments. The
most difficult computational prob lem to overcome is the need to be able to
aggregate the effects of micro-structures into large enough units that they can
be rendered effectively, while at the same time preserving key aspects of visual
appearance. This problem exists across a wide range of scales, ranging from
foliage, in which a collection of individual leaves generates a collective
appearance that is quite different than that of the constituent members, to
distant landmarks, where detail must be suppressed without removing those
properties that make landmarks distinctive and thus useful.