* 9731885
* Psychobiology Summer Research for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Neil Rowland, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2002
* USD 129,102.00

9731885 This program will offer summer research experiences in the field of
Psychobiology at the University of Florida (UF). Applicants will be solicited by
mailings to schools in the Southeast United States, with special emphasis on
smaller and/or minority institutions at which students do not otherwise have an
opportunity for significant research. Ten participants will be selected and will
spend 12 weeks at UF (mid-May through early August). To facilitate group
cohesiveness and interaction, they will be housed in an apartment residence on
campus. Over the 12 weeks, each participant will complete a research project
under the direct supervision of a faculty mentor. The primary faculty will give
their time to this program; each has an active research program in
psychobiology, with the range of emphasis spanning molecular and animal studies
through cognitive neuroscience. In addition to the primary faculty, affiliated
faculty, staff, and graduate students will be available to help the
participants. Students also will attend a small-group tutorial to cover the
essentials of biological psychology, as well as a periodic lecture for the group
on topics including ethics, experimental design, and career development. They
will learn communicative skills by preparing and presenting oral and written
reports.