* 9731923
* REU:  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Summer Intern   Program
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Christine Jones, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2003
* USD 417,630.00

9731923 Dow The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) Summer Intern
Program offers talented undergraduates, interested in a career in the physical
sciences, the opportunity to work with a scientist for ten weeks during the
summer at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. Ten students are recruited nationally each year for the program.
Women, minorities, persons with disabilities, and students from colleges where
research opportunities are limited are encouraged to apply. The potential areas
of research for the students include: observational and theoretical cosmology,
extragalactic and galactic astronomy, interstellar medium and star formation,
laboratory astrophysics, supernovae and supernovae remnants, and planetary
science. The program activities include trips to nearby observatories, taking
part in informal scientific talks, and attending a colloquium series. The
students write a research paper and present the results of their projects at an
Intern Symposium at the end of the summer. The students will have an opportunity
to use optical and radio telescopes at the Oak Ridge Observatory in
Massachusetts and to visit Haystack Radio Observatory, a major research facility
in Massachusetts not too far from Cambridge. There will be opportunities for
selected students to present a paper on the results of their research at a
professional society meeting. The program begins in mid-June and runs until mid-
August each year. The applicants must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents
and enrolled in a degree program leading to a bachelor's degree. The application
deadline is February 15th. The information about the program, including
application information, is available at the SAO Summer Intern Program Web site:
http://hea-www.harvard.edu/REU/REU.html. ***