* 9731345
* Synthesis and Characterization of Crystalline and Liquid    Crystalline Poly(silylenemethylenes)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Leonard Interrante, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2003
* USD 390,000.00

9731345 Farmer A detailed and systematic study of crystalline and liquid
crystalline order in poly(silylenemethylene)s (PSMs), is proposed. By virtue of
their structural relationship to the purely organic polyolefins and such
inorganic polymers as the polysilanes, polysiloxanes and polyphosphazenes, these
hybrid inorganic/organic backbone polymers provide a unique opportunity to
examine the effects of the polymer backbone on the structure and properties of
linear polymers with structure-directing groups or side chains. This study will
employ synthesis methods recently developed in the PI's laboratory to prepare a
senes of monosubstituted and symmetrically disubstituted polymers having
fluorine, cyano, n-alkyl, alkoxy, aryloxy, and mesogenic side chain
substituents. Preliminary work on some of these polymers indicates the existence
of novel structural transitions and properties. Prior work on related hybrid
polymers provide directions for future synthesis efforts that seem likely to
yield new polymers with interesting behavior. These polymers will be examined by
a wide range of characterization methods, including x- ray diffraction, optical
microscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance and differential scanning calorimetry.
The structures and properties of the PSMs will be compared with those of the
related organic and inorganic backbone polymers. Molecular modeling methods will
also be employed for selected polymers in an effort to provide an understanding
of the observed structures and properties and the role of the polymer backbone
in determining their behavior. %%% In addition to a better fundamental
understanding of structure- property relationships in polymeric materials this
study may lead to new functional polymers that may be useful as NLO, electro-
optic, and piezoelectric materials in devices for optical storage and
processing. ***