* 9731695
* SGER Proposal:  Rare Research Opportunity to Study          Geotectonic Fluids in Bransfield Strait and Scotia Arc,     Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Gary Klinkhammer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 10/31/1998
* USD 33,000.00

9731695 Klinkhammer This award supports participation of Oregon State University
(OSU) researchers in an expedition of the German oceanographic research vessel
POLARSTERN to the Antarctic Ocean (POLARSTERN cruise ANT-XV/2). Previous OSU
researchers supported by the US Antarctic Program identified several areas of
hydrothermal venting in the Bransfield Strait. This discovery has important
implications to the biogeography of vent animals, the geological evolution of
ore deposits, and the chemical and heat budgets of the Earth. The previous work
sampled water and particles from above the vent sites at a reconnaissance level.
Subsequent chemical analyses of these samples provided insight into the
chemistry of fluids emanating from vents on the sea floor. The POLARSTERN cruise
affords a unique opportunity to build on these discoveries in the Bransfield
Strait, foster future international work in the Bransfield area, extend research
on hydrothermal activity to other parts of the Antarctic Peninsula region, and
develop a working relationship with a strong international group. In particular,
the POLARSTERN expedition provides the opportunity for: 1) additional sampling
of water and suspended particulate matter in the water column over the
Bransfield hydrothermal sites this sampling would be aided by German
photographic reconnaissance; 2) reconnaissance, to determine the broader
geographical extent of hydrothermal activity, would be extended to the Scotia
Arc and trench areas following the general theme of the German program which is
fluid expulsion from the Scotia- Bransfield system; and 3) the use of unique
tools available on the POLARSTERN such as a camera sled and grab bottom sampler.
This work will make it possible to better define the location of hydrothermal
vents and to begin to quantify the amount of water being expelled by this
hydrothermal activity. If vents can be precisely located, the bottom photography
holds the promise of revealing possible biologic al communities associated with
these submarine hot springs.