* 9731686
* U.S.-Australia Workshop on Synaptic Transmission
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Laurence Trussell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 12/31/1998
* USD 40,992.00

9731686 Trussell An understanding of junctional mechanisms at synapses is a
central issue in basic neuroscience. It is also central to understanding many
pathological conditions of the nervous system, since pharmacological treatments
of nervous illnesses usually target some aspect of synaptic transmission. The
current intense interest in long-term modification to synaptic strength as a
model for memory also depends on a thorough understanding of synaptic
transmission. The award will support U.S. participation in an intensive workshop
on current progress and new directions in synaptic transmission. The principal
organizers are Professors Laurence Trussell of the Department of Physiology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, and Stephan Redman of the Department of
Neuroscience, Australian National University. The workshop will be held Jan
2427th, 1998, in Thredbo, Australia and supported, in part, by the Australian
Department of Industry, Science, and Technology (DIST). It will involve eight
senior researchers from Germany, Israel, England, and the United States in
addition to seventeen senior researchers from Australia. The U.S. team will
consist of four senior researchers and eight promising young U.S. graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows who will interact with Australian students
postdocs, and faculty. Bringing these senior and junior researchers to this
workshop will help foster new opportunities for U.S./Australian scientific
cooperation. Moreover, it will provide a means for the relatively isolated
Australian students and younger faculty to interact with scientists in their
field from around the world.