* 9731990
* From Computer Data to Human Knowledge: A Cognitive Approach to Knowlege Discovery and Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2001
* Michael Pazzani, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2001
* USD 240,000.00

This research is being done in conjunction with IIS-9732562, which is
being&lt;br/&gt;performed by Dorrit Billman in the Psychology Department at
Georgia&lt;br/&gt;Institute of Technology. The research is concerned with
intelligent&lt;br/&gt;decision aids that can be developed by data mining
techniques. Experience&lt;br/&gt;has determined that such systems can learn
accurate models, but that&lt;br/&gt;experts in areas where those models are used
in decision aids are often&lt;br/&gt;reluctant to trust them because they do
not, for instance, use the same&lt;br/&gt;tests intermediate conclusions or
abstractions that the experts have grown&lt;br/&gt;to trust. Or they do not use
certain factors at all that experts feel to&lt;br/&gt;be relevant. Experts also
want models that are stable under small changes&lt;br/&gt;in the data being
analyzed. Psychologists have discovered factors that&lt;br/&gt;simplify the
learning, understanding, and communication of category and&lt;br/&gt;process
information by humans. This research seeks to explore
these&lt;br/&gt;psychological principles in light of the output of existing KDD
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and then go on to develop and evaluate new KDD algorithms
that will provide&lt;br/&gt;output that is easy for people to learn , use, and
communicate to others.&lt;br/&gt;With the results of this research, it should be
possible to make such&lt;br/&gt;decision aids more "human centered", so that
they will be used more often&lt;br/&gt;and more effectively in practice.&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.ics.uci.edu/~pazzani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;