* 9731257
* Experimental Probes of Density Wave Deformations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Joseph Brill, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2002
* USD 298,536.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9731257 Brill This experimental research project is
devoted to properties of Charge Density Waves (CDW) and Spin Density Waves (SDW)
in quasi- one-dimensional conductors. In these states, the electronic charge
and/or spin density is spatially modulated, with a wavelength which differs from
that of the underlying crystal. Many of the anomalous properties, however,
result from the fact the Density Wave (DW) itself is deformable, and that its
deformations, which can be charged, interact with each other and with other
charges and defects in the crystal. This project focuses on the effect of such
deformations in 1) modifying the elastic properties of DW materials, 2) allowing
current to be injected into the DW, and 3) driving materials into glass-like
states at low temperatures. Experimental techniques include: 1) electromodulated
infrared transmission (to study charged deformations that accompany polarization
and current injection in the CDW in blue bronze); 2) ac calorimetry to study the
specific heat; and, 3) low frequency elastic measurements, which are made using
a radio frequency cavity in conjunction with small magnets to strain the small
samples. The combination of these techniques allows a search for glass-
transitions in CDW materials. This research program is interdisciplinary in
nature and involves several graduate students, who receive excellent training in
preparation for careers in industry, government laboratories or academia. %%%
This experimental research project is devoted to properties of "quasi-one-
dimensional conducting" materials. These materials, which include Tantalum
Triselenide and Potassium Molybdenum Trioxide, are often needle-like in their
crystal forms and allow for electrical conduction along only one direction.
These compounds in some cases undergo transitions at low te mperature to unusal
states in which the motion of electrical charge occurs in a correlated way, in
Charge Density Waves (CDW). A related state is called a Spin Density Wave (SDW).
Such CDW and SDW states in quasi-one-dimensional conductors feature electronic
charge and/or spin density which is spatially modulated, with a wavelength which
differs from that of the underlying crystal. Electrical conduction in the CDW
state occurs as the whole wave moves, rather than by individual charge motion as
in copper. Many of the anomalous properties, however, result from the fact the
Density Wave (DW) itself is deformable, and that its deformations, which can be
charged, interact with each other and with other charges and defects in the
crystal. This project focuses on the effect of such deformations in 1) modifying
the elastic properties od DW materials, 2) allowing electrical current to be
injected in to the DW, and 3) driving materials into glass-like states at low
temperatures. Experimental techniques include: 1) electromodulated infrared
transmission (to study charged deformations that accompany polarization and
current injection in the CDW in blue bronze); 2) ac calorimetry to study the
specific heat; and, 3) low frequency elastic measurements, which are made using
a radio frequency cavity in conjunction with small magnets to strain the small
samples. The combination of these techniques allows a search for glass-
transitions in CDW materials. This research program is interdisciplinary in
nature and involves several graduate students, who receive excellent training in
preparation for careers in industry, government laboratories or academia. ***