* 9731220
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Non Adiabatic Processes and Electron   Correlation in Low Dimensional Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Barry Friedman, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/2000
* USD 109,612.00

9731220 Friedman This award provides funds to support a twelve-month research
visit by Dr. Barry Friedman, Department of Physics, Sam Houston State
University, for collaboration with Dr. Shuji Abe, Fundamental Physics Section,
Electrotechnical Laboratory (ETL), Tsukuba, Japan. The collaborators will
conduct research to better understand non adiabatic processes in low dimensional
systems. Surface hopping methods have been developed which allow one to
incorporate the effects of non adiabatic processes in molecular dynamics
simulations. The collaborators will use these non adiabatic molecular dynamics
techniques to study pi electron systems. The particular systems include photo
induced charge transfer in conducting polymer C60 composites and the photo
induced conformation change of the visual pigment rhodopsin. Both of these
systems are important due to their intrinsic physical and biophysical interest
and from the standpoint of possible technological application. Dr. Shuji Abe and
his team at ETL are experts on the photo physical processes in conducting
polymers and fullerenes, while Dr. Friedman has gained expertise in the use of
non adiabatic molecular dynamics. Although adiabatic molecular dynamics has been
widely applied to pi electron systems, the simulation of non adiabatic processes
is relatively unexplored. Non adiabatic processes are important in these
systems, but they have been neglected due to the former lack of computational
tools. The collaborators expect the research to be very fruitful because it will
combine the ETL team's knowledge with Dr. Friedman's experience with non
adiabatic molecular dynamics. This project is supported under the Science
Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Foundation Center for Global Partnership. ***