* 9731007
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Multimedia Document         Analysis and Representation for Content-Based Indexing and  Retrieval
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2001
* A. Murat Tekalp, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2001
* USD 16,770.00

Description: This award is for the support of cooperative research by Dr. A.
Murat Tekalp, Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, and Dr. Fatos Yaman-Vural, of the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department at the Middle East Technical University (METU)
in Ankara, Turkey. In an effort to maximize the utility of the digital
multimedia archives, there is a need for efficient and universal tools for
searching and browsing the desired content in large databases. This research
addresses two important problems in the database management systems: content
extraction/understanding and content-based access. The first problem relates to
automatic entry of large number of paper documents or raw multimedia information
into digital databases. Conversion of paper documents into one of the acceptable
digital information standards requires automatic understanding of the scanned
data, which entails identification of the logical structure and the semantics of
the document. The second problem concerns content-based access to visual
information. Many digital multimedia archives contain visual information in the
form of images and video clips, and no generally recognized descriptors exist
for representing visual information. There is need for content-based indexing
and retrieval tools for searching multimedia archives including image and video
collections. Scope: this project addresses an important emerging area, where
advances would have immediate impact. The US P.I. and the Turkish collaborator
have strong records of accomplishments. The two sides have complementary
capabilities and backgrounds. The US P.I. has specific experiences in the area
of applications. The Turkish scientist is an active researcher with solid
publication records, and with extensive industrial as well as academic
experience. The project would strengthen links between strong research groups at
the U. of Rochester and METU. The project fits well within the objectives of the
Division of International Programs.