* 9731232
* New Production and Nitrogen Cycling in the Off-Shore        Regions of the Black Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* James McCarthy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2001
* USD 162,170.00

Many scientific papers have been written that detail environmental changes in
the Black Sea, and many speculate regarding implications of further potential
anthropogenic changes 1) in various drainage basins that provide freshwater to
this sea, 2) along its coastal margins, and 3) in extraction of its resources.
While the ecological effects of industrial activity and changing land and water
use are most apparent in coastal regions of the Black Sea, they are also evident
off shore. For example, the observed trend of increasing nutrient concentrations
and doublings of both phytoplankton biomass and primary productivity throughout
the central region of the sea between the mid 1970s and early 1990s, have been
attributed to anthropogenic causes. Perhaps the most dramatic basin wide changes
have, however, resulted from accidental introductions of carnivorous gelatinous
zooplankton, most recently Mnemiopsis leydii. These species have profoundly
affected Black Sea community structure, and probably community dynamics with
respect to element and energy flow. There have been no studies of the annual
nitrogen cycle and no determinations of new production in the Black Sea.
Moreover, generalizations that have been made, such as in models, are predicated
upon the generalized behavior of a Black Sea planktonic ecosystem prior to the
environmental changes of the last decade. In conjunction with colleagues in
Turkey, the off shore nitrogen cycle during all four seasons will be thoroughly
investigated. Rates of nitrogen uptake, nitrogen fixation, and nitrogen flux
among dissolved components will be measured with stable isotope techniques and
interpreted within the context of plankton community structure and hydrography.
This study will serve to document current conditions, provide a basis for
inferring the effects of recent environmental changes, and contribute to more
realistic modeling efforts of the Black Sea ecosystem. In the course of this
work our Turkish colleagues will gain experience in the design, analysis and
interpretation of results of nitrogen flux experiments, and our facilities will
be available to them for follow on studies of changing conditions in the Black
Sea. The physical scale of the Black Sea makes a comprehensive study of its
pelagic ecosystem tractable. In this regard the Black Sea is an important
resource for developing and testing understanding of ecosystem function and
stability in more broadly applied coupled physical and biogeochemical models of
the pelagic plankton realm.