* 9731126
* Investigation of Scaling Laws for Rock Discontinuity        Behavior Based on Fractal Geometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Michael Plesha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/29/2000
* USD 49,850.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award is funded to support a
primarily analytical, exploratory effort to develop fundamental, non-empirical
theories for the scaling of rock discontinuity mechanical constitutive
properties and behavior over a large range of length scales from laboratory size
(on the order on tens of mm and smaller) to field size (order o m and larger).
This will be accomplished by idealizing rock discontinuities to have fractal
shape (I. e., increasingly finer orders of detail with increasing magnification)
in conjunction with established, plasticity-type microstructural constitutive
theories for geomaterial interface behavior. The mathematical properties and
scale-invariance of fractals will be used to investigate how mechanical
properties and behavior that are observable on one length scale (typically
laboratory scales) transform to properties and behavior at other scale lengths
(typically field scales). This research will provide fundamental information on
how discontinuity properties and behavior observed on laboratory sized specimens
pertain and relate to properties at field scales. In addition to providing
physical insight, such an approach may also lead to more accurate scaling over
larger ranges of length than is possible with empirical relations. Additionally,
this research has the practical significance of enhancing the accuracy and
reliability of numerical simulations. Use of such simulations is of fundamental
importance to engineers and scientists in making land use and remediation
decisions. Such simulations are usually large-scale and have domain sizes with
lengths on the order of tens or hundreds of meters, kilometers, and larger. An
essential ingredient in the use of these methods is accurate constitutive models
for the constituent materials, including material interfaces. Presently, even if
extensive laboratory data are available, because of the problems of scaling,
users must rely on intuition and engineering judgment to specify appropriate
interface constitutive models. Because of these difficulties, very often
empirical constitutive models or substandard interface idealizations such as
simple, non-dilatant Coulomb friction are used.