* 9731361
* Magnetic Resonance Studies of Strongly-Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1998,10/31/2001
* Douglas MacLaughlin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2001
* USD 345,639.00

9731361&lt;br/&gt;MacLaughlin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic structure,
magnetism, and superconductivity in highly correlated electron materials (heavy-
fermion metals, and transition metal oxides) will be investigated using nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and muon spin rotation (mSR) techniques. NMR and mSR
are sensitive to microscopic (atomic) charge and spin correlations and make
excellent local probes of strong electron correlation. The techniques are
applied to a number of problems in strongly correlated-electron physics,
including (1) the effect of disorder on non-Fermi-liquid behavior in heavy-
fermion compounds and alloys, (2) nonmagnetic Kondo phenomena in non-Kramers
f-electron compounds, (3) paramagnetic NMR/mSR frequency shifts and
unconventional superconductivity in UBe13 and its alloys, and (4) mSR studies of
doped lanthanum cuprates and colossal magnetoresistance manganites. The grant
will provide graduate training in state-of-the-art magnetic resonance
techniques. The research will be carried out in collaboration with researchers
in government (Los Alamos National Laboratory, Iowa State Ames Laboratory) and
industrial (Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill) laboratories and
with research groups abroad (Leiden, Zurich).&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This
projects investigates the way interactions among electrons influence the
magnetism and conduction in solids. This so-called strongly correlated electron
problem is a major unsolved problem in condensed matter physics. It is a
fundamental issue that has technological implications in many technological
areas. This project employs magnetic resonance techniques as probes of
correlated-electron behavior at the atomic level. In nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), "probe" nuclear magnetic moments, similar to compass magnets, sense the
local magnetic environment created by the surrounding electrons. This research
should lead to a better understanding of the behavior of heavy-electron metals,
in which electrons behave as if they were hundreds or even thousands of times
more massive than electrons in ordinary metals. The project also deals with
metal-oxide colossal magnetoresistance materials which have potential for
applications in information storage technology. The grant will provide graduate
training in state-of-the-art magnetic resonance techniques. The research will be
carried out in collaboration with researchers in government (Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Iowa State Ames Laboratory) and industrial (Lucent Technologies Bell
Laboratories, Murray Hill) laboratories and with research groups abroad (Leiden,
Zurich).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;