* 9731957
* Materials Instabilities:  Regularity Theory and the         Calculus of Variations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Irene Fonseca, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2002
* USD 174,422.00

The general objective of this project is the development of techniques in the
&lt;br/&gt;calculus of variations and in the regularity theory for systems of
partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations. The applications that guide this work
come mainly from&lt;br/&gt;the areas of continuum mechanics of liquids and
solids. Tools from geometric &lt;br/&gt;measure theory, a theory for the study
of generalizations of surfaces, will play an&lt;br/&gt;important role. The
analysis will be undertaken for time-dependent problems, &lt;br/&gt;including in
some cases certain idealizations where inertial effects are
neglected.&lt;br/&gt;The main focus will be on the search for the effective
description of &lt;br/&gt;materials with complicated composition, on the study
of regularity properties &lt;br/&gt;of solutions in the bulk and at interfaces,
and on the prediction of their &lt;br/&gt;oscillatory or hysteretic behavior as
time evolves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be on the mathematical
description and prediction of a range of&lt;br/&gt;phenomena that occur in
material science. This includes phase transformations &lt;br/&gt;(between liquid
and solid phases), the structure, nucleation and growth of such
&lt;br/&gt;phases, and fracture and defects in solids. An important part of this
work will&lt;br/&gt;be the study of mathematical models for novel man-made
materials such as &lt;br/&gt;shape memory alloys, ferroelectric, magnetic and
magnetostrictive materials, &lt;br/&gt;composites, liquid crystals, and thin
films. Although unexpected, the mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory also provides new
methods for image segmentation in computer vision. &lt;br/&gt;The mathematical
challenges lie in the description of the dynamics and evolution of
&lt;br/&gt;microscopic structures and of phenomena that occur at vastly
different temporal or spatial&lt;br/&gt;scales. They require recently developed
mathematical tools and the introduction &lt;br/&gt;of new mathematical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;