* 9731306
* Toledo Area Partnership in Education:  Support Teachers as  Resources to Improve Elementary Science (TAPESTRIES)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2005
* Cynthia Beekley, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Stearns
* 03/31/2005
* USD 4,981,645.00

9731306 Czerniak The University of Toledo (UT) and Bowling Green State
University (BGSU) will partner with two public school districts, in a Local
Systemic Change project, to achieve a system wide comprehensive reform of K-6
science education in the schools. Thirty-two support teachers from Toledo Public
School (TPS) and suburban Springfield Local Schools (SLS) will be given full
time release from teaching and will receive over 200 hours of training. The
Support teachers who will be carefully selected for their deep knowledge of
science content will work in teams with scientists to provide assistance to the
1476 classroom teachers, grades K-6. All elementary teachers will attend summer
institutes, which will be held at both universities. Eight institutes, staffed
by scientists and science educators from both UT and BGSU, will be offered each
summer and approximately 45 teachers will be enrolled in each one. Scientists
will also be involved in classroom activities and monthly meetings with
teachers, during the academic year. Over the five years of the project teachers
will receive at a minimum over 100 hours of professional development to enhance
the implementation of FOSS and STC instructional materials which have been
selected by both districts. Principals will participate in a one-day retreat
with follow up sessions throughout the year. Ohio proficiency tests will be used
to determine student progress in science and as a component of project
evaluation. Each school will develop an action plan that involves the parents
and the community.