* 9731523
* Bubbles, Ions and Vortices in Cryogenic Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Gary Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/2001
* USD 341,000.00

9731523 Williams This low temperature physics project is composed of three
components. (1) The superfluid phase transition of very thin He-4 films adsorbed
in porous materials will be studied, using a torsion oscillator to measure the
superfluid density. This allows a measurement of the vortex core diameter in the
superfluid films. The increase of in the vortex core size with added He-3 will
be studied, and also the effect on the vortex structure of pre-plating the
substrate with 2-3 atomic layers of hydrogen. Measurements will also be
undertaken in a new porous ceramic material, known as MCM-41, where the pore
size of the material can be varied between 16 and 100 by changing the
fabrication process. Theoretical studies of the vortices in helium films will be
carried out, investigating the effect of a finite supercurrent on the vortex
pairs at the Kosterlitz-Thouless superfluid transition. (2) A search for
sonoluminescence from bubbles acoustically trapped in cryogenic liquids such as
nitrogen and oxygen will be undertaken, and the oscillation dynamics of the
bubbles will be studied using laser scattering. The cryogenic liquids have the
advantages of being pure and inert. They are also more transparent than water in
the ultraviolet region, where most of the sonoluminescent energy is emitted. (3)
Bubbles will also be created in liquid helium by injecting electrons into the
liquid, forming multi-electron bubbles large enough to become trapped in the
acoustic fields. The bubble radius as function of the electron number will be
measured, and also the oscillation dynamics of the bubble. %%% This low
temperature physics project is composed of three components. (1) The superfluid
properties of liquid helium films will be studied, with the emphasis on
understanding how quantized vortex flow line in the liquid can bring the
frictionless superfluid flow to a halt. Measurem ents of the fraction of the
liquid helium that is superfluid will allow the size of the vortex structures to
be determined. A new type of ceramic materials will be employed as a substrate
for the helium films, one whose pore size can be varied between about 16 and 100
. Theoretical studies will be carried out to provide a framework for
interpreting the experimental results. This work has applications to the High-Tc
superconductors, where it is just now being understood that quantized vortex
flux lines are excited near the superconducting transition. These lines have the
effect of bringing to a halt the frictionless flow of the electrons. (2) A
search for sonoluminescence from bubbles in cryogenic liquids such as nitrogen
and oxygen will be undertaken, and the oscillatory motion of the surface of the
bubbles will be studied using laser light scattering. The mechanism that results
in the 100 picosecond bursts of light from oscillating bubbles in water is still
not understood, and it is important to find other liquids where the phenomenon
occurs. The noble-gas cryogenic liquid have the important advantages that they
are very pure and inert, and are more transparent than water in the ultraviolet
region of the spectrum where most of the light is emitted from the bubbles. (3)
Bubbles will also be created in liquid helium by injecting electrons into the
liquid, forming small bubbles with up to several million electrons inside. The
radius of the bubble as a function of the number of electron will be measured,
and also the oscillatory motion of the bubble surface. ***