* 9731642
* Intraband Transitions in Strongly Confined Quantum Dots:    Spectroscopy and Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Philippe Guyot-Sionnest, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 255,000.00

9731642 Guyot-Sionnest This research by Professor P. Guyot-Sionnest of the James
Franck Institute of the University of Chicago addresses crucial questions of the
behavior of quantum dots/quantum wells, also known as artificial atoms or single
electron transistors (SET). Among these is the predicted "phonon bottle neck"
which would severely limit the applicability of SETs in nanotechnological
applications. The typical size of a quantum dot (QD) is of the order of 1000
times that of a free atom yet very much smaller than that of conventional
semiconductor elements. Their quantum mechanical behavior can thus not be
predicted by simple scaling or extrapolation and must be determined by
experimental work. In this research the PI will fabricate QDs using colloidal
nanocrystals rather than those made by conventional semiconductor fabrication
techniques. Infrared intraband pump-probe spectroscopy will be used to determine
the relaxation kinetics of electronically excited QDs. This will be done in
stages over the duration of the grant: excited state spectroscopy by single
color spectroscopy of optically excited QDs, and investigation of the dynamics
and fine structure of intraband transitions by dual-color infrared pump-probe
spectroscopy of optically excited QDs. These experiments will advance our
knowledge of the relaxation dynamics of the electronic states of a QD, which is
a basic issue that is key to the future generation of optical devices based on
QDs. %%% This research by Professor P. Guyot-Sionnest of the James Franck
Institute of the University of Chicago addresses crucial questions of the
behavior of quantum dots/quantum wells, also known as artificial atoms or single
electron transistors (SET). Among these is the predicted "phonon bottle neck"
which would severely limit the applicability of SETs in nanotechnological
applications. The typical size of a quantum dot (QD) is of the order of 1000
times that of a free atom yet very much smaller than that of conventional
semiconductor elements. Their quantum mechanical behavior can thus not be
predicted by simple scaling or extrapolation and must be determined by
experimental work. In this research the PI will fabricate QDs using colloidal
nanocrystals rather than those made by conventional semiconductor fabrication
techniques. Infrared intraband pump-probe spectroscopy will be used to determine
the relaxation kinetics of electronically excited QDs. This will be done in
stages over the duration of the grant: excited state spectroscopy by single
color spectroscopy of optically excited QDs, and investigation of the dynamics
and fine structure of intraband transitions by dual-color infrared pump-probe
spectroscopy of optically excited QDs. These experiments will advance our
knowledge of the relaxation dynamics of the electronic states of a QD, which is
a basic issue that is key to the future generation of optical devices based on
QDs. *** ***