* 9731062
* RUI:  Acquisition of CCD Camera and Instrument Selector
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Daniel Caton, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 06/30/2000
* USD 64,200.00

AST-9731062 Caton The study of the properties of other stars provides a
fundamental understanding of how our sun and other stars function and evolve.
Research on eclipsing binary star systems provides the only data on the mass of
other stars, and the majority of data on their radii. The variations in the
observed light during eclipses yields these important basic parameters. In
addition, differences between the times of the predicted and observed eclipses
can be used to determine the internal constitution of stars as well as
interesting effects of general relativity. Mira variable stars, on the other
hand, are single stars that intrinsically vary in brightness and color due to
pulsation in radius and temperature. The exact mechanisms for this pulsation are
still not completely understood. This project is to upgrade an existing
telescope by installing a new detector--a CCD camera. The camera will be used
with special filters that will allow observers to obtain brightness measurements
of variable stars throughout their orbit or phase variations. For observations
of the Mira variable stars, the camera will provide photometric imaging with
nearly simultaneous spectrographic data acquisition on the telescope. For the
eclipsing binary work, the new camera will allow data to be obtained that is of
better quality than previously obtained. Data may also be acquired on nights
where thin clouds or other variations in atmospheric transparency prevent use of
older, photoelectric techniques. The CCD camera will capture electronic images
of the field of stars being studied. These images are saved on computer disk
files and later studied with special image processing software. The brightness
of the variable star is determined by comparing the data to data from other
stars of constant brightness in the same image. The measurements made through
different color filters will provide information on the color, and thus the
temperature of the stars. The upgrade to the telescope will also i nclude the
installation of an automated instrument selector to allow rapid redirection of
the telescope beam to either the spectrograph, the new CCD camera, or a visual
eyepiece. This will allow rapid changeovers between spectroscopy and imaging
modes, and will help preserve the quality of the instruments by minimizing
equipment removal and installations. It will also facilitate the remote
operation of the telescope from a climate-controlled room, providing a safer and
more comfortable environment for the observers. The project will involve
undergraduate students in all phases of the work (data acquisition, reduction,
analysis, and publications). The new equipment will allow more students to
participate in exciting and fundamental scientific research. ***