* 9731598
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: A New Implicit Polynomial   Technology for Advanced Manufacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1998,08/31/2001
* William Wolovich, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2001
* USD 35,520.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Dr. William
Wolovich, Division of Engineering at Brown University and Dr. Aytul Ercil,
Department of Industrial Engineering at Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey.
They plan to extend and apply recent advances made in the US and Turkey on
implicit polynomials (IP) technology in order to improve the ways manufactured
objects are modeled, identified, measured, aligned, designed and fabricated.
Specifically, they plan to apply and extend the new IP technologies, including
conic-line factorizations and related-point ratios, 3L and PIM fitting
algorithms, boundary curve blending procedures, and new scaling and shaping
methods to a wide variety of manufactured objects. They will investigate: the
use of IP models and their algebraic invariants for rapid and accurate object
identification and alignment; 3L fitting of experimental (vision and CMM) data
to obtain useful IP models for reverse engineering and metrology; physical
fabrication (CAM) of 3D objects modeled using IP equations; new ways of
controlling a CMM while maintaining proper tool tip orientations; use of IP
curve blending to enhance industrial design, including the various ways that IP
curves and surfaces can be scaled and shaped to produce simple and innovative
designs; and identification and reconstruction of 3D objects from 2D boundary
information. Scope: the U.S. PI is well known and his laboratory is recognized
in this field. The Turkish scientist, who also received her doctorate at Brown,
is a professor at one of Turkey's best universities. At least two, and possibly
three, graduate students from Brown University will have opportunities to work
in this international collaboration. They will be joined by a similar number of
graduate students from Bogazici University. The two sides have complementary
facilities, with Brown offering excellent facilities in the Laboratory for
Engineering Man/Machine Systems (LEMS), including workstations dedicated to
experiments in 3D object visualization, and a state-of-the-art Chameleon
Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM) with both mechanical and laser scanning
probes. The Industrial Engineering Department at Bogazici is using excellent
visual facilities that were developed by Dr. Ercil, and used in collaboration
with industrial partners. This proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-
foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.