* 9731701
* Two-Dimensional Hydrodynamics in Freely Suspended Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* Xiao-Lun Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9731701 Wu The proposed research is aimed at understanding fluid flow and
instabilities in freely suspended liquid films that behave like a two-
dimensional (2D) fluid. Historically, 2D hydrodynamics has been a subject of
extensive theoretical investigation. However, controlled laboratory experiments
have been rare. This project is an effort to narrow this gap. The research will
probe different aspects of 2D flows, ranging from studies of individual vortices
to an array of vortices that are strongly interacting. Universal decay laws of
freely evolving turbulence as well as inverse energy cascades in force
turbulence will be investigated. The experiments will be carried out using laser
light scattering, laser Doppler velocimetry, and real-space imaging. To
complement the hydrodynamic studies, new efforts will also be made to
characterize physical properties of the freely suspended films. This includes
the study of the film viscosity, its relationship to the structure of the films,
and the dynamic coupling between film thickness and the flow field. The project
involves training of graduate and undergraduate students in novel projects with
state-of-the-art research facilities. The project director has also been active
in outreach activities such a development of large scale soap film
demonstrations for science museums. %%% A freely suspended liquid film has many
unique and fascinating properties. With the film thickness being only 1/10,000
of its other dimensions, the film behaves like a two-dimensional (2D0 fluid. For
example, if a flow is created in the film, the velocity is confined to the film
plane with negligible velocity variations perpendicular to it. The proposed
research is aimed at understanding fluid flow and turbulence in 2D.
Historically, 2D hydrodynamics has been dominated by theory and computer
simulations. However, the subject is relevant to many naturally occurring
phenomena such as ocean and atmospheric turbulence, formation of cyclones and
anticyclones. This project involves the development of novel techniques that
allow preparation of robust films and which allow turbulence in them to be
monitored via state-of-the art laser light scattering and video imaging. These
methods will reveal interactions between vortices and the emergence of large
coherent eddies in the sea of background turbulence. Results from this research
will be beneficial to theoretical modeling of turbulence and in furthering
understanding of strongly non-linear dynamic systems. The project involves
training of graduate and undergraduate students in novel projects with state-of-
the-art research facilities. The project director has also been active in
outreach activities such a development of large scale soap film demonstrations
for science museums. ***