* 9731242
* Administrators Working for Change:  Materials to Support    Administrators' Learning About Mathematics Education        Reform
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1998,12/31/2004
* Barbara Nelson, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 12/31/2004
* USD 1,501,971.00

9731242 Nelson The Administrators Working for Change Project is a professional
development project in the area of K-8 mathematics. The Education Development
Center (EDC) working in collaboration with Wheelock College, Lesley College, the
Boston Public Schools, and the Educational Collaborative for Greater Boston and
national field test sites, will develop, pilot, field test, publish, and
disseminate instructional materials and facilitator's guides to support school
and district administrators' learning about issues in mathematics education
reform. The project seeks to involve 520 K-8 administrators and will create two
42-hour graduate courses entitled: Administrative Issues in Implementing New
Mathematics Curricula and Teacher Supervision in Elementary Mathematics. The
project has plans to link with the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM), the National Council of Supervisors of Mathematics (NCSM) and the
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD). The courses are
designed for university-based principal certification programs or as advanced
courses for practicing administrators. Course modules are for use by school
districts or regional service providers. A unique feature of this project is its
focus on providing school and district administrators with the knowledge and
tools to support teachers implementing reform-based mathematics initiatives and
in helping communities to understand and support mathematics education reform.