* 9731071
* Globel Restructuring and Union Mobilization: An Analysis of Hotel Unionization in San Francisco, California
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Miriam Wells, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2001
* USD 150,000.00

Transnational migration and global restructuring have produced an anomalous
situation in San Francisco, where a powerful local labor union that is
increasingly female and immigrant has contracts covering three quarters of the
better hotels, with wages significantly higher than comparable non-unionized
cities. The increase in immigration of Asian and Latino workers to the U.S. has
usually been accused of responsibility for the relative decline of labor unions.
This project, involving a cultural anthropologist from the University of
California at Davis and her graduate students, will study unionization and labor
relations in the San Francisco hotel industry. The project will combine archival
research on the historical development and structure of the local hotel
industry, economic restructuring, and specifically the history of the local
union organization. In depth interviews with key actors in this situation will
focus on key events of union mobilization, the roles of women and immigrants and
the impacts of economic and demographic restructuring. This case study will
refine and build upon recent theories of political process of social movements,
which have tended to slight developing local interests, activities and meanings
in favor of national structures, constraints and opportunities. This research
will provide an important in-depth case study that will advance our
understanding of the basic causes relating migration, gender, economic
restructuring and unionization.