* 9731434
* Collaborative Research:  Maritime Origins on California's   Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Jon Erlandson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2001
* USD 28,710.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. John Erlandson and Mark Rabb will
conduct a collaborative archaeological research project. Building on past work,
they will continue their excavations at two sites located on California's
Channel Islands. The Eel Point site located on San Clemente Island is a large
and deeply stratified shell midden which results from multiple occupations from
approximately 8,200 to 500 years ago. The site contains a wealth of excellently
preserved of cultural features, shell and bone artifacts and faunal remains. The
second site, Daisy Cave is among the most important archaeological and
paleontological locality on the Channel Islands. Located on San Miguel Island
the cave and rockshelter complex contains stratified artifact and fossil bearing
deposits dating from ca. 10,400 to 700 years ago. At present it is the earliest
documented coastal shell midden in North America. Five major archaeological
components have been identified and they contain delicate materials as basketry
and cordage remnants rarely preserved in archaeological sites. A variety of
chipped stone tools and artifacts made from bone and marine shell are also
present. The investigators will build on their prior work at these sites and
conduct both fieldwork and laboratory analyses. The immediate goals are to
obtain a more complete picture of site use over time, to increase artifact and
ecofact samples, and to obtain a suite of radiocarbon determinations for more
precise dating. The faunal and artifactual materials will be analyzed. Taken
together, data from the two sites will permit archaeologists to trace the
development of marine adaptations in North America from the end of the last ice
age through early and mid Holocene times. Until recently scientists believed
that it was difficult for hunters and gatherers with relatively simple
technology to utilize marine environments effectively; such areas, it was
argued, were habitats of last resort. On mainland California, shoreline
settlements are relatively recent in time. However the discovery of early
Channel Island sites has changed that picture and archaeologists wish to
understand this early marine adaptation and how it developed and was modified
over time. The sediments on and near the islands contain an excellent
environmental record and it is possible to trace variation in ocean temperature
and concomitant changes in biotic communities. Thus Drs. Erlandson and Raab can
gain insight into basic human subsistence strategies and how these accommodated
significant variations in food type and availability. This research will shed
light on an extremely early and poorly understood aspect of North American
prehistory. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and provide
insight into an important facet of human adaptation.