* 9731429
* Monarch Monitoring:  A Teacher/Student/Scientist            Collaborative Research Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Marcia Houtz, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 08/31/2002
* USD 597,967.00

ESI 97-31429 Oberhauser This is a proposed three-year outreach that will engage
teachers and students in long-term research partnerships incorporating NRC
Standards. It is designed to enhance the capability of both middle and high
school teachers incorporate formal research practices into their science
classrooms. Project activities include experimental design, data collecting,
data analysis, and science collaboration as teams throughout the eastern United
States. The research focus will be the monarch butterfly. Results of the
research into the monarch butterfly will provide baseline knowledge that will
help and guide conservation efforts. It will also enrich the body of monarch
butterfly research data currently available. There will be a total of 60
teachers and 120 students involved over the term of the project (i.e., three
years). Teachers and students will work in teams (i.e., one teacher and two
students). Special emphasis will be given to recruiting teachers with leadership
qualities and in representation of urban, suburban, and rural schools, as well
as a variety of cultural socioeconomic backgrounds. Project evaluation will be
undertaken by the University of Minnesota Center for Applied research and
Educational Improvement (CAREI). Dissemination of the project's work will be
disseminated through presentations at local and national meetings, "teacher best
practices circles," development of a Monarch Monitoring Resource packet and CD-
ROM, on-line resources, and a fee-based institute.