* 9731797
* POWRE:  Visiting Professorship at Harvey Mudd College
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Mary Barsony, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 06/30/2000
* USD 114,196.00

ABSTRACT - BARSONY A Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and
Engineering (POWRE)award will support an 18-month Visiting Professorship at the
Physics Department at Harvey Mudd College. This award will allow a full time
collaboration with Prof. Alex Rudolph to develop the Claremont-Riverside
InfraRed CAMera (CLRIRCAM-pronounced "clearer cam") project. The visit will
start in January of 1998. Harvey Mudd College is one of the Claremont Colleges,
a group of five small colleges located in Claremont, California. Pomona College,
the oldest and largest of the five, owns a 1.0-meter telescope, whose use is
shared among the five colleges. A three-year collaboration with Dr. Rudolph
involves the acquisition of a near-infrared array camera for this telescope. The
POWRE Visiting Professorship at Harvey Mudd College will be spent developing the
design specifications for the camera, developing software for data acquisition-
including an efficient mosaicing mode, integrating the camera control software
with the telescope control software, developing an efficient data archiving
system using writeable CD-ROMs, and developing IDL data reduction routines for
photometry, astrometry, mosaicing, and re-scaling and combining of multi-color
images. Well-documented software, and student manuals on the use of the
telescope, the instrument, and on the correct steps for data-taking and data
reduction with CLRIRCAM will be produced. The Pomona College 1.0-meter telescope
is a superb instrument for the CLRIRCAM project. It is located at Table Mountain
Observatory, a high, dry site, at an altitude of 7200 feet, on the other side of
the San Gabriel Mountains away from the lights of the Los Angeles basin, making
it ideal for near-infrared observations. CLRIRCAM will open up astronomical
research opportunities for an entire community, including faculty, post-docs,
graduate students, and undergraduates from each of the six collaborating
institutions. The research plans usi ng CLRIRCAM include systematic large-area
multi-color imaging surveys of dark, interstellar molecular clouds to study
embedded young stars and star clusters, the search for the youngest protostars,
and frequent and long-term monitoring projects of variable young stellar objects
(YSOs) to elucidate infall, outflow, and disk accretion mechanisms. The YSO
monitoring projects have the potential to lead to new breakthroughs in our
understanding of fundamental physics relating to the gas motions in the
immediate circumstellar environments of young stars, that may also shed some
light on planet formation scenarios.