* 9731022
* U.S.-Mexico Joint Workshop on Research and Educational      Opportunities in Manufacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Jesus Villalobos, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/1999
* USD 28,800.00

9731022 Villalobos This award will support a U. S.-Mexico program development
workshop on research and educational opportunities in manufacturing. Organized
by Prof. Rene Villalobos of the University of Texas at El Paso and Prof. Louis
Martin Vega from Lehigh University for the U.S. side, and Prof. Eugenio Garcia
of the Instituto Tecnologico de Monterrey and Prof. Felipe Rubio of the Centro
de Investigacion y Asistencia Tecnica del Estado de Queretaro for the Mexican
side, the workshop will serve to identify opportunities for joint research
between the academic and industrial communities in both countries and as a
catalyst for the development of academic/governmental/industrial partnerships.
The links in the area of manufacturing between the United States and Mexico are
becoming stronger. The evolution of manufacturing in the United States, the
increased presence of Mexican companies in the U.S. market, and the
implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) are all
conducive to the expansion of integrated manufacturing operations between the
two countries. For these reasons, the NSF and the Mexican National Council for
Science and Technology (CONACYT) have agreed to support this program development
workshop with the expectation that it will arrive at a set of recommendations
that will be useful to both agencies and to others concerning the manufacturing
arena. The activity is being jointly funded on the NSF side by the Division of
Design, Manufacture, & Industrial Innovation (DMII) and the Division of
International Programs. ***