* 9731396
* SGER: Modified Sol-Gel Processing of Nanostructured         Multifunctional Active Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1997,09/30/1998
* Gan-Moog Chow, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 09/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY CTS-9731396 The development of smart materials in the form of
multifunctional active coatings is proposed in this exploratory research
program. To demonstrate the feasibility and potential of multifunctional active
coatings in this six-month collaborative project between Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and Naval Research Laboratory, research focus will be directed
towards hybrid active coatings that will serve to protect against environmental
hazards, such as toxic fumes associated with fire damage. The smart coatings
will present a combination of superb thermal barrier and catalytic functions. To
accomplish these goals simultaneously, novel materials processing will be
explored to provide intrinsic capabilities for tailoring unique microstructures
and compositional flexibility. The PI's propose the use of nanostructure
processing to achieve coatings with enhanced performance and interfacial
stability. Specifically, modified sol-gel processing will be examined for
nanostructure tailoring and coating applications. The multifunctional coatings
includes the design of a thermal barrier overcoat that protects the underlying
structure from a high-temperature environment, and catalytically active layers
that would neutralize the toxic gases released. Sol-gel processing will be used
to achieve the ultrafine grain size, high volume fraction of grain boundaries
and tailored pore structures of nanostructured yttria-stabilized zircona for
controlled transport characteristics through the coatings. This advanced wet
chemical approach is attractive for its intrinsic flexibility in tailoring
compositional homegeneity grain size and pore structure, and will enable
realization of a thermal barrier coating with superior thermal resistance than
the conventional coarse-grained counterpart. The toxic fumes diffused past the
thermal barrier overcoat will further be catalytically treated by the underlying
nanocrystalline layers. The ultrahigh surface-to-volume ratio of nanostructured
materials will be exploited to provide unique surface reactivity and ultrahigh
dispersion of active species for effective catalytic remediation of toxic gases.
Various processing parameters will be examined to control the relative
nucleation and growth rates and minimize particle agglomeration to achieve high
surface area nanoparticles. The PI's will further develop barium hexaaluminate
as an effective catalyst for oxidation of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide. This
material is much less expensive and more thermally stable than conventional
noble metal catalysts. The PI's propose an innovative controlled sol-gel
hydrolysis synthesis in reverse nanoemulsion for the low-temperature derivation
of ultrahigh surface area, nanocrystalline doped barium hexaaluminate for
effective oxidation of hydrocarbons and CO. The proposed research will
demonstrate that nanocrystals can be processed in the form of coatings with
controlled microstructures that will retain their unique transport and catalytic
characteristics displayed in the respective bulk ceramic form and particulate
form. It is further sought to investigate the structural, thermal and chemical
stability of the interface of these hybrid coatings. Nanocomposite processing
has demonstrated the possibility to engineer the surface reactivity and grain
boundary structure to mechanically reinforce and thermally stabilize desirable
microstructures.