* 9731179
* RUI: Galactic Plane OB Stars: Photometry, Database Development, and Analyses
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* B. Cameron Reed, Alma College
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 05/31/2001
* USD 108,547.00

AST-9731179 Reed Photometry, Database Development, and Analyses of Galactic
Plane OB Stars Stars of spectral types 0 and B are among the hottest, most
luminous, and short lived stars known, and, as such, cannot move far from their
birthplaces in the spiral arms of disk galaxies during their main-sequence
lifetimes of but a few millions of years. Consequently, they serve as natural
"tracers" of the physical, chemical, and dynamical structures of such galaxies
and as laboratories for studying the natures of massive stars and star-forming
regions. These stars within our own Milky Way (MW) Galaxy are of particular
interest as their apparent brightness make them relatively easy to study in
detail. Over 12,000 OB stars in the plane of the Milky Way were cataloged by
astronomers at the Hamburg and Warner and Swasey observatories in a seven volume
set of luminous stars (LS) catalogs between 1959 and 1971. These LS catalogs
constitute the most extensive available uniformly-executed survey for
intrinsically luminous stars in the plane of the MW, and have served as starting
points for a number of research projects for more than three decades. A project
has begun to compile published spectrophotometric information for the LS stars
into a coherent database that would be made freely available to the astronomical
community. The resulting set of databases have stimulated a number of
investigations and the database continues to grow and be disseminated as new
data are published. Despite their importance in a variety of areas of
astronomical research, fundamental broadband photometry (let alone spectroscopy
or narrow-band photometry) has yet to be obtained for nearly half of the LS
stars. This project is therefore directed at (I) obtaining photometry for as
many of these stars as possible while (II) expanding the existing databases to
incorporate published spectral classifications for LS stars visible from the
Northern hemisphere, and (III) undertaking the analyses of the accumulated data.
The resulting databases will be made freely available to the entire astronomical
community. Alma College has guaranteed access to telescope time to carry out the
project. Undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of this work.
The students will have the opportunity to apply knowledge and techniques
acquired in the classroom to actual research situations. ***