* 9731748
* ERC: Engineering Research Center for Computer-Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1998,12/31/2009
* Russell Taylor, Johns Hopkins University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lynn Preston
* 12/31/2009
* USD 33,070,116.00

9731748 TAYLOR This award initiates the Engineering Research Center for
Computer-Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology (CISST). The lead
institution is Johns Hopkins University in partnership with Carnegie Mellon
University and Shadyside Hospital, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Brigham & Women's Hospital. The award funds the first five years of effort under
a new cooperative agreement, with a potential duration of ten years. The vision
of the ERC is to advance knowledge and technology needed to develop a new
generation of minimally invasive surgery techniques for the 21st century, which
will dramatically impact health care in the U.S., reaping substantial economic
and social impacts. Critical to the vision are two core concepts: 1) Computer-
assisted surgical planning/computer assisted surgical execution systems will
integrate accurate patient-specific models, surgical plan optimization
permitting the plans to be carried out accurately, safely, and with minimal
invasiveness; 2) Surgical Assistant Systems will work cooperatively with
surgeons in carrying out precise and minimally invasive surgical procedures. The
center's research program is multidisciplinary and designed to produce
fundamental advances in core technologies of modeling and analysis and
interfacial technologies for surgical systems. These will be integrated into a
robust, modular family of systems and subsystems promoting rapid prototyping of
multi-surgical testbed applications, as well as facilitating transfer to end use
within commercialized systems. A multidisciplinary educational program will
facilitate the training of engineers, scientists, and clinicians to advance all
phases of this work from basic research to deployed systems. Practitioners and
industry will be actively involved in the center. NSF funds will be used for the
fundamental research needed to explore and advance these concepts, clinical work
will be supported through other sources. This award is the outcome of the entry
of this ERC's preproposal in the FY 1997-98 Engineering Research Centers
Competition under the ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5.