* 9731013
* U.S.-Korea Seminar on Composites, Seoul, Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,01/31/2000
* H. Thomas Hahn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/2000
* USD 40,876.00

9731013 Hahn This award supports the participation of thirteen U.S. researchers
in the "1998 U.S.-Korea Seminar on Composites," to be held in Seoul, Korea,
September 7-11, 1998. The U.S. and Korean Coordinators are, respectively, Dr. H.
Thomas Hahn, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department, University of
California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Chul Rim Choe, Polymer Hybrids Research Center,
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul. This seminar will bring
together leading scientists/engineers to discuss and exchange information in
this area of research and to identify topics which may be suitably addressed in
future cooperative activities. As a result of extensive research efforts over
the past three decades, a variety of composites have become available which can
provide the kind of unique performance that conventional materials cannot.
Unfortunately, however, such unique performance is frequently obtained at a high
cost, hindering wider application of these materials. Nevertheless, cost can be
brought down by using an integrated approach to the development and production
of composite products. The necessary integration requires collaboration of
engineers from diverse areas of composites science and technology. Thus, the
main purpose of the proposed joint seminar is to provide a forum for
researchers/educators from widely different backgrounds to exchange information
and explore the possibility of future cooperation between the U.S. and Korea to
realize mutual benefits from the technology of composites. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project
will provide international training and experience for one U.S. graduate student
in an important area of res earch. Korean participation is supported by the
Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). The Korean Society for
Composite Materials (KSCM) will serve as host. ***