* 9731056
* The Analysis of Geopolitics: Reconceptualizing International Borders through the Application of GIS (Geographic Information Systems)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,10/31/2001
* Harvey Starr, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 10/31/2001
* USD 84,589.00

Over the past 15 years there has been a renewed attention to the role and impact
of geography in the study of international relations. Much of this is related to
the `new geopolitics: which treats geography as an essential part of the context
of possibilities and constraints that face foreign policy decision makers. Based
on earlier work which conceptualized and described international borders, this
projects seeks to establish a major reconceptualization and revision of how
borders may be seen (theory) and measured (method). The use of Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) permits a much fuller and clearer specification of
borders by allowing an operationalization of the specific qualities of borders
in terms of opportunity and willingness: ease of interaction and salience,
respectively. Using data available in the data layers found in ARC/INFO's
Digital chart of the world, indexes of both ease of interaction and of salience
have been constructed. These indexes aggregate values generated from ARC/INFO.
they can be used to characterize any border (or arc) or border segment on the
globe. thus, the use of a GIS dataset permits a new mechanism for
operationalizing a state's borders. Through the indexes generated, values can be
attached to the ease of interaction a border or border segment provides, and/or
the importance of any particular border or border segment. These two dimensions
can be used separately or combined. A border with high values on both could be
considered a `Vital Border.` The GIS generated indexes permit investigators to
tap both dimensions, and to use them singly or combined given the research under
consideration. This theoretically based reconceptualization will lead to the
creation of a dataset which will permit research to go beyond simply observing
the number of borders a state possesses, whether or not a border existed between
two states, or the length of that border. The dataset to be produced should be
of interest to numerous scholars in international relations and geography and
regional science.