* 9731781
* Pragmatics, Metalanguage, and Addressee-Uptake in Language  Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Eve Clark, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 08/31/2002
* USD 233,257.00

This project looks at the METALANGUAGE DIRECTIONS about words and word meanings
contained in child directed speech, and at their UPTAKE by children.
Metalanguage directions may be explicit, as in the provision of a term for a
category (`That's a squirrel`) or implicit, as when the speaker assumes the
addressee can infer the identify the target referent (`Bring me the soup
spoon`). Both explicit and implicit directions can be used to introduce children
to new terms and to offer repairs when children come up with terms that are
inappropriate or not specific enough. The theoretical issue here is the extent
to which children aged 1;6 to 5;0 are offered and can make use of such
metalanguage directions in their word learning. Identification of the pragmatic
information available to and usable by you ng children offers an alternative to
proposals based on constraints on word acquisition. The studies are both
observational and experimental. In the observational studies, we will analyze
the range of metalanguage directions actually used, and examine the consistency
with which they serve to introduce members of different word classes (e.g.,
nouns vs verbs vs prepositions) as well as different semantic relations (e.g.,
inclusion, part of). We will also look at evidence for uptake (from children's
usage) and its relation to the type of metalanguage direction used. In the
experimental studies, we examine in detail the range of forms adults make use of
in their metalanguage directions when they are asked to teach words from
different word classes (e.g., nouns vs adjectives vs verbs). We also look at
children's ability to understand differences between explicit and implicit
directions used both to introduce new terms and to repair terms already under
consideration. Lastly, we look at whether the same range of metalanguage
directions is used when adults teach other adults new terms in an unfamiliar
domain. These studies will allow us to establish (a) the extent to which there
is a continuum of forms for metalanguage directions, from explicit to implicit,
and also a continuum from implicit directions to inductions; (b) whether words
in some word classes can be taught while others must be induced (e.g., nouns and
verbs vs prepositions); (c) whether adults favor particular kinds of
metalanguage directions for particular word classes (e.g., whether proper nouns
are typically offered in explicit directions, compared to verbs, say, in
implicit ones), and (d) how effective different metalanguage forms are for word
learning, as measured by child uptake.