* 9731316
* Guiding Education in Mathematics and Science Network        (GEMS-NET)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2004
* Barbara Fitzsimmons, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 04/30/2004
* USD 1,527,823.00

ESI 9731316 This Local Systemic Change proposal is submitted by a partnership
involving 5 school districts in collaboration with scientists and science
educators from the University of Rhode Island. The project will offer high
quality professional development to 350 teachers, grades K-8, in 29 schools. Ten
Kindergarten Science Resource teachers will be among these participants. Inquiry
based kits from well established curriculum projects, FOSS and STC, have been
selected for implementation grades K-6 and will be delivered to teachers and
refurbished by the regional instructional materials Resource Center used by the
KITES project. The extension of the common science curriculum to grades 7 and 8
has been accomplished in partnership with high school science department chairs
and middle school science teachers. The middle school curriculum changes will be
led by a group of 10 middle school science teachers exploring the extension of
the common science curriculum into grades 7 and 8, with SEPUP instructional
materials being considered for implementation. Science mentors recruited from
the university and the private sector will partner with elementary teachers. The
project will have significant impact on elementary and secondary teacher
preparation as materials and curriculum used with the preservice teachers will
be adapted for use in science methods courses. Computers and connections are
available in all five districts to facilitate networking among teachers. The
request is for $1,047, 908 for 5 years with cost sharing estimated as
$1,166,823.