* 9731656
* The Oldest Open Star Clusters Revisited: Their Distances, Reddenings and Ages
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Kenneth Janes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* James V. Graham
* 05/31/2001
* USD 122,225.00

AST 97-31656 Kenneth Janes Dr. Janes is observing five nearby open star clusters
with approximate ages greater than 2,000,000,000 years. The goal of the project
is to determine the fundamental properties, particularly the ages, of stars in
these five open clusters. Perhaps the greatest uncertainties in the ages of star
clusters are the uncertainty in the distance scale and the difficulty in
determining interstellar reddening. The distance scale (from the nearest stars
to the edge of the Universe) depends and builds upon the fundamental
determination of stellar parallax. The availability of the new Hipparcos Catalog
with its precise parallaxes makes it possible to resolve some of these
uncertainties - especially for open clusters. Because there are large numbers of
nearby Population I main-sequence stars, many of which have better determined
parallaxes than the subdwarfs, and because the standard star color systems are
defined by many of those same parallax stars, it is possible to do a better job
of tying the old open cluster distance scale to the Hipparcos than can be done
with globular clusters. The PI is obtaining new high precision photometry of
these five clusters, and also developing improved analysis tools to reduce the
data. The five clusters span the age of the Milky Way disk, so they are well
matched to the problem. The project depends upon large numbers of observations
on moderate aperture telescopes combined with careful and extensive
calibrations. Regular photometric monitoring of open cluster stars will make it
possible to identify many, if not most, of the non-member stars, as well as
variable stars and binaries. Other interesting stellar phenomena might be found
and characterized: delta Scuti stars, reflection effects in close (but non-
eclipsing) systems, and eclipsing systems with secondary components perhaps as
small as Jupiter. ***