* 9731980
* Dissertation Research:  An Archaeological Study of the Aztec-Tarascan Frontier
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Kenneth Hirth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1999
* USD 11,800.00

Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Hirth, Mr. Jay Silverstein will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his archaeological project is to
understand the organization of a border area, located in the Guerrero region of
Mexico, which separated the Tarascan and Aztec empires. In late prehistoric
times two great empires - the better known Aztec and the less studied Tarascan
arose in central Mexico. Both extended their ranges through conquest and the
incorporation of subject peoples and Guerrero, where their borders met, was the
scene of extensive and prolonged conflict. Ethnohistoric sources record major
battles in the region. Archaeologists rarely have the opportunity to study such
a well defined and demarcated frontier and, in part, Mr. Silverstein wishes to
define the material correlates of such a situation. Although the border was
defended, it also remained inhabited by local peoples who were present before
the establishment of either empire. Preliminary data indicates that exchange
took place across the boundary and people continued to live in this region. Mr.
Silverstein wishes to understand the nature of the trade and interaction
involved. Researchers interested in the rise and functioning of empires have
tended to focus more on the `core` or capital regions of empires and less on
peripheral areas. To gain a better perspective, both core and periphery must be
taken into account and this research will provide insight into how both the
Aztecs and Tarascans governed. Mr. Silverstein has designed a two stage plan.
First, sites known from previous research and air photo interpretation will be
sampled and mapped. Secondly, an intensive field survey will be conducted over a
60 km square area between the nearest Aztec and Tarascan habitations. Sites
located will be plotted on air photos, sampled through intensive collection and
all visible features will be sketched and photographed. Artifact samples will be
analyzed to provide information on both chronology and exchange. This research
is important for several reasons. It will provide new information on how
prehistoric empires functioned and interacted. It will help to fill in the
archaeological record for a poorly known part of Mexico and will assist in
training a promising young scientist.