* 9731157
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical Consequences of         Extensive Gas Hydrate Formation in Sediments of the         Cascadia Accfetionaly Prism
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Marta Torres, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2002
* USD 372,700.00

9731157 Torres To quantify the exchange of fluids and dissolved constituents
from the Cascadia margin hydrate field to the overlying water column a multi-
investigator program is designed to measure this exchange under a variety of
conditions within the Cascadia region. A 2-year field program will deploy
benthic devices that sample fluid discharge. Gravity, push and multicores will
be used to assess how near-surface formation and decomposition of a mixed
CH4-H2S hydrate in continental margin sediments influences benthic fluxes and
early diagenetic reactions. The data collected during the first year will be
used to assess the spatial variations of constituent release from the hydrate
field, variations that are likely to be most significant at active venting
sites. These results will 1) identify ideal sites for temporal variability
studies to be conducted during two subsequent visits to the area, and 2) define
the length and number of deployments in the following field programs. The
different environments present in the Cascadia margin, along with the spatial-
temporal experimental design will enable assessment of the effect of widespread
hydrate formation in the Cascadia margin on element mobilization, transport, and
release at the seafloor. This knowledge has applications for broader issues on a
global scale, as hydrate geochemistry is of significant relevance in global
carbon budgets, climate change models, sediment slope stability, and energy
resource issues.