* 9731273
* Error Bounds and Algorithms for Complementarity and         Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Paul Tseng, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 05/31/2002
* USD 117,087.00

An error bound for a problem is a bound on the distance from any point to the
solution set by some error function evaluated at that point. There recently has
been active interest in using error bounds to design and analyze solution
methods for optimization and complementarity and variational inequality
problems. One focus of this project is a continued study of this subject, but in
new directions. In particular, the following problems are being studied: (i)
error bounds for perturbations of linear/nonlinear programs and complementarity
problems, (ii) the use of error bound to implicitly identify active sets and
obtain local superlinear convergence of methods under weaker assumptions than
those existing, (iii) error bounds and their use in estimating the convergence
ratio of Gauss- Seidel and Jacobi methods for infinite-dimensional convex
minimization. A second focus of the project is the design and the analysis of
solution methods for complementarity and related problems. In particular, these
problems are being studied: (iv) branch-and- bound strategies for globalizing
local methods for complementarity problems, (v) extension of interior path-
following and non-interior methods and merit functions for complementarity
problems to the semi-definite setting, i.e., in the space of symmetric real
matrices. A third focus of the project is (vi) the development of epsilon-
relaxation methods for multicommodity network flow problems and, more generally,
linearly constrained minimization problems with separable convex costs.
Computational study of the above methods is being conducted.