* 9731555
* Dissertation Research:  Medicinal Plants in the Greater     Mississippi River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Gayle Fritz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2000
* USD 7,005.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gayle Fritz, MS Michele Williams will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will study archaeological records and
excavated material in four museums and universities in the United States. Her
work focuses on botanical materials from native American sites in the Midwest
which span an approximately 1,000 year period and which document the transition
from a hunting and gathering way of life to a mode of subsistence based on
agriculture. Archaeological data clearly demonstrate that over this span
sedentary settlements of ever larger size appeared, population density increased
and that societies assumed an increasingly hierarchical structure. It is
interesting to note that these conditions resulted in a net decrease in health
and skeletal analysis indicates decreasing age of death and a heavier disease
load. MS Williams is interested in the changes in medicinal practice which
accompanied this transition. Ethnographic accounts of extant native American
societies indicate the utilization of a wide range of wild plants for medicinal
purposes and it is reasonable to assume that this practice has considerable
antiquity. While carbonized plant remains have been recovered from many sites
and have been extensive analyzed to provide insight into subsistence, none have
ever been examined from a medicinal perspective. Seeds and other plant parts
attributable to this function are assumed to be rare and hard to identify and
the analytic results from a single site are unlikely to paint a convincing
picture. Through a multisite analysis which spans both a considerable geographic
region and time period, it should be possible to search for patterns, especially
when the results are interpreted in light of ethnographic data. Such is the goal
of MS Williams' research. The study gains power because it makes use of medical
data derived from skeletal analysis and it should be possible to determine how
cultural practices change (or do not change) in response to changing disease
patterns. This is innovative research which will make use of extant data and
museum collections. It will provide new insight into prehistoric native American
adaptation and provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.