* 9731886
* Collections-Based Research Experiences for Undergraduates at The Academy of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* Richard McCourt, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 149,939.00

9731886 The number specialists dedicated to collections-based research has
declined because students often receive little exposure to collections and
research in organismal biology in many modern university science programs.
Museums with a strong research program such as The Academy of Natural Sciences
offer an opportunity to fill this gap in undergraduate education. The goal is to
provide a diverse and exciting research experience for undergraduates in an
effort to recruit new young researchers to this ever important field. Education
in biodiversity, systematics, and taxonomy along with conservation will enable
students to explore, document and conserve global biodiversity and ecosystems.
Applicants will be sought primarily from colleges in the greater Philadelphia
area (including New Jersey and Delaware), with emphasis on recruiting women and
underserved minorities. Twenty, 10-week fellowships will be awarded and students
will be chosen on the basis of academic performance, overall interest and
potential ability, two recommendations, and an interview. After a one-week
introductory session, students will choose a mentor to serve as the primary
advisor of their research project. Research projects will cover diverse topics
related to systematic biology, including evolution, molecular biology, ecology,
and history of scientific collections. Students will work side-by-side with
curators and senior scientist and will be involved in all aspects of
collections-based research including: conducting research in the museum's world-
class biological collections, collection and curation of specimens,
participation in field expeditions, participation in discussion groups with
scientists, and dissemination of scientific results through oral presentation
and publication. Written evaluations by mentors and students will be used to
assess the impact of this research program and to improve the program in
subsequent, and after completing their research experience they will assess the
value of the program t oward reaching these goals. Mentors will also evaluate
the student and program performance. Students will present the results of their
research in the form of a paper to be published in a refereed journal. In
addition, students will give oral presentations of their research in a one-day
student symposium.