* 9731424
* Reconceptualizing Mathematics Teaching and Learning Through Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2006
* Lucy West, Community School District Two
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 09/30/2006
* USD 3,946,402.00

9731424 Mahon The Reconceptualizing Mathematics Teaching and Learning through
Professional Development Local Systemic Change project involves Community School
District Two of New York City and the following higher education partners: City
University of New York, Bank Street College, and New York University. The
project also involves Marilyn Burns' Education Associates, the Federal Reserve
Bank, and the 14th Street Business Improvement District as private sector
partners. The project focuses on the implementation of mathematics education
reform initiatives at the K-8 levels. It is the project's goal to enhance the
capacity of all 1,200 teachers of K-8 mathematics by focusing on their
mathematics content knowledge, challenging their instructional beliefs, and
building their ability to utilize constructivist-based instructional strategies.
The project plans to implement the NSF-funded Investigations (elementary) and
Connected Mathematics (middle) curriculum materials. It will also link up with
the NSF-funded Mathematics in the City Project and New York's Urban Systemic
Initiative. A very thorough evaluation of the project will be completed, via a
subcontract with New York University. District Two is the only one of New York
City's 32 school districts to work with Lauren Resnick and Marc Tucker's New
Standards Project. The district is now implementing the New Standards and this
project will expand District Two's efforts in professional development and the
use of exemplary curriculum. An interesting aspect of this project is the use of
a variety of partners and prior and current projects in extending professional
development efforts to include the implementation of a standards-based K-8
mathematics curriculum.