* 9731339
* Video Cases for Mathematics Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Nicholas Branca, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Monica M. Neagoy
* 12/31/2003
* USD 2,249,609.00

9731339 Branca This four-year project creates K-12 mathematics professional
curriculum materials based on classroom videos. The materials consist of a
series of professional development sessions based on video cases from grades
K-12 and include such features as: videoclips, student work samples, teacher and
mathematician commentaries, and facilitation guides that allow materials to be
used flexibly in many settings and with a variety of audiences from K-12.
Mathematicians explicate the mathematical content in the video lessons through
analyses and discussions. Their resulting commentaries and videotaped
discussions provide a perspective to enrich case discussions about the
mathematics situated in practice, enhancing opportunities for increased
mathematical content knowledge. Building on the methodology and technology of
the TIMSS Video Study, the technological tools provide efficient and flexible
access to the features of the video cases. The tools that accompany each case
permit educators to engage in face-to-face and Internet conversations about the
video cases, enhancing analysis opportunities and extending professional
development opportunities beyond the "workshop" door. The facilitation guides
will provide strategies to engage participants in critical discussions aimed at
improving mathematics teaching practices K-12. The proposed modules are: (1)
"Algebraic Thinking as Generalized Arithmetic," which will examine how algebraic
ideas at the secondary level are developed from elementary work with number; (2)
"Algebraic Thinking from a Geometry Perspective," which will examine lessons
from middle and high school classrooms and highlight instances of algebraic
reasoning from geometric models; (3) "Modeling," which will provide
opportunities to develop a language to discuss and support a robust
understanding of the role of modeling in mathematics; and, if a fourth module is
possible, (4) "Language and Representation," a K-12 examination of changes in
levels of sophistication o f mathematical language from elementary through high
school. Project evaluation is focused around three key questions: * What are the
effects, if any, of using these video cases in professional development on
teachers' knowledge of mathematical content and the theories of teaching? * What
are the effects, if any, of using these video cases in professional development
on teachers' instructional decision-making and classroom practice? * What are
the effects, if any, of using these video cases in professional development on
student learning? The project will work closely with the Mathematics Renaissance
K-12, Local Systemic Change projects, and other Teacher Enhancement projects,
using the video cases as part of the professional development program with
nearly 4000 teachers. Cost sharing, derived primarily from the San Diego State
University Foundation, is approximately 43% of the NSF request.