* 9731240
* The Effect of Economic Development in the Clearance of Old  Growth Forest Among Chimane Amerindians, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1998,03/30/1999
* Ricardo Godoy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/30/1999
* USD 50,603.00

Anthropologists have shown that the expansion of markets into traditional
societies lowers human welfare and hurts the environment, but natural resource
economists have said that economic development improves conservation once people
move beyond a threshold of income. This proposal tests hypotheses about market
involvement and deforestation: that the amount of annual labor income or number
of days spent working in non-farm jobs by a household will be negatively related
to the clearance of old-growth forest, and that the share of the harvest sold or
income from the sales will be positively related to the clearance of old-growth
forest, and that integration through markets and cash income from the sale of
crops and labor will bear a non-linear relation to forest clearance, rising at
first but then declining once households passed a threshold of income. The
hypotheses will be tested with data from the Chimane Amerindians in lowland
Bolivia, elicited by an anthropologist, a conservation biologist, and three
doctoral students of anthropology. This research will help advance our
understanding of the relation between market involvement and conservation in
Indigenous society, and will advance science in cultural anthropology by
training students in field methods and multivariate data analysis. It will also
improve our society's expertise about this important region of the world.