* 9731418
* Investigation of Early Neolithic Adaptive Strategies in     Southern Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Donald Henry, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2002
* USD 150,426.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Donald Henry and his colleagues
will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the desertic Wadi Hisma
region of southern Jordan. Previous archaeological work in this area has
revealed the presence of a large Pre Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) site which, on
typological grounds, may be as much as 9,000 years old. The site, Ain Abu
Nekheileh, consists of a constellation of curvilinear stone-walled structures
exposed on the surface of a small alluvial fan over an area of ca. 2,250 square
meters. Based on variation in house form, as many as five building phases may be
present and thus the site may encompass a significant period of time. Associated
sediments are finely stratified and, because of the dry conditions, preserve an
abundance of cultural materials including large numbers of well preserved bones.
Dr. Henry and his colleagues will conduct extensive excavation at the site and
collect both cultural and environmental information to reconstruct PPNB social
and subsistence patterns and set these into a broader ecological context. In
particular he will focus on the wealth of faunal remains because they provide
insight both into the season in the site was occupied and the extent to which
purposeful manipulation of caprid species (sheep and goat) took place. The Near
East is one of the cradles of civilization and the domestication of plants and
animals necessary to achieve this level of complexity took place in this region.
Excellent data from many sites have provided insight into the evolution of
domestic wheat and barley from their local wild progenitors. Data also indicate
that not until ca. 1,000 years later do domestic sheep and goat appear in the
archaeological record. However the history of this latter transformation and the
processes which underlie it are unknown. Although many sites have been excavated
in better watered regions of the Near East, relatively little is known about
marginal desert regions and Dr. Henry has focused his attention in just such an
area. Because wild caprid ancestors were present, Dr. Henry believes that work
at Ain Abu Nekheileh may provide relevant data. This research will provide basic
information about an understudied region and the results will be of interest to
many archaeologists. It will, hopefully, shed new light on one of the major
transformations of human culture. The project includes a number of graduate
students who will work with Dr. Henry in the field and thus important training
will take place.