* 9731229
* U.S.-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement: Seasonal        Variation in the Hunting Activities of the Prehistoric      Inhabitants of the South African Cape
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2000
* Curtis Marean, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 05/31/2000
* USD 15,000.00

9731229 Marean &amp; Lam This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
graduate student, Mr. Yin-Man Lam, working under the guidance of Dr. Curtis W.
Marean, Associate Professor of Anthropology at the State University of New York
at Stony Brook, to do field research in South Africa. The South African Cape
contains some of the earliest fossil evidence of anatomically modern humans,
from which much has been learned about the evolution of modern human behavior.
But little is known about the manner in which Middle Stone Age (MSA) peoples and
Late Stone Age (LSA) hunter-gatherers interacted with prey animals at different
times of the year, or if the timing of those interactions influenced the manner
in which they adapted to seasonal variations in climate and resource
availability. By determining the time of the year during which human foragers
interacted with and killed prey animals, Mr. Lam hypothesizes that the season of
occupation of MSA and LSA peoples can be identified. The season of death of prey
animals, specifically bovids and seals, will be determined by use of a technique
which will analyze the cementum increments of mandibular specimens from fossil
prey animals previously extracted from MSA and LSA sites, and from modern
samples collected from the all-year rainfall and winter rainfall regions of the
Cape. The resulting data will be interpreted to determine if early and recent
modern humans used different foraging patterns, and whether those patterns were
due to changes in such variables as climate, population pressure, or their
respective cognitive abilities. The results are expected to identify how
prehistoric peoples reacted to seasonal climatic and resource fluctuations in
their environment, from which a better understanding can be gained about the
manner in which early and modern peoples adapted to the many large-scale
climatic changes that occurred during the Pleistocene. The analytical technique
of studying growth increments in the tooth cem entum of prey animals has not
been used before in this region, and Mr. Lam also expects the results to show
its feasibility of using the technique for the interpretation of archaeological
data from southern Africa. Staff members at the South African Museum and the
Department of Archaeology at the University of Cape Town will collaborate with
Mr. Lam on this project. This study will expand the existing knowledge of
prehistoric human behavior and evolution in the South African Cape, and it will
create a reference collection of cementum increment analysis samples for the
interpretation of archaeological data from the region. Additionally, it will
also explore the feasibility of using the cementum increment analysis technique
for the study of prehistoric human behavior in southern Africa. The grant will
also provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong,
independent research career. Funding for this project is being jointly provided
by the Division of International Programs and the Division of Social, Behavioral
and Economic Research.