* 9731228
* U.S.-Ethiopia Dissertation Enhancement: Investigation of    Faunal Remains from Two Middle Stone Age Sites of Ethiopia: Garba III (Melka Konture) and Porc-epic
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2000
* Curtis Marean, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 07/31/2000
* USD 15,000.00

9731228 Marean &amp; Assefa This dissertation enhancement grants supports a
graduate student, Mr. Zelalem Assefa, working under the guidance of Dr. Curtis
Marean, Associate Professor of Anthropology at the State University of New York
at Stony Brook, to do field research in Ethiopia. East Africa is a region that
contains significant information about the evolutionary history of the origin of
modern humans. Biological and cultural evidence has shown that the Middle Stone
Age (MSA) or Middle Paleolithic was an important period in the formative phase
of modern behavior of early modern peoples. But examination of the subsistence
models used by early modern humans in these periods has provided contradictory
explanations about their resource exploitation behaviors. Mr. Assefa
hypothesizes that the early appearance of the MSA in Africa is related to
adaptive adjustments early modern humans made during the arid and cold phases of
the Late Middle and Upper Pleistocene, and that they developed their seasonal
exploitation of resources (vegetation and prey animals) into a subsistence
strategy during the late MSA in East Africa. The role of hunting may have been
one of the factors responsible for the observed technological shift in the MSA,
and if so Mr. Assefa also hypothesizes that it will predict major changes in the
taphonomic features of faunal remains between late Acheulean and early MSA
assemblages. The results of this project will determine if the trajectory for
behavioral evolution was the same in both Africa and Europe. This project will
test subsistence models that are developed from analyses of faunal specimens
from different parts of the Old World and Ethiopia with the MSA record, for the
purpose of identifying and analyzing any contradictions among the models. The
methodological approaches of GIS-based ecological analysis and taphonomic
investigation will be used to collect data from fauna and ecological specimens
from the Garba III and Porc-epic sites. Staff members at The National Museum of
Ethiopia will collaborate with Mr. Assefa on this project. These results will
provide important new information on the behavioral history of the early modern
humans in East Africa. The new set of data will also provide a valuable
reference resource for other archeological projects in East Africa.
Additionally, the grant will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong, independent research career. The Division of International
Programs and the Division of Social, Behavioral and Economic Research are
jointly providing funding for this project.