* 9731102
* The Co-evolution of Organizations and Careers
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,10/13/1999
* Heather Haveman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/13/1999
* USD 125,673.00

This is a study of the co-evolution of organizations and careers in the American
magazine industry before the Civil War. The modern era has been dominated by
formal organizations, which have considerable power to determine the lives of
individuals. But at the same time, these formal organizational comprise their
individual members; hence, organizational members can collectively shape
organizations. For decades, sociologists have pondered the question of how
formal organizations affect their employees and how, in turn, employees
influence organizations. This project will augment our knowledge of
organization-employee relations by using the empirical case of the magazine
industry to answer two basic questions: (1) How do individual employees
contribute to organizational resources that, in turn, improve organizational
activities, performance, and ultimately organizational survival chances? (2) How
do the changing structures of industries and their constituent organizations
alter the career paths of industry employees? Answering these questions will
fill gaps in both organizational theory and the literature on careers. First,
this project will develop and test a theory of how the resources accruing to
individuals from their human and social capital combine to affect the
capabilities and thus the fates of entire organizations. Second, it will expand
our knowledge of how organizational dynamics - organizational founding, growth,
change, and failure - create and destroy jobs wholesale and so radically alter
the opportunity structures facing individuals. To test relationships concerning
the co-evolution of organizations and employees' careers, this project will
collect and analyze data on the magazine-publishing industry and its employees
from its inception in 1741 to the Civil War. Data will be drawn from publicly-
available archives in the Library of Congress, the New York City Public Library,
and various university libraries, to create three longitudinal data bases, one
each for magazine-publ ishing companies, magazines, and magazine-industry
employees. A variety of econometric techniques - event-history analysis, event-
count analysis, and pooled time-series regression - will be used to analyze the
dynamics of magazine-publishing organizations and their employees. These
quantitative data and analyses will be supplemented with a systematic
qualitative analysis of the abundant historical data sources. In addition to
answering key questions about reciprocal and dynamic relations between
organizations and employees, this project will shed light on how industry-level
change affects the structure of opportunity. By focusing on the early magazine
industry in America, it will examine how economic and technological revolutions
that transformed the face of publishing reconfigured the pathways to upward
mobility for generations of Americans. From this study of the American past will
come insights about the relationship between organizations and individuals, and
between social capital and human capital, that will strengthen our understanding
of the policy choices we face today in the areas of organizations and
occupational careers.