* 9731030
* Environmental Policy Instrument Choice: A Comparison of     Canada and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Kenneth Richards, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 03/31/2000
* USD 18,250.00

Richards The study of policy instrument choice addresses the question of which
policy instruments most cost-effectively produce the desired policy outcome and
attempts to explain why certain policy instruments have been adopted in
particular cases. This conference focuses on gaining a greater understanding of
the policy instrument choice field through a comparison of environmental policy
instrument choice in Canada and the United States. The primary goal of the
conference is to facilitate discussion and research that explains the variation
in instrument choice as it applies to environmental and natural resource issues
in the two countries. A wide range of explanatory factors will be explored,
including differences in industrial structure, legal structure, nature of
environmental problems, division of power, institutional structure, political
milieu, public finance system, and public involvement. Session topics have been
arranged to first develop a framework for comparison of instrument choice in
Canada and the United States. Sessions will then examine various types of policy
instruments regarding the environment (e.g., regulatory instruments, taxes and
marketable allowances, government purchase, voluntary programs) in more depth.
Each session will have presenters from both the United States and Canada and
will consider applications to various environmental fields (e.g., air pollution,
water pollution, forestry resources, and fisheries.) Because of the many
economic, political and legal factors involved in policy choice, the conference
is designed to be multi-disciplinary in nature. Participants will come from a
wide range of academic areas including economics, political science,
anthropology, administrative science and law. In addition, practitioners from
both the Canadian and U.S. governments will be involved as presenters,
commentators and discussants.