* 9731733
* Surfactant-Assisted Growth of Giant Magnetoresistive        Magnetic Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Harsh Chopra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2003
* USD 418,158.00

9731733 Chopra This is a study of NiO-Co-Cu-based "giant" magnetoresistive
magnetic multilayers in spin valve configuration, deposited by dc-magnetron
sputtering. The goal is to employ surfactants to control elementary film
deposition steps at the atomic level in order to modify the nature of interfaces
and film morphology. This approach should result in basic understanding of the
structure sensitivity of the magneto- transport properties in these layered
systems. Deposition of a suitable number of layers of a surfactant on a given
layer of a multilayer should alter the balance between surface and interface
energies. The potential surfactant species (Ag, As, Sn, Sb, and Pb) are soft
metals having large atomic volumes, properties that favor their "floating" out
to the surface during over-layer growth and leaving behind intact layers with
smooth interfaces less prone to intermixing. Surfactant assisted evolution of
surface topography with respect to surfactant-free spin valves is studied at
different stages of film growth in-situ and ex- situ (using scanning tunneling
microscopy and atomic force microscopy). Surface segregation of surfactants is
monitored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Magnetic properties, domain
structures and wall transition in applied field are measured. %%% Artificially
modulated magnetic multilayers comprised of magnetic and non-magnetic films are
the subjects of intense research. These systems have potential device
applications as magneto-optical storage materials using multilayers with
perpendicular anisotropy and as next-generation read-heads for high-density
storage. ***