* 9731004
* US-Southern Africa Workshop: Scientific Foundations of      Programs for Community Based Management of Wildlife, Gwaai  River, Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/1999
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 04/30/1999
* USD 22,508.00

9731004 Getz &amp; Fortmann This award supports 22 participants (8 US and 14
African) in the US-Southern Africa Workshop on the Scientific Foundations of
Programs for Community Based Management of Wildlife, to be held at Gwaai River,
Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998. Additional participants include 2 from Europe, and
about 40 from the Southern Africa region, including South Africa. The co-
organizers are Drs. Wayne Getz and Louise Fortmann, Department of Environmental
Science, Policy, and Management at the University of California, Berkeley, and
Dr. David Cumming, Head of the World Wildlife Fund Program Office in Harare,
Zimbabwe. This multidisciplinary workshop will include natural and social
scientists, resource managers, and policy makers. Many parts of Southern Africa
are starting to use community based natural resource management (CBNRM) programs
to preserve rural savanna lands as a mean of augmenting national park areas.
Currently there is a great deal of variation among the sets of data collected,
interpreted, and disseminated by the CBNRM programs. As a result there are no
reliable regional assessments on these ecosystems, or on how they are being
affected by development and global change. During this workshop participants
will learn about CBNRM programs in Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe, after which
they will form working groups in the areas of: 1) environmental monitoring and
evaluation, 2) software and hardware programs, and 3) community management and
program evaluation. Each group will identify its database needs and
requirements, and then collectively they will establish a common set of
scientific protocols and software packages to be used by all CBNRM programs for
the collection, interpretation, and management of data, and for program
evaluation. The use of these common protocols and software packages will
increase the reliability of data collections and assessments, which will enable
the information to be used for a new, long-term regional data base on Southern
Africa's savanna ecos ystems which are outside of the national parks. The
establishment of such a database will be a very significant contribution to the
region's scientific infrastructure, and its availability will also enable
researchers worldwide to have access to new knowledge about the loss of
biodiversity in Southern Africa. The common protocols will also be used in a
SAVE GAME (Southern African Veld Ecosystems Geographic Assessment, Monitoring,
&amp; Evaluation) pilot program to provide areas of rural Southern Africa with
scientifically well designed CBNRM programs. This grant will support the
participation of two graduate students from the United States. The Division of
International Programs and the Division of Biological Infrastructure are jointly
supporting this workshop.