* 9731718
* Importance of Secondary Dispersal in Determining Patterns   of Spatial Abundance in Macro-Invertebrate Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Charles Peterson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2002
* USD 140,073.00

9731718 Peterson Soft-bottom benthic habitats represent one of the most
ubiquitous environments within the marine ecosystem; however, our knowledge of
the processes which determine species abundance and distribution pales in
comparison to other types of benthic systems. The majority of past research in
benthic systems has focused on the role of predation, disturbance, and
competition on adult benthic populations. Recent attention to the potential role
of larval supply and the entire recruitment process has greatly expanded our
knowledge of the processes which structure benthic communities. Nevertheless,
for soft-bottom communities, one large, critical gap exists in our knowledge,
the role of secondary movement or redispersal of organisms following larval
recruitment. Through a series of field and laboratory experiments designed to
address this topic, research will focus on two objectives: to quantify and
describe the secondary movement of selected marine benthic macro-invertebrates,
particularly juveniles, and to determine the role secondary movement has in
structuring soft-bottom communities and mediating interactions of other
processes. Research will focus on three common estuarine benthic invertebrates
which vary in their dispersal abilities and include two bivalves and one
polychate worm. The research will involve direct examination of these organisms
in situ and will include a characterization of the hydrodymanic regimes.
Research on the interaction of habitat structure, predators and density
dependence on secondary dispersion is planned. The results will add knowledge to
a poorly understood aspect of the factors which influence community structure
and function in soft-bottom benthic environments.