* 9731991
* Research Opportunities for Minorities Program (ROMP)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Chandrakant Panse, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2003
* USD 266,899.00

9731991 The Research Opportunities for Minorities Program is a highly rigorous
but exciting research-training program for undergraduates and post-
baccalaureates who belong to groups underrepresented in basic-science research.
The program provides participants up to 2 years of intensive research training
in molecular biology through the Biotechnology (BT) Programs at Massachusetts
Bay Community College (MBCC). Concomitant or prior admission to the BT program
at MBCC is a prerequisite for entry into the ROMP. The majority of research
training occurs in the BT laboratories at MBCC, the most advanced undergraduate
research facility in the nation. However, each ROMP student undertakes at least
one summer research externship at one of over 50 eminent research institutions
in the United States and abroad. Representative of these are the Marine
Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole; the Texas Medical Center, Galveston; The
University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and the Molecular Biology Institute of the
University of Quebec, Canada. For every student admitted, the ROMP begins with
an intensive 10- week molecular-biology research project conducted at MBCC in
the summer preceding their Fall entry into the BT program. The projects are
designed to be expandable and extend into the subsequent academic year. During
the academic year, all ROMP students are assigned 4 or 5 entering Freshman BT
students who must conduct tangential sub-projects under the direction of ROMP
students. This mentoring role is designed to foster leadership skills and
research-management skills in ROMP students. In the second summer of the ROMP,
participants can undertake a challenging research externship at one the many
foreign and domestic research institutions that collaborate with the ROMP.
Summer research projects are then extended into the second and final year of the
Program as described above. ROMP students are assisted in advancing to
baccalaureate or graduate-degree programs by MBCC, which h olds numerous
transfer and application- articulation agreements with colleges and universities
throughout the United States and abroad.