* 9731349
* A Study of Massive and other Phase Transformations in TiAl- Based Intermetallic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Vijay Vasudevan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2002
* USD 282,496.00

9731349 Vasudevan This research applies high resolution transmission electron
microscopy in a study of the massive transformation in TiAl- based intermetallic
alloys. Two important issues are addressed related to the mechanisms of massive
transformations in TiAl alloys: (1) the nature of the massive -parent interphase
interfacial structure, and (2) the role of defect structures. The study focuses
on alloys with aluminum contents between 46-47 at. %, which allows retention of
large areas of the massive-parent interfaces. Orientation relationships that
develop during nucleation and the early stages of growth of the massive phase
are studied in samples whose reaction kinetics has been determined. The
structures of the parent -massive phases and the types of interfaces that
between them are determined in samples undergoing different undercoolings,
reaction start temperatures, and growth rates. The state of coherency of the
interfaces is determined and from these studies atomistic models of the
structures of the massive-parent interphase interfaces are developed. The atomic
structures of defects (dislocations and stacking faults) are determined as well,
and their role in the growth of the massive product assessed. %%% New alloys
based on the TiAl compound are of great importance for application in high
temperature propulsion systems because of their unique combination of
properties. Mechanical properties of these materials are controlled by their
microstructures, which is the focus of this research. ***