* 9731118
* US-Nepal Cooperative Research: The Role of Water Relations  in Controlling the Leaf Life Cycle of Himalayan Trees
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Donald Zobel, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2002
* USD 53,331.00

9731118 Zobel Description: This award is for the US-Nepal Collaborative
Research: The Role of Water Relations in Controlling the Leaf Life Cycle of
Himalayan Trees. The investigators, Donald Zobel of Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR and Pramod K. Jha of Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal will
address fundamental questions in plant biology concerning Himalayan tree
species. The primary goals are-- 1) to determine the role of water relations in
governing leaf development and leaf senescence of trees in the central Himalaya,
and 2) examine possible mechanisms by which Himalayan trees generate sufficient
turgor to expand leaves during the dry season. Scope: This project will be a
major boost for water relations research in Nepal. In addition to training of
young Nepalese scientists and providing essential equipment to conduct botany
research at Tribhuvan University, this project will develop an important
regional link with botanists at Kumaun University, India who have collaborated
with the US PI on the same topic. While both Indian and Nepalese groups have
made substantial contributions to Himalayan ecology, there has been little
coordination of effort and expertise. For US science, this project will produce
a large volume of currently unavailable data on water relations, vegetation, and
ecosystem processes in Himalayan forests and will improve analysis and
prediction at the scale of the biosphere. ***