* 9731599
* Mechanisms of Arylhydrocarbon Receptor-Mediated Interactions with Estrogen Receptor in Hypothalamus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Sandra Petersen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 05/31/2001
* USD 290,310.00

ABSTRACT IBN 97-31599 PI = PETERSEN, Sandra L. The objective of this research
is to understand the role of the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the
regulation of estrogen actions in the hypothalamus, the part of the brain that
plays a central role in reproduction. The AhR is generally considered as the
receptor that binds dioxin and dioxin-like environmental contaminants. However,
this receptors has apparently been conserved throughout evolution and,
therefore, is likely to have ligands other than the dioxins that have been
produced only within the past 50 years. Although the AhR has been studied in
non-neural tissue, virtually no studies have been conducted in the brain. In
other estrogen-sensitive tissues, such as breast tissue, activation of the AhR
is anti-estrogenic. Dr. Petersen recently discovered that the genes for AhR and
estrogen receptor (ER) are co-localized in regions of the hypothalamus that
control ovulation. Other recent work has shown that a single dose of dioxin
(which activates the AhR) blocks the ability of estrogen to induce the
preovulatory surge of luetinizing hormone (LH) required for ovulation. Based on
this finding, Dr. Petersen hypothesized that activation of the AhR may interfere
with specific ER functions in hypothalamus. To test this hypothesis, it will be
determined whether: (1) activation of the AhR alters estrogen expression or
receptor protein expression, (2) activation of the AhR induces the gene
expression of specific hydroxylases that metabolize estrogen, thereby decreasing
hormone availability and creating neurotoxic substances, and (3) known estrogen
actions in the hypothalamus, such as progesterone receptor induction and changes
in proopiomelanocortin, tyrosine hydroxylase and NPA gene expression, are
blocked by activation of the AhR. Taken together, these studies will provide
important new insights into the mechanisms by which ligands for the AhR might
affect ER-mediated events required for ovulation. In addition, the proposed
experiments will provide important clues to help identify the endogenous
ligand(s) for the receptor.