* 9731369
* Sixth International Conference on Fundamentals of           Adsorption, Presq'ile de Giens, France, May 24-28, 1998
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1998,01/31/1999
* Orhan Talu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 15,000.00

~ - 1-I' l Abstract Proposal No: 9731369 Proposal Type: Request for Conference
Support Principal Investigator: Orhan Talu Affiliation: Cleveland State
University This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification
Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. Orhan
Talu at Cleveland State University. This is a grant application for conference
support. The conference is the Sixth International Conference on Fundamentals of
Adsorption which will be held in Presq'ile de Glens, France, May 24-28, 1998.
This is a topical area fully relevant to the Interfacial, Transport and
Separation Processes Program. The objective of the conference is to provide a
forum for the exchange of research results and ideas related to adsorption
processes. Topics that will be emphasized include adsorption for bulk gas
separations, gas storage, cooling, air and water pollution control and
environmental remediation. A special emphasis in this conference is the design
of adsorption materials which include new and novel materials such as carbon
nanotubes. The conference is a good blend of engineering science, materials
chemistry and process engineering. There is also a good blend of scientists from
industry, academia and government laboratories. Highly reputed international
researchers are also part of the presentation and discussion schedule. The
conference will benefit US scientists and engineers through interaction with
their international colleagues. Participation by young faculty will be
especially encouraged. The conference proceedings will be published after peer
review. It is expected that NSF partial sponsorship of the conference will allow
US researchers to fully benefit from the technical content of the program and
will help advance the state of the art in adsorption science and technology. J