* 9731568
* Contaminant Particle Formation in Radio Frequency Silane    Plasmas
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Steven Girshick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Cyndi Nguyen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 169,148.00

9731568&lt;br/&gt;Kortshagen&lt;br/&gt;The formation of ultrafine particles in
processing plasmas has been a concern for some years. Contaminant particles can
cause considerable product yield loss in microelectronics fabrication or they
can severely impair the quality of thin films used for the production of
photovoltaic cells or the coating of optical devices.&lt;br/&gt;While
considerable progress has been made in the understanding of the transport and
charging of micrometer-sized particles in plasmas, little is known about the
nucleation of particles and the behavior of nanometer-sized particles. The
nucleation and growth of small particles is observed in particular in plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition systems. The particle formation in silane
plasmas, which are of great importance for the deposition of amorphous silicon,
has been extensively studied, however, the true nature of the particle formation
mechanism has not been determined. Different and even contradicting scenarios
for particle formation in silane plasmas have been proposed by various
researchers. For instance, the important precursor for the particle nucleation
in silane plasmas is still controversially discussed. The influence of the
plasma conditions on the nucleation process are not understood. Also,
experimental results on the particle nucleation phase are scarce, due to the
serious difficulties in in-situ detection of nanometer-sized
particles.&lt;br/&gt;Since the understanding of particle nucleation is a very
complex problem, a combined experimental and theoretical approach will be
pursued in the proposed project. The proposed research has three main
objectives: 1. A nucleation model for particles in silane plasmas will be
developed which takes into account the chemical aspects involved. 2. The
nucleation model will be coupled to a self-consistent plasma model for a silane
plasma chemical vapor deposition system in order to enable predictions about the
occurrence of particle nucleation. 3. The model to be developed will be verified
by a number of experimental studies on a capacitively coupled RF discharge in
diluted silane.&lt;br/&gt;The nucleation model to be developed will consider the
formation of hydrogenated silicon clusters by both anionic and neutral
mechanisms. It will be coupled to an aerosol model capable of predicting
particle growth, coagulation and transport. This model will be combined with a
kinetic discharge model for a capacitive RF discharge. The kinetic discharge
model, which will be based on already existing codes, will be used to calculate
the spatial profile of the important species involved in the nucleation process.
Since the nucleation rate depends sensitively on the precursor concentrations it
is expected that predictions about nucleation thresholds and the spatial
location of nucleation regions can be obtained. Unlike in some other approaches,
the effects of a non- Maxwellian electron distribution function, which are
crucial for an accurate determination of various chemical reaction rates, will
be taken into account by calculating the actual distribution function by
solution of the Boltzmann equation.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental studies will
focus on the detection of small particles in order to verify the nucleation
model and on the measurement of the electron distribution function using
Langmuir probes in order to test the kinetic discharge model. For the particle
detection a high power YAG laser will be used for evaporative particle explosion
and electron detachment. Furthermore, a new diagnostics will be tested which is
based on the propagation of acoustic waves coupled to the particle population in
the plasma. This diagnostic should be able to reveal in-situ information about
the particle size and mass even for subnanometer particles, which are extremely
difficult to detect with laser methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;