* 9731014
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Investigation of the Novel  Electronic, Stuctural and Dynamical Properties of Cubane and Various Cubane Derivatives
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Robert Briber, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2002
* USD 28,332.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Drs. Taner
Yildirim, and Robert Briber, Department of Materials and Nuclear Engineering at
the University of Maryland, and Dr. Selim Ciraci, Physics Department at Bilkent
University in Ankara, Turkey. They plan to study the solid state physical
properties of cubane materials. Cubane (C8H8), an atomic scale cube, is an
immensely strained molecule whose 90 degree bond angle challenges classical
notions of the sp3 bonding of carbons. Its high heat of formation and density
make it an exciting candidate for a new generation of fuels and explosives. Many
solid state properties of cubane and its derivatives are poorly understood. The
scientists propose to investigate the (a) stability, energetics, and dynamics,
(b) effect of pressure on structure and phase transition, (c) electronic
structure, and (d) interaction of cubane and its derivatives with various
metals, with other molecules, surfaces, and solids (e.g. graphite and C60). The
study will involve first principle calculations and molecular dynamics
simulations by groups from the Universities of Maryland and Bilkent, and x-ray
and neutron scattering measurements performed by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) scientists. Scope: The U.S. PI is a recent Ph.D.
who has established a solid reputation in this research area. He is
collaborating with well-established colleagues at NIST and at the University of
Maryland, and with a well-respected physicist at Bilkent University. The study
will contribute substantially to our understanding of the design and control in
strained-molecule engineering, and will benefit continuing attempts to create
cubane-based materials with novel properties. The scientific methods used by the
US and Turkish sides are complementary in terms of material synthesis,
measurement, and theoretical expertise. The scientific collaboration should be
mutually beneficial.