* 9731431
* Strategic and Normative Analysis of Resource Allocation     Problems
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* William Thomson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 05/31/2002
* USD 184,184.00

Allocating kidneys, apportionment in Congress, pricing the internet, and
matching of medical interns to hospitals for residency programs are all examples
of situations that we face in our daily life, and that modern economic theory
can help us solve in a much more satisfactory way than would have been possible
just a few years ago. This project is concerned with finding ``good` solutions
to such problems. The author addresses two kinds of issues: normative issues of
economic justice (Who should pay, and how much? What is fair?); and strategic
issues of incentives (How can we provide self- interested economic agents the
incentive to behave in accordance with the good of society?). In this research
the point of departure then is to identify desirable properties of decision
procedures. For each specific class of problems, the author investigates how
restrictive the properties are. Do the rules that are used in practice satisfy
these properties? If not, are there rules that do satisfy these properties? Can
a complete description of all the rules satisfying the properties be obtained?
Among them, are some better than others? This methodology is applied to several
classes of problems: allocating scarce resources; scheduling and sequencing
problems; problems of timing; and problems of allocation over time. Exploiting
the considerable methodological advances of the last few years, the goal of this
project is to identify methods of reaching decisions that all economic agents
find fair and that provide them with the right incentives to participate.