* 9731181
* RPG:  The Influence of Clonal Reproduction on Population Sex Ratios in Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2000
* David McLetchie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/2000
* USD 23,000.00

9726931 McLetchie Many plants occur in populations where males outnumber females
or vice versa. In some instances where females outnumber males, reduced sexual
reproduction has been observed and attributed to this low male frequency. This
planning grant is designed to obtain baseline ecological information that will
support a full proposal to study 1) the causes of sex-specific clonal (asexual)
reproduction and 2) the effects of this reproduction on the number of males and
females in populations. Diplasiolejeunea pellucida, a small tropical plant that
grows on living leaves of other plant species will be the focal test species.
This species grows on a transient substrate; thus individuals must colonize,
grow and sexually or asexually reproduce quickly to colonize new substrate. The
activities planned in this study includes: a) collecting demographic data on
male and female plants (by monitoring individual plants), b) determining the
cause of reduced sexual reproduction (by manipulating male frequency), c)
establishing protocols for culturing plants in natural and laboratory
conditions, and d) detecting sex-specific DNA markers and clonal structure among
plants in the population. This project has broad scientific importance in three
main areas of study 1) the contribution of asexual reproduction in reducing
population extinction, 2) the causes and consequences of the differences between
male and female plants and 3) the relationships of asexual reproduction to other
characteristics of the organism (sexual reproduction, growth and survival).
Asexual reproduction has been largely ignored in evolutionary studies of plants
despite the fact that clonal growth greatly influences survival. Some clonal
plants show no sign of aging, making asexual reproduction a distinctive and
important ecological and evolutionary trait. Information obtained on
Diplasiolejeunea pellucida can be invaluable in modeling sex ratio patterns and
consequence s in other plant species that are more difficult to study. Finally,
many studies focus on allocation of resources (energy and nutrients) for sexual
reproduction, growth and survival. Asexual reproduction is rarely incorporated
into these studies yet most organisms (animals, plants, fungi and others) are
able to reproduce asexually. This study will contribute to our knowledge of how
resource allocation to asexual reproduction affects and is affected by sexual
reproduction, growth and survival .