* 9731769
* Aqueous Dispersion of Ferroelectric Ceramic Powders
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Burtrand Lee, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 291,174.00

9731769 Lee The objective of this GOALI project is to achieve a better
understanding of the behavior of submicron ferroelectric ceramic powders in
aqueous liquid media. Although these powders are processed in nonaqueous media
satisfactorily, the need for environmentally safer media for manufacturing
ferroelectric components is increasing. Two of most widely used ferroelectric
ceramic powders, barium titanate (BT) and lead zirconate titanate (PZT), will be
used as "model" systems. Fine powders of BT and PZT will be characterized and
dispersed in aqueous media, and the particles will be stabilized by adsorbed
organic molecules. The stabilizer molecules will be selected for their
solubility in water, strong anchoring groups, and sterically stabilizing chains
for dispersion and binding of the ceramic particles. Strong and uniform
adsorption of the organic stabilizer acting also as passivating agents to
prevent the dissolution of metal ions from the powders will be investigated. The
interaction between liquid-particle, particle-dispersant, and liquid-dispersant
will be studied based on the physicochemical properties of the participants. The
effect of the dispersant on stabilization of the submicron ferroelectric ceramic
particles will be assessed by analyzing the rheology, zeta potential/isoelectric
points, sedimentation behavior, particle characteristics, conformation of the
adsorbates, green body properties, and metal ion dissolution of BT and PZT. %%%
The ultimate goal of this study is to obtain high density green bodies with
uniform microstructure of high reproducibility and reliability. Formed under
these conditions, the green ceramics will lead to lower organic content with
high green density which will shorten processing times and lower sintering
temperatures. The results will provide the needed assistance to the
manufacturing problem the industry is facing now by better controlling the
reproducibility of ferroelectric powder slips. This control wil l bring lower
manufacturing cost with higher product quality and more environmentally
"friendly" systems. This project will be carried out under interdisciplinary
cooperation among the Ceramic &amp; Materials Engineering Department at Clemson
University, Kemet Electronics Corporation, and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. Kemet Electronics Corporation, the industrial partner,
will provide their research, analytical, and production capabilities available
to Professor Lee, as well and providing a summer internship for a graduate
student. In addition, a graduate student will spend a summer working at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, using facilities that are not
available at Clemson or at Kemet. The scientific results obtained from this
study will be transferred to the industrial partner. Because of the strong
linkage with industry, the educational aspects of the project are enhanced. The
summer internship at Kemet will expose the graduate student to industrial-type
research. This GOALI project is co-funded by the Ceramics Program of Division of
Materials Research, the Particulate and Multiphase Processes Program of Division
of Chemical and Transport Systems, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and the GOALI Office of the
Engineering Directorate. ***