* 9731898
* The DESERT Project:  District-wide Emphasis on Science      Education Reform in Tucson
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2005
* Richard Greenberg, Tucson Unified School District
* Continuing grant
* David A. Hanych
* 04/30/2005
* USD 5,445,000.00

97-31898 Paulin The DESERT Project is a Local Systemic Change (LSC) project
designed to change the way that science is taught throughout the Tucson Unified
School District (TUSD) so that all students become scientifically literate. The
project is designed to build self-sustaining learning communities in
collaboration with the University of Arizona and the business community in 94
elementary and middle schools. Clear science standards together with both
district wide and site centered professional development will be provided for
1,536 elementaryteachers, and 160 middle school teachers, and 94 principals (n =
1,790 teachers). Schools as learning communities together with community links
to the community will be accomplished through leadership and district wide site
centered strands. All strands are supported by Internet technology. The district
wide strands provide professional development to help teachers meet the needs of
diverse learners. This will be accomplished through a series of foundation
courses (four) designed to provide teachers experience with inquiry and
assessment strategies. These will be supplemented with summer courses will
develop a pedagogical base necessary for effective science instruction to
diverse learners. The site centered strand is designed to strengthen teachers in
their instructional mode through study groups and action research that will
empower them to assume responsibilities for their own professional development
on a continuing basis. Computer workstations will be provided in each teacher's
classroom allowing access to the DESERT website containing information and
learning tools to support and augment teaching. Family science activities at
each school with parents and pupils is designed to link the community and School
closer together. Science forums in partnership with university scientists will
be conducted. Businesses will inform and encourage their members to support
systemic change throughout the TUSD schools.