* 9731680
* ERC:  Center for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1998,01/31/2009
* Douglas Hirt, Clemson University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2009
* USD 28,807,688.00

9731680 EDIE This award established an Engineering Research Center (ERC) for
Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films at Clemson University with Massachusetts
Institute of Technology as a partner institution. The vision of the ERC is to
provide an integrated environment for the system-oriented study of next
generation fibers and films. The research program emphasizes the use of
computation/visualization tools to overcome the barriers of experimental
development, structure/property relationships, and control of structures. The
research is organized under three thrust areas: Computer-based Product and
Process Development, New Fiber and Film Products, and Advanced Fiber and Film
Processes. The investigations will target liquid-crystalline systems, metallo-
organic systems, and intractable polymer systems. The new processes will include
supercritical solution processing, in-situ processing, and self-assembly
processing. The ERC will produce software for new film and fiber formulation and
processing design. The ERC's interdisciplinary, systems oriented education
program will provide the students with a holistic education in fiber and film
science and technology. The graduate education will include industrial residency
for in-plant research experience. The first year industrial partnership will
include seventeen companies. This award is the outcome of the Engineering
Research Centers Competition under ERC Program Announcement, NSF 97-5. The funds
for the first five years is recommended with a potential duration of ten years
under a cooperative agreement.