* 9731612
* Instrumentation for the Macromolecular Biophysics Facility  at the UCSD
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2000
* Susan Taylor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/2000
* USD 400,000.00

Essential to our understanding of a large number of biological processes is the
characterization of molecular structure and molecular interactions. Faculty at
the University of Califomia San Diego proposes to establish a Macromolecular
Biophysics Facility (MBF) to advance these types of studies. The function of the
MBF is to provide the necessary instrumentation for biomolecular and biophysical
studies and to facilitate interactions between investigators at UCSD with
interests in biophysical and biomolecular research. The primary goal of the MBF
is to create a biophysical infrastructure that will make essential
instrumentation readily available and at the same time foster interactions
between researchers. Instruments to be provided by this project include a
circular dichroism spectrometer to analyze secondary structure of proteins and
conformational changes due to ligand binding, an analytical ultracentrifuge for
the characterization of the physical properties of macromolecules, and a surface
plasmon resonance instrument for the study of protein-protein, protein-DNA, and
ligand receptor interactions. These instruments will be combined with peptide
synthesis and N-terminal sequencing instrumentation currently located in
individual laboratories that will be contributed to the facility. The MBF will
be used by a diverse set of faculty for biophysical analysis of macromolecules
including analysis of protein-protein, protein-lipid, and protein-nucleic acid
interactions important in such diverse biological processes as cell-cell
interactions, signal transduction and transcription. To be effective, a facility
such as this must be properly administered and maintained. The aim of the
facility is not simply to purchase state-of-the-art instrumentation, but to
establish a well-coordinated facility where staff will be available for training
students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty. The MBF is part of a concerted
effort to maximize the research environment at UCSD an d to foster
interdisciplinary research efforts. The MBF will join three other existing
centers at UCSD (the NIR Research Resource for Data Collection, the National
Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, and the National Biological
Computing Resource) under the umbrella of the newly formed Center for Research
in Biological Structure and will complement the existing centers by providing
crucial common analysis instruments for macromolecular biophysics.