* 9731511
* Physical Phenomena in Superconducting Arrays, High-Tc       Superconductors, and Composite Media
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2001
* David Stroud, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2001
* USD 261,000.00

9731511 Stroud Theoretical studies will be conducted in three areas of research.
The first involves the study of the properties of superconducting arrays. The
circumstances under which these arrays can be made to oscillate coherently will
be studied by both numerical and analytical techniques. Additional calculations
are planned to treat vortex motion, quantum effects, flux noise, a.c. magnetic
susceptibility, classical magnetoresistance, and long-range interactions in such
arrays, using a variety of theoretical techniques. The second area is a
theoretical investigation of flux lattice melting and related phenomena,
primarily in high temperature superconductors. A previously developed lowest-
Landau level representation will be extended to treat flux lattice melting in
the presence of disorder, and to study the behavior of the c-axis Josephson
plasmon in the flux liquid state, both with and without disorder. Further
calculations of flux lattice melting are planned in a uniformly frustrated XY
model and a layered London model, both with and without pinning. As a
speculative project, the possibility of extending these approaches to layered
magnetic materials will be investigated. Finally, several aspects of the physics
of classically inhomogeneous materials will be studied. The emphasis will be on
the nonlinear optical response of such materials, and on the linear a.c.
response of polycrystals of anisotropic materials (such as quasi-one-dimensional
conducting polymers). It is also planned to examine the possibility of treating
a disordered two-dimensional superconductor as a model system for chaotic
propagation of classical electromagnetic waves. %%% Theoretical research will be
conducted in three areas of research using numerical and analytical techniques.
These three areas are the study of superconducting arrays; flux lattice melting;
and classical inhomogeneous materials. The first two areas are ones which have
received increased attention due t o their applicability to the high temperature
superconductors. The third area is one of great interest in designing composite
materials with unique (optical) properties. ***