* 9731336
* Corporate Governance Around the World
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Andrei Shleifer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2001
* USD 364,725.00

This project examines the institutions of corporate governance around the world,
with a particular focus on the role of legal institutions in addressing agency
problems between corporate insiders and outside investors, and on corporate
decisions made in different countries operating under different legal
institutions. The approach in all the specific projects is to compare outcomes
across countries that have different legal institutions. Earlier work has shown
that legal institutions governing investor protection, including both the nature
of the laws and the quality of their enforcement, differ significantly across
countries and that these differences matter enormously for how firms are owned
and financed. Three projects are undertaken that continue this line of analysis,
but deal with new topics. The first project deals with dividend policies around
the world. Recent research has argued that dividend policies help to address
agency problems because the cash that is disgorged by firms to investors cannot
be wasted or diverted by corporate insiders. There are two broad versions of the
agency theory of dividends: one, dividends are an outcome of investors using
their powers to force firms to disgorge cash; another, firms choose to pay
dividends to establish a reputation for good treatment of investors, so that
they can raise more equity funds in the future. These two theories have
different predictions for dividend policies of firms operating under different
legal regimes. The predictions of these theories on a cross section of about
4,000 firms from 33 countries. The second project focuses on ownership patterns
of large corporations in 25 to30 wealthy economies. While there is a general
recognition that the Berle Means widely held corporation is a peculiarity of
wealthy Anglo Saxon economies, there is a conspicuous gap both in the theory of
ownership of firms operating in poor legal environments, and in the knowledge of
facts in this area. A database of about 30 large firms per country is being
constructed, which contains detailed information on the ownership structure of
each firm. In most countries, firms are owned by other firms, holding companies,
and financial institutions, which in turn are owned by more firms and
institutions, etc. An attempt is made to `go up the pyramids` and to identify
the ultimate owners of each firm. The data will allow for the development of
basic facts about ownership patterns of firms in different countries. The third
project focuses on government ownership of commercial banks around the world,
which appears to be a pervasive phenomenon. Government finance is one of the
three ways of financing economic growth, in addition to capital markets and
private banks. The effects of government ownership of banks on economic growth
is examined, and compared to the effects of private financing. To this end, a
database is being constructed of both complete and partial government ownership
of the largest commercial banks in over 90 countries. These data are used to
examine the growth question, and to also address the more microeconomic question
of how government ownership of banks influences the allocation of credit in
different countries between private and state firms, firms of different sizes,
and firms in different sectors of the economy.