* 9731979
* Economic Integration, Competition and Welfare: A Study of   the Automobile Industry in Europe
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Pinelopi Goldberg, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2001
* USD 156,271.00

The effects of economic integration on competition and welfare have been of
interest to economists for some time. For anyone interested in these issues, the
European automobile industry during the 1980s and 1990s provides a unique study
experiment. The industry has been characterized by significant internal and
external trade barriers, many of which were eliminated in 1992. Issues of market
power and labor rents seem a priori important, given the oligopolistic structure
of the sector and the presence of unions. In addition, car prices in European
countries are characterized by large and persistent differences across
countries, that are often viewed as the result of market segmentation and price
discriminating practices. Empirically, the price dispersion in the European
market coincides with large exchange rate movements and substantial, evolving
cross country differences in value added taxes, botch of which are bound to be
affected by the process of economic integration. The purpose of this project is
to shed light on these issues and estimate the effects of various aspects of
economic integration, using detailed data on prices, characteristics, market
shares and production location of all available car models in seven European
countries over the period 1980 1996. Contrary to previous studies that employed
a calibration approach, this study is based on econometric estimates of the
relevant parameters. This research proceeds in three steps. The first is to
carry out a descriptive analysis to document the basic patterns in the price
data and relate them to factors such as exchange and tax rates, demographic
characteristics, and trade restrictions, using a reduced form approach. A
question of particular interest is whether prices across European countries
appear to converge over time, as European integration progresses and the year
for the European Monetary Union approaches. The second step is to estimate a
structural model of oligopoly with product differentiation, to obtain the demand
and cost parameters required in policy simulations and welfare calculations. The
model incorporates exchange rate fluctuations, tax differences, and multicountry
production. Apart from forming the basis for the simulations, the structural
framework offers the advantage of providing estimates of the unobserved marginal
costs and markups in the industry. These estimates are required in order to
address the effects of economic integration on competition. The third step in
the analysis is to use the estimated structural model parameters in simulations
to investigate the effects of various aspects of economic integration on welfare
in European countries. The four main aspects of integration are: (a) removal of
internal tariff barriers, (b) tax harmonization, (c) transition to a common
currency, and (d) elimination of market segmentation and price discrimination.