* 9731509
* GOALI: The Dynamics of Phase Inversion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Anthony McHugh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2002
* USD 225,000.00

CTS-9731509 Anthony McHugh U. of Illinois Studies are proposed of phase
inversion, the process by which a cast polymer solution is converted into a
porous, polymer gel by either thermal or nonsolvent quenching. Pore size and
pore size distribution in the solidified polymer render properties favorable for
membrane applications. Such membranes are ubiquitous in the separations and
biomedical industries, having an annual commercial basis in excess of $1.6
billion. Hence understanding and controlling the conditions for their optimal
fabrication has technological and scientific importance. Experimental and
modeling analyses will be directed towards fundamental understanding of the
dynamics by which membrane structures are formed and locked-in during quenching.
Experiments will utilize a combination of in-situ measurements techniques based
on dark-ground microscopy and small angle light scattering, coupled with video
imaging. These provide unique quantitative data on the diffusion and liquid-
liquid phase separation kinetics associated with phase inversion, as well as the
freezing in of gel structure by glass transition or crystallization.
Microstructural analysis of the formed morphologies will be carried out using
electron microscopy. Quenching experiments will involve a number of
polymer/solvent/nonsolvent systems, including crystallizable and amorphous
polymers. Data will be analyzed in terms of mathematical models based o spinodal
decomposition coupled with external mass transfer. The goal of modeling will be
to quantify the mechanisms by which finger-like or spongy porous structures form
during liquid-liquid phase separation and are then frozen in. In-situ techniques
will also be applied to study phase inversion phenomena related to the in-vivo
formation of controlled release drug delivery membranes, an area of growing
importance in the biomedical and pharmaceutical industries. Membrane formation
dynamics will be monitored in the biodegradable copolymer, poly (lactic-co-
glycol ic acid) PLGA, dissolved in various nontoxic solvents, and quenched in
water. The simultanoeus release characteristics of a model protein, lysozyme,
from the as-formed membranes will also be determined. The objective will be to
quantify relations among solvent water solubility, system glass-forming
characteristics, and the formation of membrane structure favorable for
simultaneous, in-situ encapsulation and controlled release of protein. Results
of these studies will have direct application in the field of controlled drug
delivery. ***