* 9731594
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Recovery of Borax from    Saturated Salt Solutions
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1998,02/29/2000
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2000
* USD 28,950.00

Description: This award is for the support of cooperative research by Dr. Jan
Miller, Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah, Salt
lake City, and Drs. Guven Onal and Mehmet Sabri Celik, of the Mining Faculty,
Istanbul Technical University in Turkey. The research aims at improving the
understanding of the floating chemistry of boron minerals, to make more
efficient use of boron resources, and to minimize the environmental impact of
the process operations. Specifically, the investigators plan to use Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM) as a powerful tool for examination of the interaction forces in
boron flotation. They will measure the interaction forces in borate ore in water
under different conditions of concentration, when mixing with clays, and under
different pH levels. They plan to use Fourier Transform infrared (FTIR)
spectrometers to examine the adsorption of anionic and cationic collectors in
various ore and ore-mixes. Also planned is the use of Raman Spectroscopy to
detect and describe flotation conditions and results. Scope: This award allows
cooperation of two research teams with complementary capabilities, to do
important scientific work that has applications in industry, in the US and in
Turkey. The teams will include graduate students from the US and from Turkey.
The studies will contribute to the development of a flotation separation
strategy for more effective recovery of boron minerals from saturated solutions.
The US is the largest producer of boron compounds, and Turkey has the largest
boron reserves in the world. The project fits well within the objectives of the
Division of International Programs. This award includes funding from the
Division of International Programs, and from the Division of Chemical and
Transport Systems.