* 9731243
* Dissertation Research: Animal Exploitation at Aksum
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/1999
* Fiona Marshall, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 6,528.00

Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, Mr. Chester Cain will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze faunal remains recovered through
archaeological excavation from the site of Aksum, the ancient capital of
Ethiopia. The process which led to the rise of civilization took place
independently in many parts of both Old and New World. Archaeologists work in a
comparative context and wish to reconstruct these individual cases in order to
compare them and search for underlying processes of cultural development. While
some regions of the world such as China, the Near East and Middle America have
been the subject of extensive study, others are much less well known. Ethiopia
falls within this latter category. Available data indicate that the Ethiopian
highlands served as a center for the domestication of such plant species as
sorghum and millet (as well as other less well known species) and that the
donkey may also have been domesticated in the area. Prehistoric and early
historic peoples built cities with impressive stone carved monuments and
buildings. During much of the first millennium Aksum served as capital of a
widespread empire. Only in the last several years has work at the site been
possible and Mr. Cain has participated in the field research. Excavations have
yielded large numbers of animal bones, both wild and domestic and these have
been recovered in several different social contexts. With National Science
Foundation support Mr. Cain will analyze these materials. The study has two
goals. First it will provide a list of species consumed and their relative
frequencies. On this basis it will be possible to reconstruct diet. Secondly,
distribution of species and body part in different portions of the site will be
determined. This provides insight into the economic context of consumption and
gives some indication of the methods of social control which underlie it. In
some instances butchering and distribution of meat is centrally controlled.
Animals are butchered in one place the meat distributed to individual household
units and this implies a high degree of hierarchical organization. In others
cases production essentially takes place on a household level. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed new light on how empires are
organized and function. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
and assist in training a promising young scientist.