* 9731097
* Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Harvey Segur, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/2003
* USD 119,696.00

Proposal # DMS-9731097 PI: Harvey Segur Title: Nonlinear Wave Motion The
Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation is a nonlinear partial differential equation in
two spatial dimensions plus time. It is one of very few nonlinear equations
that: (i) is completely integrable and admits "soliton" solutions; (ii) involves
two spatial dimensions plus time; and (iii) arises naturally in physics.
Specifically, the equation describes approximately the motion of ocean waves in
shallow water. (Ocean waves require two spatial dimensions because they occur on
the water's two-dimensional surface.) For this application, the most interesting
solutions are either exactly or approximately periodic, just as typical ocean
waves are approximately periodic. Based on recent discoveries of the
mathematical structure of this equation, we can now solve this problem as an
initial-value problem for initial data that are either exactly or approximately
periodic in space. The work to be carried out in this study will exploit this
structure to build an accurate model of waves in shallow water. The waves in the
model will be as complicated as waves in the ocean usually are: steady or
unsteady, with either exact or approximate periodicity in time or in space or
both, with arbitrarily large amplitudes, and with fully two-dimensional spatial
patterns. No other functioning model of water waves includes all of these
features simultaneously, so this model should vastly improve our ability to
predict waves in shallow water. Nonlinear phenomena occur when a perturbation to
a system triggers a response that is not proportional to the perturbation. Many
of the dramatic events in nature are nonlinear, including the "big bang" in
cosmology, sonic booms in aerodynamics, hurricanes and breaking ocean waves in
geophysics. The mathematical models used to describe these phenomena are
intrinsically nonlinear, and typically we cannot solve them in any general
sense. The set of models that admit "solitons" and are "completely integrable"
are exceptions to this rule: usually these models can be solved in complete
detail, and they have provided great insight into the nature of nonlinear wave
phenomena. The work to be carried out in this study will exploit recently a
discovered mathematical structure of one of these completely integrable models
to build an accurate and realistic model of ocean waves in shallow water.
Practical implications of more accurate predictions of shallow water waves
include better control of beach erosion, fewer problems with shoreline pollution
from dispersal of man-made waste, and better design of offshore structures like
oil platforms.