* 9731531
* Apex Predators in the Pelagic Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2004
* James Kitchell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 542,300.00

Exploitation of apex predators in pelagic food webs should result in a set of
ecological changes at several scales. We will determine the dynamics of
compensatory responses by apex predators (large tunas, billfishes and sharks)
and some of their primary prey (squids, small tunas and juvenile mahimahi) in
the pelagic food webs of the Central North Pacific (CNP). We will test for
fishery-induced changes in growth rates, predator-prey interactions (diets),
life history characteristics such as size or age at maturity, and species
composition of the fish community. Analyses of food web dynamics will be used to
evaluate the ecological consequences of changes in exploitation. We will use
retrospective analyses of long-term data sets provided by collaboration with the
Honolulu Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service. Responses to `pulse`
manipulations will derive from analyses of recent evidence for major, rapid
changes in exploitation effects, prey availability, and environmental effects
(oceanic regime shifts). Responses to `press` manipulations of apex predator
populations will derive from the 35-50 year records of basic biological data,
life history studies and catch data maintained by NMFS. Contemporary data on
growth rates, diets, life history characteristics, and species composition will
be compared with those collected since 1948. This effort will employ three
classes of analytical tools. Time-series methods and Bayesian models will be
used to discern signal from noise and to identify the interactions of causative
variables. Bioenergetics models will provide quantitative estimates of the
changes in food web linkages for individual predators, their prey and the
cumulative change for all members of the apex trophic guild. A new simulation
model (Ecosim II) creates the food web context of an entire ecosystem and will
be used to explore responses to changing mortality rates, different life history
strategies and the role of a habitat refuge created around the Northwest
Hawaiian Islands. The recent rise of conservationist concern for large predatory
fishes is based on their unknown role in sustaining the ecological integrity of
pelagic ecosystems. It is imperative that we better understand the effects of
these migratory predators and their interactions with habitats encompassed by
current and future refuges for pelagic fishes. That understanding must be set in
the context of environmental changes that dampen or amplify food web effects.