* 9731001
* Marine Benthic Habitats and Their Living Resources: A       Conference on Monitoring, Management and Application to     Pacific Island Nations
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Gregor Cailliet, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 11/30/1999
* USD 56,254.00

9731001 Cailliet Declining fisheries and adverse impacts to benthic habitats
and biodiversity are a worldwide concern as coastal resources around the world
increasingly are being modified by combined natural and human disturbances.
Scientists from many Pacific nations and interested organizations have organized
a conference to discuss state-of-the-art research using geophysical and
biological sampling tools to describe benthic habitats as they relate to marine
biodiversity and fisheries issues in the Pacific to take place from November
10-16 in Noumea, New Caledonia. A group of fifteen American researchers,
including ten senior investigators and five graduate students will be able to
attend the conference as a result of the present award. Attendance is expected
to include many representatives from small Pacific island nations and
territories such as the Cook Islands, Fiji, Guam, Kiribati, the Marshall
Islands, and Western Samoa, to name a few, as well as from the larger Pacific
Nations including Australia, New Zealand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the United
States. France is also sending a sizable contingent, and French institutions are
centrally involved in the planning, including the Institut Francais de Recherche
pour l'Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER) and the Institut Francais de Recherche
Scientifique pour le Developpment en Cooperation (OSTROM). Drs. Jean-Marie
Auzende and Rene Grandperrin of IFREMER and OSTROM respectively are helping to
plan the meeting. This conference is expected to create greater opportunities
for American scientists to pursue research and education in marine benthic
habitats and biodiversity and to provide Pacific island scientists and officials
with scientific information useful in managing their marine habitats.