* 9731502
* Phase Inverted Structures in Polymer Blends:  New Chemistry and Processing Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2001
* Steven Hudson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2001
* USD 173,144.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9731502 S. Hudson/Case Western Rubber modification to improve the
impact behavior of polymeric materials is ubiquitous, yet high-impact
polystyrene (HIPS) is unique in it s efficient use of rubber modifier. Such
performance derives from the unique phase-invented morphology of the HIPS
modifier particles, whose effective volume is several times the actual volume of
rubbery material. Recent experiments in our laboratory demonstrate that this
desirable morphology can be achieved also by blending, if the minor (rubbery)
component strongly solubilizes an interfacially active block copolymer. Reactive
melt processing of polymers is rapidly becoming an important industrial process,
because of its efficient preparation of interfacial agents at the site where
they function, thus obviating the difficulty involved in transporting them to
the interface. The proposed research combines the concepts of reactive melt
processing and phase-invented blend morphology to develop a novel and efficient
approach to mechanical property modification of polymers. The solubilization of
the copolymer will be varied systematically to determine the optimal blend
formulation and processing. The morphology, mechanical properties (tensile and
impact), and deformation mechanisms of these novel, melt-processable, reactive
polymer blends will be tested. The proposed work aims to establish a scientific
understanding using model blend systems containing polyamides. A versatile and
simple chemistry has been selected, so that this new strategy may then be
extended to a variety of other polymers that now suffer from inefficient
modification procedures. The proposed activity also benefits graduate,
undergraduate and high school teacher training and education. Collaboration with
industrial contacts supports this and related projects within PI's laboratory.
***