* 9731207
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Design of Communications  Networks Using Computational Intelligence, and Study of     Women in Engineering in the U.S. and in Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Alice Smith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2000
* USD 34,965.00

Description: This award is for the support of cooperative research by Dr. Alice
Smith, Department of Industrial Engineering at the University of Pittsburgh, and
Dr. Berna Dengiz, Department of Industrial Engineering at Gazi University in
Ankara, Turkey. The project has two separate objectives: to use methods from
computational intelligence, namely neural networks and genetic algorithms, to
improve the design of data and voice communications network topologies when
considering reliability; and to utilize the collaboration of the US and Turkish
scientists (both are women) to study the issue of women participation in
engineering in Turkey, and a comparison with their participation in engineering
in the United States. Scope: This award allows cooperation of two scientists
with complementary capabilities, to do important scientific work that has
applications in the communications industry, in the US and in Turkey. They will
also address a subject that is important to careers of women in engineering in
the United States. The project will provide an international experience to one
graduate student and one undergraduate student from the University of
Pittsburgh, by conducting research at Gazi University in Ankara. The project
fits well within the objectives of the Division of International Programs. This
award includes funding from the Division of Engineering Education and Centers.