* 9731592
* Magnetic, Electronic, and Structural Development in         Atomic Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Louis Bloomfield, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2002
* USD 450,000.00

9731592 Bloomfield This research program examines magnetic and electronic
structure in isolated atomic clusters, with the goal of connecting present
understandings of atoms and molecules to those of bulk materials. Because of
their low dimensionalities, clusters provide insight into surface effects,
quantum size effects, thermal relaxation processes, and the molecular origins of
structural and electronic phase transitions. In this program, clusters are
prepared in laser-based sources and studied with molecular beam techniques.
Magnetic structure is probed using the Stern-Gerlach beam deflection method and
effects such as surface-enhanced magnetization, surface and shape induced
magnetic anisotropy, and spin-canting in local moment systems are studied. This
program also searches for additional magnetically ordered clusters of normally
non-magnetic elements and alloys. Cluster electronic structure is studied by
anion photodetachment spectroscopy. This work looks at the effects of cluster
size, composition, shape, and temperature on (1) the modes of electron
accommodation in these systems, (2) their structural and electronic phases, and
(3) their electronically excited states. %%% This research program examines the
magnetic and electronic properties of material particles only slightly larger
than atoms themselves, as a way to bridge the gap in understanding between
solids and molecules. As electronic components and magnetic memory systems
become smaller, they reach sizes at which they can no longer be treated simply
as small versions of larger objects. Instead, these tiny devices must be viewed
in part as elaborate molecular systems, with the complexities of quantum
mechanics, thermal fluctuations, and surface structure altering their behavior.
By studying magnetism in clusters of atoms, this research program is learning
how magnetism in solids develops from molecular st ructure and is mapping out
possibilities for the ultimate generation of magnetic storage media. In its work
on electronic and spatial structure in clusters, this program is exploring the
world of insulators and metals near the atomic scale and is examining their
behaviors when they become so small that nearly all their atoms are on their
surfaces. ***