* 9731255
* Development of an Embedded Crack Method for the Shear       Behavior of Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* P. Benson Shing, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 03/31/2002
* USD 169,783.00

The focus of the research is to develop an embedded crack analytical method for
assessing the serviceability and safety of concrete and masonry structures. The
behavior of reinforced concrete/masonry structures is complicated due to the
interaction of ductile and brittle materials. With the addition of steel
reinforcement, different limit states and failure modes, ranging from ductile to
brittle, can evolve in concrete/masonry structures, depending on the loading
conditions as well as the quantity of reinforcement. The ability to capture
these mechanisms is of primary importance for the evaluation of existing civil
infrastructure systems as well as for the design of new structures. Existing
analytical methods using the discrete or smeared crack modeling approach suffer
from a number of shortcomings. The smeared crack approach cannot capture the
brittle shear behavior of reinforced concrete deep beams and shear walls, while
the discrete crack approach is not suitable for modeling diffuse cracks. Hence,
a third approach based on an efficient in that it does not require remeshing,
which is often needed in the discrete crack analysis, and it is able to
eradicate the major deficiencies of the smeared crack approach by introducing a
displacement discontinuity within the element domain. The concept is new and has
a sound theoretical basis founded on variational principles.