* 9731202
* US-South Africa Dissertation Enhancement:  Modeling of      Herbivore Population Dynamics at Kruger National Park
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 12/31/2002
* USD 14,900.00

9731004 Getz &amp; Fortmann This award supports 22 participants (8 US and 14
African) in the US-Southern Africa Workshop on the Scientific Foundations of
Programs for Community Based Management of Wildlife, to be held at Gwaai River,
Zimbabwe, August 4-7, 1998. Additional participants include 2 from Europe, and
about 40 from the Southern Africa region, including South Africa. The co-
organizers are Drs. Wayne Getz and Louise Fortmann, Department of Environmental
Science, Policy, and Management at the University of California, Berkeley, and
Dr. David Cumming, Head of the World Wildlife Fund Program Officer in Harare,
Zimbabwe. This multidisciplinary workshop will include natural and social
scientists, resource managers, and policy makers. Many parts of Southern Africa
are starting to use community based natural resource management (CBNRM) programs
to preserve rural savanna lands as a mean of augmenting national park areas.
Currently there is a great deal of variation among the sets of data collected,
interpreted, and disseminated by the CBNRM programs. As a result there are no
reliable regional assessments on these ecosystems, or how development and global
change is affecting them. During this workshop participants will learn about
CBNRM programs in Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe, after which they will form
working groups in the areas of: 1) environmental monitoring and evaluation, 2)
software and hardware programs, and 3) community management and program
evaluation. Each group will identify its database needs and requirements, and
then collectively they will establish a common set of scientific protocols and
software packages to be used by all CBNRM programs for the collection,
interpretation, and management of data, and for program evaluation. The use of
these common protocols and software packages will increase the reliability of
data collections and assessments, which will enable the information to be used
for a new, long-term regional data base on Southern Africa's savanna ecos ystems
which are outside of the national parks--a very significant contribution to the
region's scientific infrastructure. The availability of such a database will
enable researchers worldwide to have access to new knowledge about the loss of
biodiversity in Southern Africa. The common protocols will also be used in a
SAVE GAME (Southern African Veld Ecosystems Geographic Assessment, Monitoring,
&amp; Evaluation) pilot program to provide rural Southern Africa areas with
scientifically well designed CBNRM programs. This grant will support the
participation of two graduate students from the United States. The Division of
International Programs and the Division of Biological Infrastructure are jointly
supporting this workshop.