* 9731280
* Determinants of Education and Mobility among Second-        Generation Mexican-Americans
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Robert Smith, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2002
* USD 134,389.00

This is a study of the determinants of education and work mobility among second-
generation Mexican-Americans in New York City. The fate of the children of
immigrants, the "second generation," is an increasingly important scholarly and
public policy topic. This research will contribute to our understanding of the
fate of the second generation through an ethnographic and interview study that
considers the effects of gender, market niche, ethnic identity and social
organization on their educational and occupational mobility patterns. This study
is based on earlier ethnographic research on immigrants from the Mexican town of
Ticuani, and the present project will seek to understand several puzzling
ethnographic findings, including: Why would second generation Ticuanense women
be more likely to be upwardly mobile in the mainstream economy and to attend
college and obtain professional jobs, while the men are more likely to leave
school and be upwardly mobile in the "immigrant economy"? What accounts for the
upward mobility of a significant minority of second generation Ticuanense men
and women, and the stagnation or even downward mobility of the rest? Why do some
second generation Mexican-Americans view ethnic and racial discrimination as not
stopping them from achieving in school or work, view themselves more as "second
generation ethnics" and identify more with "ethnic" immigrants (like Greeks or
Italians), while others see discrimination as precluding their mobility, view
themselves as "native racial minorities" and identify more with Blacks and
Puerto Ricans. What relationship, if any, do their views of discrimination have
to their occupational and educational mobility? This project is supported under
the Research in Undergraduate Institutions program. It fulfills the RUI aims to
support high quality research by faculty with active involvement of
undergraduate students, strengthen the research environment in academic
departments that are oriented primarily toward undergraduate instructi on, and
promote the integration of research and education at predominantly undergraduate
institutions. The study will also contribute to our understanding of the second
generation of immigrants and of educational and occupational mobility