* 9731024
* Conference on Auctions and Infrastructure to be Hosted by   the University of Maryland in Spring 1998
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1998,01/31/1999
* Peter Cramton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1999
* USD 24,996.00

Project Abstract This proposal is for a conference on auctions and
infrastructure hosted by the University of Maryland in the spring of 1998. The
conference lasts two and one half days (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday). About one
dozen papers are scheduled for presentation and discussion. In addition,
participants discuss informally ideas during breaks and meals. An important
economic development of the 1990s has been the restructuring of infrastructure
industries. Throughout the world, markets are replacing monopoly, and private
firms are increasingly providing goods and services that once were provided by
government. Auctions are playing a major role in this restructuring. Auctions
provide an efficient and transparent way for governments to privatize
industries, for monopolies to divest their assets, and for scarce resources to
be allocated. Applications are seen in every infrastructure industry:
telecommunications (e.g., the FCC spectrum auctions), electric power, natural
gas, water, air, and transportation. Treasury auctions are a related
application. In the early 1990s, economists realized that existing auction
theory was inadequate for these applications. Although auction theory for the
sale of a single item is well developed, each of these applications involves the
sale of multiple items, often with value interdependencies among items. In
response, there has been a burst of research activity on auctions for multiple
items. This work is theoretical, experimental, and empirical. The proposed
conference will bring together about forty experts in the auction field to
present and discuss their research on auctions. The conference will mix
theorists, experimentalists, and empiricists. The common core will be auctions
and a desire to apply auction ideas to these important real world applications.
Industry experts and policy makers will also participate. The conference
proceedings will be widely disseminated.