* 9731955
* Educational Technology and Lessons Learned from the         National Science Foundation
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1998,01/31/1999
* Leslie Graitcer, Tides Center
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 01/31/1999
* USD 49,500.00

9731955 Graitcer Grantmakers for Education (GFE) and the National Science
Foundation (NSF) will conduct a workshop and pre and post workshop activities
for education grantmakers, NSF program officers and selected NSF project
Principal Investigators. The purpose of these activities is to share the
knowledge and experiences of NSF programs about the role of technology in
student learning and school reform with education grantmakers of private,
corporate, and family foundations. It is anticipated that the sharing of
information between NSF program officers and foundation grantmakers will inform
grantmaking through increasing GFE members knowledge about the use of technology
in education. The primary activity would be a two day workshop for grantmakers
from private, corporate, and family foundations to meet with and learn from
experienced NSF grantmakers and the principal investigators (PIs) of successful
NSF funded programs. The workshop would include opportunities for GFE members
and NSF program officers to learn from each other and to explore ways to work
together to enhance the impact of their grantmaking in support of effective and
appropriate uses of educational technology. The workshop will be designed for
presentations by PIs and NSF Program Officers to GFE members and importantly for
in-depth discussions, questions and answers, and sharing. There will also be
opportunities for break out sessions for grantmakers to explore what the
presentations and discussions mean to GFE members in their grantmaking agendas.
Prior to the workshop a series of preparatory activities would occur that would
provide background information and basic hands-on experiences for GFE members to
assure maximum opportunities for learning at the workshop, including readings,
site visits, preconference issue dialogue using technology. After the workshop
the follow-up and continuing dialogue among the funders, including: second site
visit, newsletter articles sharing learnings from the workshop, GFE sponsor ed
educational technology meeting(s), technology interface for grantmakers to
continue discussion of topics raised by the workshop and visits, and integration
of learning from this project into overall GFE planning and programming. ***