* 9731647
* Singular Integrals and Maximal Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Stephen Wainger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 04/30/2002
* USD 85,946.00

Proposal: DMS-973647 Principal Investigator: Stephen Wainger

Abstract: Wainger plans to study maximal and singular averages of functions
defined on n-dimensional space, where n is greater than or equal to 2. In
contrast to the theory of Calderon and Zygmund, the integration in these
averages is to take place over curves or surfaces of positive codimension.
Wainger is interested in L-p bounds for these operators that relate to curvature
properties of the curves and surfaces. He also plans to study discrete analogues
of these questions, in which integration is replaced by a summation over a
discrete set of points.

An important problem in mathematics in the last 250 years has been that of
approximating arbitrary functions by combinations of simpler functions. This
problem arose in the study of vibrating strings in the 18th century and in the
study of heat flow in the 19th century. More recently this problem has been the
focus of considerable activity in conjunction with the electronic transmission
of data. This approximation problem has led in modern times to the problem of
finding estimates for the sizes of certain "averages" of functions in terms of
the size of the functions. Wainger's proposed research involves the averaging of
functions of n variables, with n greater than or equal to 2, now over surfaces
or curves in n-dimensional space rather than all of n-dimensional space. He then
seeks estimates for these averages in terms of geometric properties of the
surfaces or curves, as well as of the functions themselves.