* 9731221
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Improving Friction       Brakes by Eliminating Tribological Problems and Reducing    Wear
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Michael Bryant, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robb M. Winter
* 07/31/2001
* USD 13,445.00

9731221 Bryant This award provides funds to permit Dr. Michael D. Bryant,
Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Texas at Austin, to pursue with
Dr. Chung Kyun Kim, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hongik University,
Seoul, Korea, for 36 months, a program of cooperative research on improving
friction brakes by eliminating tribological problems and reducing wear. The
collaborators will seek to improve high speed brake systems through
complementary efforts, with each researcher working to improve different aspects
of disc brakes, later to be combined. The combined effort could result in
efficient, long lasting brakes on high speed trains, airplanes, automobiles, and
industrial machinery Dr. Kim will contribute a new disc design and will analyze
nonlinear thermal behavior of the disc and brake pad system using the Finite
Element Method. He will redesign materials and geometry on the disc to optimize
removal of heat and minimize thermal expansion problems that lead to brake noise
and premature brake wear. Dr. Bryant will contribute new brake pad and disc
designs that incorporate patented techniques that reduce brake pad wear and
extend (double) life. Cooperative research issues will focus on problems that
arise when combining the two designs: (1) necessary redesigns of both systems,
(2) solving any problems that would prevent the two systems from functioning in
a combined manner, (3) extensive testing of the new brake system, and (4)
technology transfer to industries in both countries. Doubling brake life and
eliminating other tribological brake problems could save both societies billions
of dollars. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mut ual benefit. This project provides an international research
experience for a U.S. graduate student. It also will add an international
cooperative dimension to ongoing research under NSF Grant No. CMS-9713942,
supported under the Surface Engineering and Tribology Program. Korean
participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
(KOSEF). ***