* 9732685
* US-India Cooperative Research: Effect of Realistic          Eurasian Snow Cover on Indian Summer Monsoon-- Numerical    Experiments with Regional Model, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Sushil Dash, Indian Institute of Technology New Delhi
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/2001
* USD 16,129.00

9732685 Dash Description: This award supports the US-India Cooperative Research:
The Effects of Realistic Eurasian Snow Cover on the Indian Summer Monsoon-- A
Numerical Experiment with a Regional Model. The collaborators are US PI Anandu
D. Vernekar, Department of Meteorology, University of Maryland and Indian PI
S.K. Dash, Centre for Atmospheric Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, New
Delhi. This research examines the effect of the Eurasian snow cover on the
interannual variability of the Indian monsoon. The hypothesis that excessive
winter Eurasian snow cover has adverse effect on the subsequent summer monsoon
rainfall over India will be studied through numerical experiments on a high
resolution regional model linked to a global general circulation model. The
results will have important predictive value about the onset and strength of the
Indian monsoon. Scope: This is a new collaboration linking the Department of
Meteorology, University of Maryland and the Center for Atmospheric Sciences,
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. This project combines the pioneering
expertise of Vernekar's group at Maryland in numerical experiments with general
and regional models with the capability of the Delhi group in modeling
atmospheric and ocean processes. The National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) will provided Cray supercomputer facilities to support this research. ***