* 9732705
* Machine Learning, On-Line Decision Making, and Algorithms   for Computationally Hard Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 198,407.00

The focus of this research is on developing efficient combinatorial algorithms
for key problems in Artificial Intelligence and Optimization, as well as
providing an improved understanding of the inherent nature of these problems.
This project involves three areas in particular: machine learning, on- line
decision-making, and the study of algorithms for computationally hard problems.
In the area of machine learning, one main component of this work is the design
of better algorithms for learning in large feature spaces. This includes
questions of how to best combine a large number of low-quality sources of advice
that may be available (e.g., via the internet), as well as a number of questions
with close relations to crytography. In the area of on-line algorithms and on-
line decision making, this research will investigate new approaches for the
Weighted-Caching problem, as well as the potential for using methods from
machine learning (for instance, algorithms for combining sources of advice) to
produce improved solutions to a number of problems in this area. In the study of
methods for solving computationally hard problems, this project will continue
exploration of approximation algorithms, as well as a new approach to general
purpose planning based on representing planning problems in a compact graph
structure, and then bringing in tools and ideas from graph algorithms. This
planning method was first demonstrated in the Graphplan planner, and empirically
appears to be substantially faster than more traditional planning algorithms in
a wide variety of settings.