* 9732729
* Unsaturated, Multifunctional Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Kenneth Caulton, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 06/30/2001
* USD 439,460.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides continued support to Dr. Kenneth G. Caulton of the Chemistry
Department, Indiana University, for synthesis and reaction studies of
unsaturated organometallic compounds. Theoretical work will be carried out in
collaboration with Dr. Odile Eisenstein of the Universite de Montpellier,
France. The goal of the research is to determine reactivity patterns for
compounds having several different functional ligands attached to the same metal
atom. The compounds synthesized will contain a mixture of ligands such as
hydride, halide, alkyl, and carbene. Relative reactivity of various ligands will
be determined directly and complex reactions such as alkyl migration and
intramolecular reduction elimination in the same molecule will be monitored.
Multifunctional metal complexes may also deliver more than one functional group
to another molecule. The target compounds will be selected because of their
ability to undergo nucleophilic or oxidation reactions at low temperature.
Studying reactivity under these conditions improves the possibility of
identifying primary reaction products and maximizes the selectivity of
reactions. Thermodynamic parameters will be determined. Specific reactions to be
investigated include reductive elimination of benzene from osmium carbonyls,
removal of halide from 16-electron species to form 14-electron compounds, and
reaction of trifluoromethyl ligands to form difluoromethyl ligands. Unusual
reactions of a wide range of organometallic compounds will be studied, including
C-H and C-F bond activation and reactivity of coordinatively unsaturated
compounds. Reactions of this kind are important to obtaining a basic
understanding the behavior of homogeneous catalysts.