* 9732135
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research on Modeling of Magnetization  for Evaluation of Microstructure
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 19,863.00

INT 9732135&lt;br/&gt;Jiles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Czech
research project between David Jiles of Iowa State University and partners,
Ladislav Pust and Ivan Tomas of the Czech Institute of Physics, Prague, will
examine the relationship between structure and properties of magnetic materials
by developing computer based models of relevant magnetization processes. These
efforts will feature energy dissipation as a result of magnetization where Bloch
walls interact with regions that have different magnetic properties from the
matrix. The researchers intend to emphasize pinning of magnetic domain walls on
larger voids, non-magnetic inclusions, and regions of high localized
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cooperative work will involve comparing
theoretical model calculations with experimental data measured on iron and
nickel based alloys. Results should provide a more complete theoretical
framework for the description of magnetic properties of materials, i.e.,
hysteresis curve modeling, thereby improving our understanding of
microstructural effects on magnetic properties. If successful, findings may be
applied in magnetic nondestructive evaluation methods, an area of broad interest
in materials research and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in
theoretical materials research fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence.&lt;br/&gt;