* 9732219
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Manufacturing    Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* John Frater, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2003
* USD 673,525.00

Proposal No.: 9732219 PI: Schoenig University: Cleveland State U ABSTRACT The
Advanced Manufacturing Center at Cleveland State University is proposing to
provide undergraduate manufacturing engineering research experiences to students
whom are seeking a Bachelor's degree in Science or Engineering. Participants
will be recruited from among CSU students as well as students at three regional
community colleges who have committed to four year baccalaureate programs. Many
of these students will be participants in the dual admission program. Dual
enrolled students carry out their first two years of study at the community
college before completing their BS degree at CSU. The focus of this applied
research is manufacturing innovations. The goals of the program are to attract
and retain highly motivated students into manufacturing engineering careers, to
offer an early introduction to research for lower level undergraduate students
from CSU and regional community colleges, to use these experiences to assist
community college students in their transition into the university environment,
to better prepare students for entry into the manufacturing field, and to
recruit students for advanced engineering studies. Research projects cover
various aspects of manufacturing engineering and are designed to prepare
individuals to develop innovative solutions to long-standing manufacturing
problems. Research teams will consist of faculty, staff engineers, graduate and
undergraduate students and, in some cases, high school students. The teams will
usually be cross-functional. Students will have the opportunity to participate
during the summer and/or throughout the academic year for a total of 600 hours
per year. Participants will be encouraged to continue in the program through
their transfer from a community college into the university. The project will
include an optional ethics component. Two separate modules will be offered to
address basic and more complex ethical issues. In additi on, a framework will be
developed in which students will identify potential ethical issues in their own
manufacturing research projects and will share their findings with other
participants.