* 9732205
* Algorithms in Finite Groups
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Laszlo Babai, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2002
* USD 205,589.00

This project investigates the design and analysis of asymptotically efficient
algorithms for finite matrix groups. While three decades of work in
computational group theory have resulted in a thorough understanding, both
theoretical and practical, of many algorithmic aspects of permutation groups,
virtually no efficient algorithms have been designed until recently in the
potentially more important domain of matrix groups. This latter area, however,
is currently experiencing explosive growth. This research focuses on theoretical
aspects and polynomial time algorithms. Past experience shows that this approach
has the potential of yielding important insights which may lead to efficient
implementations. Indeed, algorithms inspired by the polynomial-time paradigm
have made their way into the widely used group theory package GAP. The main
objective is to map out the normal structure of a matrix group given by a list
of generators. Components of this project include a number of problems to be
handled in the more general context of "black-box groups" (the group operations
are performed by a "black box"). A key ingredient is the black-box recognition
of finite simple groups. Another component consists in "getting past" a simple
top quotient. The methods include the statistical analysis of number theoretic
properties of the orders of elements in finite simple groups (based on the
classification of finite simple groups). One of the main obstacles seems to
require the study of modular representations of simple groups. Combinatorial
methods seem to be called for in the analysis of random sampling heuristics
which are required for most existing matrix group algorithms.