* 9732845
* Efficient and Reliable Competitive Market for Electric      Power: Integrating Electrical Engineering and Experimental  Economics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Richard Schuler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 08/31/2000
* USD 282,665.00

ECS-9732845 Thomas This project is designed to settle specific economic and
engineering questions arising from the restructuring of the electric power
industry. Of specific interest are those questions related to the introduction
of competitive markets for the generation of electricity. We note that there are
unique physical aspects associated wit h the supply of electricity (e.g.,
instantaneous matching of supply and demand, unintended congestion of parallel
transmission routes and maintenance of system stability in response to
disturbances). Others include the prospect of localized market power. Because of
these and other aspects of reliable electric power supply, traditional theories
of efficient markets and auction structures developed for other commodities
through years of experience may not be efficient if applied without alteration
to markets for electricity. Conversely, current utility rules of operation
developed for a centrally-planned regime may not be ideal in terms of providing
economically efficient or reliable operating practices in a competitive
environment. The objective of this research is to determine a new balance
between ideal economic market mechanisms and traditional utility operating
practices that will provide inexpensive energy for consumers and maintain system
stability. Computer simulations of electricity networks along with laboratory
markets that combine human-subject behavior and power systems behavior are the
tools we propose to develop and use. The group of researchers assembled consists
of theoretical and experimental economists and power/control systems engineers
who are uniquely qualified to address issues of market structure, auction
mechanisms and rules, and the viability of continuing to use computer programs
such as large scale optimal power flow models (OPF), unit commitment (UC) and
security constrained dispatch that have been used historically to guide
operations.