* 9732029
* Impact of Research Activities on McMurdo Dry Valley Lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Peter Doran, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/2000
* USD 61,475.00

Diary Note OPP-0732029 Program staff recommend support of this workshop
proposal, which is exempt from peer review per NSF Manual 10, 122.1.c.3.b. The
proposal will support a workshop to address the impact of scientific research on
the perennially ice- covered lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica. The
Environmental Officer, Joyce Jatko, was consulted as to the relevance of this
workshop; she endorsed its funding. This invitational workshop will bring
together about 35 experts from not only the polar limnology community but from
the broader aquatic community. The workshop addresses important issues, which
have been the focus of question or concern by the scientific community, program
staff at NSF, the US non-governmental community and the international Antarctic
community. The invited participant list is appropriately balanced by scientific
discipline and includes the key international scientists. Program staff
discussed the lack of gender balance in the proposed list of participants with
the PIs, who have assured staff that a more appropriate balance will be
achieved. The results of the workshop will be made available as a report, to be
widely distributed. The report will be useful not only to scientists, but to
managers of Antarctic programs who must ensure that activities conducted in
Antarctica are reviewed to meet the intent of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. 9732029 DORAN The perennially ice-covered
lakes of the McMurdo Dry Valleys in southern Victoria Land, Antarctica, have
been the object of study since their discovery by Robert Falcon Scott in 1903.
These dry valley lakes are unique on Earth, and there is great interest within
the scientific community to preserve their pristine nature to the maximum extent
possible. This award will support an invitational workshop which will bring
together about thirty-five scientists with expe rtise in aquatic environments.
The purpose of the workshop is to assess the impact of past and current research
activities in and around the dry valley lakes. The group will make
recommendations on the establishment of acceptable levels of impact as well as
on approaches to management of future research activities in an environmentally
responsible manner. Given the uniqueness and scientifically valuable nature of
these lakes, workshop participants will be chosen from the pool of Antarctic and
Arctic scientists as well as from investigators in the broader aquatic sciences
community. Workshop participants will address the potential impacts of research
activities on the Antarctic lakes, including ice-hole melting, SCUBA diving,
remotely-operated and autonomously-operated underwater vehicles, the use of
chemical tracers, repetitive water sampling, waster removal and sediment coring.
The impact of shore-based and glacier melt stream research activities on the dry
valley lakes will also be explored. This serious approach to one aspect of the
issue of human impact to the Earth's environment should provide critical
information to help guide and direct future scientific activities.