* 9732650
* Ultrathin Film Molecular Materials: New Molecules, New      Deposition and Characterization Strategies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 01/31/2003
* USD 770,000.00

The development of new preparation methodologies for the creation of novel
organic thin film assemblies for use as optical and electronic elements is the
focus of the research in this project supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program. Professor Armstrong and his students at the University of
Arizona will use a comprehensive approach of synthesis and characterization of
these thin film systems. Organic molecular beam epitaxy (OMBE) and Langmuir-
Blodgett (L-B) approaches will be employed to deposit films on a variety of
substrate surfaces. The preparation of organic films of highly luminescent dyes
by OMBE will be characterized through a variety of spectroscopic and
crystallographic methods to gain understanding into the role of structure and
composition in their ultimate use as microcircuitry elements. Bilayer and
multilayer films of a number of phthalocyanine derivatives will be prepared
using the L-B technique. The films are being investigated for future
applications as microcircuitry and field effect transistor (FET) devices. The
controlled growth of organic molecular thin films is an area of intense interest
due to its potential impact in the creation of molecular electronic devices. The
development of new preparation and characterization strategies is a vital
component in the evolution of this technology. Professor Armstrong and his
students at the University of Arizona will apply new synthetic methods and a
host of spectroscopic techniques to gain insights into the fundamental
electronic and optical properties of organic thin films. The combination of
synthetic and characterization aspects of molecular thin film systems undertaken
here will have relevance to a wide range of projected applications of organic
thin films.