* 9732886
* Energetics and Mechanisms of large Biomolecule and DNA      Duplex Dissociation by Tandem Fourier-transform Mass        Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 12/31/2001
* USD 521,515.00

This multidisciplinary project, co-supported by the Analtyical and Surface
Chemistry Program, the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, focuses on the further development of
the blackbody infrared radiative dissociation (BIRD) technique for the study of
the energetics and mechanisms of protein and DNA dissociation. Professor
Williams and his students at the University of California at Berkeley will
implement BIRD experiments on a 7 Tesla FT/ICR instrument which is being
acquired through this award. Dissociation of DNA duplexes is projected to
provide insights into Watson-Crick base pairing, base stacking, and other
electrostatic interactions. Gas-phase hydrogen/deuterium exchange reactions will
be employed as a diagnostic tool regarding gas phase ion conformation of
biomolecules. The ability to draw conclusions pertaining to the conformation of
biological molecules in situ based on gas-phase ion chemistry is an area of
intense interest in the chemical and biological communities. Professor Williams
and his students at the Unversity of California at Berkeley will use a
multidisciplinary approach of theory and experimentation to study the gas-phase
ion chemistry of proteins and DNA. Dissociation mechanisms and energetics, along
with hydrogen/deuterium exchange reactions, will provide important information
toward the understanding of the biological molecules and their structures