* 9732254
* Undergraduate Research in Nutrition at The Pennsylvania     State University
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* John Milner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 123,873.00

This REU Site, operated by the Graduate Program in Nutrition, offers
undergraduate students research experience in the biology and chemistry of
nutritional processes. This experiential-learning program builds on the
commitment and capabilities of 15 faculty members who will serve as mentors for
the students. A 10-week summer program aims to immerse students in the
excitement of scientific inquiry and to provide knowledge of approaches,
techniques and critical thinking skills used in research; practice and
improvement in communication skills; and guidance in planning graduate programs
and careers. Participants will include minority students and students from
institutions without broad research activities, as well as students from Penn
State. Communications between each student, his or her mentor, and the program
director will be established before the student arrives at the University Park
campus and will continue after the student returns to his or her home campus.
Working with a team including a faculty mentor and a graduate student or other
staff member, each undergraduate student will design a research project that can
be completed successfully within the summer time period. Students also will
attend special seminars on improving scientific-communication skills, both
written and oral. Social events will complement the scientific community
developed within the mentors' laboratories. All students will participate in a
Career Opportunities Workshop that explores the merits and means of obtaining a
M.S. and/or Ph.D. degree. The summer will culminate in a research symposium
attended by faculty, staff, and students.