* 9732403
* (SGER) COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hydrometeorological          Analysis of the Spring Creek Flood of 1997-Fort Collins
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1997,11/30/1998
* James Smith, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9732403 Smith A small exploratory grant is proposed to employ advanced state of
the art remote sensing and rainfall/runoff modeling approaches to examine the
meteorology, runoff and channel hydraulics of the catastrophic flood which
occurred on the Spring Creek drainage on July 28, 1997 in Fort Collins,
Colorado. This flood resulted in an estimated 50 to 100 million dollars of
damage to Colorado State University alone. Additional damages include the
devastation of two mobile homes courts, flooding of numerous homes, multiple
injuries and the unfortunate deaths of five people. The proposed study is a
collaborative effort between researchers at the University of Connecticut,
University of Missouri, and Princeton University. The researchers involved have
extensive experience in radar-rainfall estimation, hydrologic scaling, and the
development of state of the art rainfall/runoff models which incorporate
remotely-senses data. The objectives of this proposed study are to (1)
characterize the meteorological conditions which existed on the evening of July
28 leading to over 11 inches of rainfall in less than three hours on the
watershed; (2) calibrate and verify radar-rainfall estimates from the NSF-funded
CSU-CHILL S-band dual-polarization research radar, and the two WSR-88D NEXRAD
radars located near Denver, Colorado and Cheyenne, Wyoming, using surface
recorded rainfall accumulations; (3) collect and organize watershed
characteristic and flood data using GIS; (4) apply the rainfall and watershed
characteristic data to recreate the runoff event using a two-dimensional,
physically-based hydrologic model; and (5) compare and contrast the performance
of two-dimensional runoff simulation results with a recreation of the flood
using the more traditional SWMM and HEC-2 approaches for flood warning and
hydrologic design. The collaborative proposers are uniquely positioned to
perform this research because they immediately sought and obtained data relevant
to the flood. Additionally, the c ollaborative research team has conducted a
significant amount of research and development to rainfall/runoff modeling using
remotely-sensed inputs. Furthermore, the two of the proposers lived in Fort
Collins for many years, have extensive hydrologic contacts in the area, and are
intimately familiar with the region affected by the flood. It is anticipated
that the initial analysis, modeling and re-creation of the flood can be
performed in less than 3 months leading to a summary report and paper on the
conditions leading up to, and during the event. Additional refinement and
modifications of modeling efforts will continue until funding is expended. This
initial effort will garner and focus national attention on the
hydrometeorological conditions which lead to this storm, and establish the
capabilities of physically-based, distributed-parameter runoff models using
remotely-sensed rainfall input for predicting short-duration flash floods in
urban areas. This new flash-flood modeling approach to be evaluated has
significant potential to reduce the risk of life and property, as well as
improve the accuracy of hydrologic design in urban areas.