* 9732073
* REU Site:  Thermal Analysis of Materials Processing and     Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Ioannis Miaoulis, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa A. Maldonado, Ph.D., P.E.
* 12/31/2001
* USD 254,640.00

Proposal No.: 9732073 PI: Miaoulis University: Tufts University ABSTRACT The
success of materials processing and manufacturing is strongly influenced by
thermal and fluid phenomena. Unfortunately, most processing engineers are
trained in only a single discipline and lack sufficient knowledge about
thermal/fluid effects in the process. In response, Tufts University established
the Thermal Analysis of Materials Processing Laboratory (TAMPL) to conduct
interdisciplinary research including thermavfluid sciences, materials science,
and manufacturing. This laboratory has proven to be a successful place to
educate engineers in interdisciplinary research that is relevant to industry.
TAMPL is a unique research setting that involves a chain of mentorships from
faculty to graduate students to undergraduates to high school girls. This aim of
the proposed project is to expand the research opportunities to undergraduate
engineers from colleges and universities where settings such as TAMPL are not
available. Also, TAMPL has a strong commitment and record to increasing the
number of women in engineering careers. Recruitment will be aimed at non-
research institutions (as categorized by the Carnegie Classification) and
limited-research institutions in order to provide them with an experience at
Tufts, a research university. Based on our experience with Tufts undergraduates,
such experience will encourage them to continue with their graduate studies in
engineering. Projects include examining heat transfer in thermal processing of
electronic materials, fluid flow in turbulent mixing processes, and process
control in thermal manufacturing systems. The P.I.'s and a trained team of
graduate students will lead the undergraduates through an introduction to the
research process, project supervision, internet publishing workshops, and
presentation skills. Combining these skills with the interdisciplinary nature
and extensive resources of TAMPL will give these students a unique undergraduate
experien ce that will encourage them to continue with their engineering
education.