* 9732969
* CAREER: Molecular-Level Characterization of Bonding and     Bioavailability of Monoaromatic Pollutants Associated wtih  Dissolved Organic Carbon
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Mark Nanny, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 03/31/2002
* USD 213,545.00

Mark Nanny 9732969 This is an award to support a project proposed in accord with
the Guidelines for Submission of Proposals to the Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program, NSF 97-87. As such, it has both a research and
educational component. The investigator's research objectives are to conduct
work that characterizes non- covalent reactions of dissolved organic carbon with
water pollutants that affects their bioavailability, transferability in aquifers
and other factors that can be applied to engineering design of systems to reduce
the pollutional impact of leachate from landfills. The dissolved organic
compounds he plans on using have been isolated from the Norman Landfill leachate
and include humic acid, fulvic acid and hydrophilic organic matter. The
investigator plans on using deuterium-labeled aromatic compounds such as
toluene, ethylbenzene, nitrobenzene, phenol, aniline, benzoic acid and
methoxybenzene derivatives in addition to pyridine and quinoline in the
characterization of their reactions with natural organic carbonaceous
substances. The Principal Investigator's educational component has an outreach
component aspect for involving secondary school teachers, their students and
undergraduates in environmental research focussed on an actual problem such as
those associated with management of the leachate from a local landfill. This
problem addresses environmental issues that are expected to motivate students
because of their immediate importance, scientific and technological complexity.
The investigator plans on inaugurating a summer program for high school students
who will assist in designing a research project to be conducted by them during
the succeeding academic year. The investigator also plans on implementation of
the use of advanced analytical instrumentation in undergraduate classes and
integrating the results of his research in the engineering design and
implementation of systems for solving hazardous waste management problem s. ***