* 9732560
* The Fifth International Conference on Inorganic Membranes:  Nagoya, Japan, June 22-26, 1998
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1998,10/31/1998
* Yi Ma, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ
* 10/31/1998
* USD 15,500.00

~ 'e - - Proposal No: 9732560 Proposal Type: Request for Conference Support
Principal Investigator: Yi Hua Ma Affiliation: Worcester Polytechnic Institute
This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-
element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical
and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is Dr. Yi Hua Ma at
Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The conference is the Fifth International
Conference on Inorganic Membranes, Nagoya, Japan, June 22-26, 1998. A This is a
topical area fully relevant to the Interfacial, Transport and Separation
Processes Program. The objective of the conference is to bring together
international researchers and industrial practitioners to present and discuss
their results on inorganic membranes, which is a relatively new technology for
high temperature separations. The conference will provide and for the U.S.
participants to gain an understanding of the inorganic membrane activities
relating to separations technology in the Pacific Rim. ~ The conference will
cover both theoretical and experimental aspects of inorganic membranes with
topics encompassing membrane preparation, membrane transport phenomena,
characterization, membrane reactors and process systems. The conference will
include plenary lectures, and oral and poster presentations. ~ ' it