* 9732055
* Research Internships in Telecommunications Engineering      (RITE) Site
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Wesley Lawson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2003
* USD 547,680.00

Proposal No.: 9732055 PI: Farvardin University: U of MD-College Park ABSTRACT We
propose to establish a Research Internships in Telecommunications Engineering
(RITE) Site within the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Maryland, College Park to provide research opportunities for undergraduates in
the broad area of Telecommunications. The proposed RITE Site will involve
approximately 18 undergraduates per year. At least one half of the students will
be recruited from institutions other than the University of Maryland. Special
emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from underrepresented groups and
from institutions that do not have a strong research program. The program will
be limited to US citizens or permanent residents. The program, which starts each
year in the beginning of the summer, is intended for students who have completed
their sophomore year. The students participate in one of 6-8 research projects
covering the broad spectrum of Telecommunications technologies. Examples are:
wireless communication systems, image and video transmission over the Internet;
mapping DSP dataflows to software implementation; operating systems for DSP
applications; line-of-site optical communications, rapid prototyping of DSP
systems, and wideband amplifiers for communications applications. Each project
will be directed by one or more faculty (and a mentor from industry if
appropriate) and will involve a team of graduate and undergraduate students. A
final project report will be produced for each project accompanied by a
presentation in the last week of the summer session during the "RITE Site Fair."
There will be additional weekly activities including high-level technical
seminars by faculty and industry speakers on emerging technologies and trends in
Telecommunications, seminars on technical writing and speaking, applying to
graduate school and preparing for the GRE exam, and career opportunities and
trends, as well as field trips to telecommunications c ompanies. In addition to
providing exposure to telecommunications research, the program will promote
communication skills, team work and university-industry interaction, and will
provide exposure to the real-world applications of telecommunications research.