* 9732416
* REU: National Museum of Natural History Research Training   Program - Geological Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/1999
* Timothy McCoy, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/28/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9732416 McCoy The goal of the National Museum of Natural History research
Training Program at the Smithsonian Institution is to prepare talented
undergraduates for research careers in natural history. This is accomplished by
means of an intensive summer program centered on guided research experiences in
natural history. The Research Training Program has developed a highly regarded
and innovative program that introduces undergraduates to the diversity of
scientific disciplines, research techniques, and career choices available in the
field of modern natural history. The ten-week program focuses on a research
project guided by a research advisor who is one of the over 100 Ph.D.'s on our
scientific staff. The participant, in conjunction with the research advisor,
develops and tests a scientific hypothesis using appropriate techniques, and
communicates the results in written manuscripts and oral presentations. The
research project is supplemented with a schedule of activities including
lectures, discussions, demonstrations, field trips, and tours to provide a broad
and balanced view of natural history careers. While in residence at the National
Museum of Natural History, the participants are fully integrated into the Museum
community. This award supports 5 program positions dedicated to geoscience-based
research topics. Cooperative funding of the Research Training Program between
the Biological Sciences and Geosciences Directorates will also encourage,
through both formal research projects and informal discussions, the type of
cross-disciplinary research which occur frequently within a large natural
history museum. ***