* 9732208
* Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 06/30/2002
* USD 261,814.00

The development of numerical methods for large algebraic systems is central in
the development of efficient codes for computational fluid dynamics, elasticity,
and other core problems of continuum mechanics. Many other tasks in such codes
parallelize relatively easily. The importance of the algebraic system solvers is
therefore increasing with the appearance of parallel and distributed computing
systems, with a substantial number of fast processors, each with relatively
large memory. A very desirable feature of iterative substructuring and other
domain decomposition algorithms is that they respect the memory hierarchy of
modern parallel and distributed computing systems, which is essential for
approaching peak floating point performance. The development of improved methods
is, together with more powerful computer systems, making it possible to carry
out simulations in three dimensions, with quite high resolution, relatively
easily. This work is now supported by high quality software systems, such as
Argonne's PETSC library, which will facilitate code development as well as the
access to a variety of parallel and distributed computer systems. Work
willcontinue in developing iterative substructuring and other domain
decomposition methods for increasingly difficult partial differential equations.
Domain decomposition algorithms are iterative methods, often of preconditioned
conjugate gradient type, for the parallel solution of the large linear, or
nonlinear, systems of algebraic equations that arise when partial differential
equations are discretized by finite elements, finite differences, or spectral
methods. In each iteration step, local problems representing the restriction of
the original problem to a potentially large number of subregions are solved
approximately. The subregions, which can be allocated to individual processors
of a parallel computer, form a decomposition of the entire domain of the
problem. In addition, the inclusion of a coarse proble m often substantially
increases the efficiency of the preconditioner. This study will combine
mathematical analysis with the design and numerical testing of algorithms. A
special emphasis will be placed on the study of spectral elements and other high
order finite element methods, as well as on nonconforming methods such as the
mortar and Nedelec finite element methods. The latter have been developed for
Maxwell's equation. There will also be a focus on the often very ill-conditioned
problems which arise in finite element approximations of elasticity. Iterative
methods and production codes will also be developed for Helmholtz's equation and
other time-harmonic models arising, e.g., from Maxwell's equations. These
problems pose very real challenges for the development of iterative solvers and
are also of great importance in a number of engineering applications.