* 9732306
* Modeling and Visualization with Algebraic Surfaces          and Splines
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Chandrajit Bajaj, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

This project concerns the design and implementation of symbolic, numeric and
geometric algorithms for the creation, manipulation and visualization of
polynomial (algebraic) curves, surfaces and splines. Such algorithms form the
science base for diverse applications ranging from computer graphics game
environments to computer aided geometric design for simulation based design
prototyping. The project has an abstract data type orientation. In this
framework, the choice of which representation of the polynomial curve or surface
patch to use is determined by the desired optimality of the algorithms for the
operations. Research will therefore be done on different representations of
algebraic curve and surface splines for specific operations of display, finite
element mesh generation and polynomial spline model construction. Piecewise
polynomial or rational functions or surfaces of some fixed degree d and
continuously differentiable up to some order r are known as algebraic splines or
finite elements. While it is possible to model a general closed surface of
arbitrary genus as a single algebraic surface patch, the geometry of such a
global surface is difficult to specify, interactively control, and display. This
research will covers both implicit and parametric algebraic surface splines
(algebraic patches and non-uniform rational B-spline patches).