* 9732716
* Promoting Undergraduate and Graduate Participation in the   IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting; Tampa,       Florida; February 1-5, 1998
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/1998,12/31/1998
* Mariesa Crow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 14,039.00

9732716 Crow In this project, a plan is outlined to continue the efforts of the
Student Meeting Activities Subcommittee of the Power Engineering Education
Committee of the IEEE Power Engineering Society (PES) to promote student
interest in the power engineering field by sponsoring electrical engineering
students to attend the IEEE PES annual Winter Meeting. The goal of this project
is to provide an opportunity for US students to be exposed to the most recent
developments in operation, constructions, and research in the power engineering
field. This is a particularly critical time for power engineering as the
industry undergoes significant change due to the restructuring of the
traditional utility structure. The career opportunities for students interested
in power engineering are many and varied; opportunities exist within utilities,
vendors, manufacturers, and consulting firms. The impact of this program is
significant and far reaching. This is an exciting time to be involved in power
engineering. The power industry is currently undergoing major changes, and young
engineers entering the marketplace need to be exposed to the challenges and
issues these changes are causing. This program will allow students the
opportunities to experience first-hand the energy and vitality of the power
area. This will hopefully encourage students to pursue a life-long career in the
power engineering field. ***