* 9732490
* Activation - Driving Force Relationships in Radical Ion     Rearrangements
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2001
* James Tanko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2001
* USD 370,000.00

This research focuses on elucidating the chemistry of organic radical anions and
cations that are considered to be key intermediates in a number of chemical and
biochemical transformations. The rates of decay of these transient
intermediates, generated chemically, electrochemically, or photochemically from
selected precursors, will be measured as functions of precursor structure,
solvent polarity and counter ion. Corresponding thermodynamic data, principally
the free energy change associated with the ring opening of cyclic radical anions
and cations, will be determined electrochemically by means of appropriate
thermochemical cycles. Using selected precursors that have been or will be
synthesized during the course of the experiments, and correlating the kinetic
and thermodynamic data obtained for the corresponding radical anion or cation,
structure-reactivity relationships of these short-lived intermediates will be
developed. With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports the research and educational activities of Professor James Tanko of the
Chemistry Department at Virginia Polytechnic University. Professor Tanko's
research will focus on elucidating the structure-reactivity relationships that
define the chemistry of reactive cationic and anionic radical intermediates.
Although well known as intermediates in a number of organic transformations,
these highly-reactive, short-lived intermediates are now thought to be
intermediates in a number of pharmacological and enzymatic transformations.
Professor Tanko's educational activities involve the education and training of
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students.