* 9732820
* Exciton Dynamics and Laser Action in Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* Werner Gellermann, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2002
* USD 450,000.00

9732820 Vardeny This proposal by Professor Z. Vardeny of the Department of
Physics of the University of Utah describes research on semiconducting polymers
which offer promise as new lasing materials. The research will be conducted by
members of a Focused Research Group which will investigate the various
properties of these materials. These systems of semiconducting polymers are not
yet sufficiently well understood and there is at present significant controversy
about the results of experiments and their interpretation. This research will
attempt to provide answers to critical questions on the origin of the amplified
emission from PPV and related polymers. The roles of superfluorescence,
superradiance, and amplified spontaneous emission will be addressed in this
research. The Utah group will attack these problems and will thereby contribute
to clearing up misunderstandings and misinterpretations through carefully
conducted experiments and theoretical analyses. This basic research has the
potential of making a great impact if solid state organic lasers can be produced
in a technologically reliable manner. %%% This proposal by Professor Z. Vardeny
of the Department of Physics of the University of Utah describes research on
semiconducting polymers which offer promise as new lasing materials. The
research will be conducted by members of a Focused Research Group which will
investigate the various properties of these materials. These systems of
semiconducting polymers are not yet sufficiently well understood and there is at
present significant controversy about the results of experiments and their
interpretation. This research will attempt to provide answers to critical
questions on the origin of the amplified emission from PPV and related polymers.
The roles of superfluorescence, superradiance, and amplified spontaneous
emission will be addressed in this research. The Utah group will attack these
problems and will thereby contribute to clearing up misunderstandings and
misinterpretations through carefully conducted experiments and theoretical
analyses. This basic research has the potential of making a great impact if
solid state organic lasers can be produced in a technologically reliable manner.
***