* 9732950
* Design and Self-Assembly of Supramolecular Photonic         Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Charles Drain, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2003
* USD 351,169.00

The focus of this research is the development of methods for the assembly of
porphyrin building blocks into multi-component arrays and materials. Discrete,
ordered arrays of five to ten porphyrins will be self-assembled and
characterized using coordination of exocyclic ligands on the macrocycle to metal
centers with appropriate coordination geometry, complimentary hydrogen bond
molecular recognition groups and a hybrid metal ion and hydrogen bond mediated
approach. One- two- and three-dimensional porphyrin films, polymers and crystals
will be prepared and new methods developed for the characterization of these
materials. Also, new photonic materials will be prepared via self-assembly. The
focus of the educational activities will be the development of a course in
supramolecular chemistry and efforts geared to high school science outreach.
With this Faculty Early Development (CAREER) award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
activities of Dr. Charles M. Drain of the Department of Chemistry at CUNY Hunter
College. Professor Drain will focus his research efforts on the synthesis and
characterization of new materials. Arrays of five to ten porphyrins will be
self-assembled to evaluate the possible formation of these materials, the
mechanism of electron and energy transfer via non-covalent interactions and the
process of self-assembly. The overall hypothesis to be evaluated is that highly
ordered photo-active films, polymers and crystals may be systematically
engineered by programming the correct bonding code into self-assembling
monomers. The educational activities in the project include course development
and out reach to high school students.