* 9732483
* Local Polymer Dynamics in Melts and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2001
* USD 287,500.00

9732483 Ediger Many important properties of synthetic polymers are controlled by
the local segmental dynamics of the polymers. These include the glass transition
temperature(Tg), the temperature dependence of viscous flow, the diffusion
coefficients of small molecules, and the rates of physical ageing. Optical
experiments and NMR spectroscopy will be used to investigate the relationship
between local segmental dynamics and these important properties. One project
will explore the molecular basis for physical ageing in polystyrene and
polycarbonate. The goal is to understand why different observables age
differently and how ageing times below Tg are related to equilibrium relaxation
times above Tg. The prediction of long term properties of polymer glasses
depends upon the answers to these questions. A second project explores spatially
heterogeneous dynamics in polymer melts and their influence on the diffusion
coefficients of low molecular weight species. It is important to understand why
these heterogeneous regions are more important in some melts than others so that
technologically important diffusion coefficients can be accurately predicted.
The lifetimes of these regions will be explored because this determines how
larger length scale motions will be influenced by these regions. A third project
uses variable-field NMR spectroscopy to study polyethylene and atactic
polypropylene melts. These two simple systems are ideal for exploring the
relationship between local dynamics and viscous flow, and for understanding the
polymer motions which are responsible for the glass transition. It is expected
that these results will contribute to an understanding of the industially
important flow properties of branched polyethylene. A fourth project uses
molecular dynamics trajectories to test the interpretation of 2D NMR and neutron
spin echo experiments. This investigation may result in more reliable
microscopic inferences being drawn from these experimental ob servables. %%% The
utility of polymers in our society is based upon the wide range of properties
which can be obtained by changing the chemical identity of the repeat units,
e.g., some structures produce rubbery materials while others produce hard
plastics. This proposal investigates how some important properties are
controlled by chemical structure. This fundamental understanding will be applied
to some problems of industrial interest in the proposed work and will suggest
strategies for solving a broader range of practical problems. ***