* 9732530
* PWG/IDA:  Disseminating Current Information About Women and Girls in Science, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1998,10/31/1999
* Linda Basch, National Council for Research on Women
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9732530 Basch The National Council for Research on Women (NCRW) will produce
and&lt;br/&gt; disseminate a special edition of Issues Quarterly (IQ),
`Balancing the Equation: Women&lt;br/&gt; and Girls in Science, Engineering, and
mathematics,` and IQ Fax. NCRW is a working&lt;br/&gt; coalition of 77 research
centers in the US with connections to over 1,500 other&lt;br/&gt; organizations
and networks worldwide concerned with improving the status of women
and&lt;br/&gt; girls. The goal of this project is to sustain and stimulate
national dialogue and action on&lt;br/&gt; issues affecting women and girls in
science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM). IQ will&lt;br/&gt; synthesize a
broad range of research, data, and perspectives on women and girls in
SEM.&lt;br/&gt; It will include first-hand interviews with K-16 educators,
representatives of girls'&lt;br/&gt; organizations and women's scientific
professional organizations and networks, women&lt;br/&gt; practitioners in
science and technology, representatives of industry, and this issue's&lt;br/&gt;
editorial committee members. IQ will also include data and information from
recently&lt;br/&gt; published books, scientific and higher education journals,
government reports, and reports&lt;br/&gt; from professional organizations. By
highlighting current research, policy, and action on&lt;br/&gt; integrating
women as full participants in the mainstream of scientific and
technological&lt;br/&gt; education, employment, and enterprise in its IQ and IQ
Fax publications, NCRW will&lt;br/&gt; advance the accessibility and usability
of this information by a large and diverse group of&lt;br/&gt; researchers,
educators, policy makers, advocates, and a broad general audience. By&lt;br/&gt;
increasing the awareness and involvement of this community on issues of gender,
science,&lt;br/&gt; and technology, it will encourage research on and
exploration of the benefits of science to&lt;br/&gt; society and the importance
of diversifying the community of scientists. **&lt;br/&gt;