* 9732678
* Theoretical Studies in Non-Axisymmetric Vortex Adjustment   and an Observational Examination of Vortex Rossby Waves in  Hurricanes Using Existing Radar Data
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melinda S. Peng
* 12/31/2001
* USD 306,486.00

9732678 Montgomery In addition to being of basic fluid dynamical interest, the
hurricane is a high impact weather phenomenon that continues to be a priority
for basic meteorological research. While considerable insight into the physics
of tropical cyclones has been realized using axisymmetric theory and models,
fundamental questions remain concerning the role of convective asymmetries in
the tropical cyclone lifecycle and in other geophysical vortices as well.
Perhaps the most fundamental question is whether convective asymmetries enhance
or hinder the vortex. Under this award, the principal investigator will take a
two-pronged approach in investigating the nonlinear dynamics of convective
asymmetries in the near-core region of hurricanes. The first thrust involves a
theoretical investigation of the dynamical impact of outbreaks of cumulus
convection on the larger-scale vortex circulation. Determining the role that
vortex Rossby wave and gravity-inertia waves play in modulating the mixing of
convectively generated potential vorticity near the center of the vortex is the
principal objective. The second task involves an observational study using
existing radar data to examine the kinematics and dynamics of vortex Rossby
waves in hurricanes. This part of the research will be done in collaboration
with Dr. Marks of NOAA's Hurricane Research Division.