* 9732023
* Ultrafast and 4pi-Confocal Micro-Spectroscopy of Few or Single Atomic Defects, Migration, and Local Processes in Inhomogeneous Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Richard Williams, Wake Forest University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 197,000.00

9732023 Williams This proposal by Professor Richard T. Williams of the
Department of Physics of Wake Forest University describes a research program for
the characterization of materials based on far-field optical microscopy. The
goal is atomic scale identification and characterization of local and extended
defects in inorganic materials. Specific phenomena which will be observed and
studied by this technique include local diffusion of adsorbates in zeolites,
single molecule imaging of fluorescent dyes in organic host matrices, Cesium 3+
clustering at interfaces of fluoride hosts, 3D mapping GaN/AlN films, and
characterization of desorption -induced defects in ionic and semiconducting
systems. The proposed work involves new, high-risk, high-payoff research. %%%
This proposal by Professor Richard T. Williams of the Department of Physics of
Wake Forest University describes a research program for the characterization of
materials based on far-field optical microscopy. The goal is atomic scale
identification and characterization of local and extended defects in inorganic
materials. Specific phenomena which will be observed and studied by this
technique include local diffusion of adsorbates in zeolites, single molecule
imaging of fluorescent dyes in organic host matrices, Cesium 3+ clustering at
interfaces of fluoride hosts, 3dimensional mapping Gallium-Nitride/Aluminum-
Nitride films, and characterization of desorption -induced defects in ionic and
semiconducting systems. The proposed work involves new, high-risk, high-payoff
research. ***