* 9732922
* Topics in Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Lance Fortnow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2001
* USD 203,994.00

For over thirty years, computational complexity theory has provided the computer
science community with a theoretical backbone from which one can understand the
power of computation. Computational complexity has produced the tools that
allows one to understand what likely can and cannot be computed in a reasonable
amount of time and memory. This research will continue this tradition. While
this research will look at a wide range of problems in many different areas of
computational complexity it will focus on two interesting directions. The
project first looks at a new model of computation, quantum computing. Computer
scientists have recently discovered the powerful applications of the
cancellation effect of quantum physics. Though these quantum computers do not
yet exist, nice theoretical models of these machines allow study of their
complexity. The research will look at ways to apply the cancellation effects in
the well-studied area of counting complexity to help the understanding of the
complexity of quantum computation. The research will also embark on a more
ambitious plan of attempting complexity class separation, one of the most
important and least successful directions in the area. In particular, the
research will try to show languages in computable in nondeterministic polynomial
time, such as the famous traveling salesman problem, cannot be computable in
(logarithmic) amount of space. The research well use tools recently developed by
the PI of simulating space and time by alternation and applying Post's program
of looking at properties of these and other classes. By understanding the
relationship among complexity classes, one can better understand the nature of
computation and provide the necessary directions one needs to solve problems on
various models of computation. This research will help strengthen the
theoretical foundations from which computer science stands.