* 9732653
* Probing the Fundamentals of Polymer Melt Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2001
* USD 272,500.00

9732653 Hsaio The main objective of the proposed research is to explore several
fundamental issues of polymer melt crystallization, which include early stages
of phase transformation, secondary crystallization and deformation-induced
crystallization. The rationale for the proposed study is as follows. It is now
firmly established that, in polymer melt, long-chain molecules can crystallize
into a two- phase structure with periodic arrangement of lamellae and amorphous
interlayers under quiescent and flow conditions. Although the kinetics of the
process can be understood with nucleation and growth theories, the mechanism of
forming a two- phase structure at short and long time scales under these
conditions, requires further clarification. The proposed research is intended to
systematically study the fundamental behavior of melt crystallization in
polymers with different molecular architecture, chain stiffness, molecular
weight and chain branching using several advanced characterization techniques
including time-resolved simultaneous synchrotron SAXS/WAXD, microscopy, light
scattering and thermal analysis. %%% The significance of this work lies in the
probable universal behavior of the phase transformation during melt
crystallization, in the enormous multiplicity of macromolecules, that is yet to
be completely understood. With the proposed study, an in-depth understanding
about the subject may be obtained. This can significantly improve the ability to
correlate the structure, morphology, process and property relationships in the
applications of crystalline polymers. ***