* 9732567
* Structure and Defects of Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Michael Widom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 191,000.00

9732567&lt;br/&gt;Widom&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports theoretical research into
the properties of quasicrystalline alloys. Aluminum-rich alloys containing
transition metals form intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals. These
alloys display unusual mechanical properties such as low coefficients of
friction, great hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high
temperatures. Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys, and may
eventually coat surfaces of conventional metals subject to wear by friction,
such as frying pains and automobile engine parts. The research conducted here
will attempt to understand the atomic interactions, atomic structure and
resulting mechanical properties of bulk quasicrystals, their defects and
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic structure based pair and many-body
interaction potentials for intermetallic alloys allow reliable total energy
calculations for complex crystalline and aperiodic structures. This research
evaluates and applies these interactions for such alloy families as Al-Mn, Al-
Cu-Co, Al-Ni-Co and Al-Cu-Fe. With the interactions in hand, we will evaluate
mechanical and thermodynamic stability for complex crystalline structure and
decagonal and icosahedral quasicrystals. We will improve current understanding
of the atomic positions, and understand the energetic preference for particular
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the equilibrium thermodynamics of
these phases we will evaluate low energy excitations such as vacancies, chemical
disorder and atomic vibrations. Quasicrystalline materials possess additional
types of structural excitations known as phason fluctuations. The precise
meaning of a phason fluctuation in terms of atomic displacements is presently
not well known. One stategy for modeling thermodynamic properties involves
deriving tiling Hamiltonians. These are approximations for calculating the free
energy of large aperiodic structures based on careful evaluation of energy and
entropy for small unit cell structures. With the tiling Hamiltonian we can study
phason eleasticity and solid state phase
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forefront theoretical and experimental
research addresses mechanical properties of quasicrystals, including the role of
defects. This research examines structures and long range strain fields at
dislocations and energetics of grain boundaries and twin boundaries. Structural
modifications at interfaces between quasicrystals and vacuum or other metals
require attention. Beyond these purely structural questions, the low energy
excitations discussed above influence dynamical properties such as atomic
diffusion and dislocation motion. This grant studies such defects. Starting with
simplified tiling and Lennard-Jones atomistic models, we eventually link with
the tiling Hamiltonians and atomic structure
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports theoretical research into
the properties of quasicrystalline alloys. Aluminum-rich alloys containing
transition metals form intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals. These
alloys display unusual mechanical properties such as low coefficients of
friction, great hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high
temperatures. Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys, and may
eventually coat surfaces of conventional metals subject to wear by friction,
such as frying pains and automobile engine parts. The research conducted here
will attempt to understand the atomic interactions, atomic structure and
resulting mechanical properties of bulk quasicrystals, their defects and
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;