* 9732811
* Testing and Modeling of Saturated Interfaces in Soil-       Structure Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Chandra Desai, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2002
* USD 255,000.00

The behavior at interfaces and joints in geomechanical problems such as
structure-soil foundation, and structure-rock foundation systems plays a vital
role in their response under static and dynamic loads. Although laboratory
testing and modeling for the interface response, mostly under dry conditions,
have been performed in the past, the important issue of the effect of pore water
pressures at interfaces on the soil-structure response has not been fully
investigated before. The response of saturated interfaces is influenced
significantly by the pore pressure development and its resulting effect on
deformations, failure, and load carrying capacities of the structure-foundation
systems is important for safe and economical design. This research will use a
newly developed shear test device that allows static and dynamic loading and
pore water pressures with inclusion of factors such as roughness, normal stress,
density, simple and direct shear conditions and large-sized specimens. As
interfaces between sand and concrete can provide a general condition, a series
of quasistatic and cyclic tests on dry and saturated Ottawa sand-concrete
interfaces will be performed. Another main objective of the research is to
develop the unified disturbed state concept (DSC) which allows elastic and
plastic deformations, hardening, softening and degradation, and modeling of
liquefaction if indicated in the test results. The model will be calibrated
based on the test data, and validated with respect to independent tests. An
optimization procedure will permit systematic simplification and reduction in
parameters, toward practical analysis and design. Finally, guidelines for
application of the model, including through nonlinear finite element procedures,
will be developed.