* 9732913
* PPD/DP:  USING SPACE SCIENCE TO ENHANCE SCIENCE,            MATHEMATICS, TECHNOLOGY SKILLS AND SELF-ESTEEM IN SPECIAL   NEEDS STUDENTS
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2001
* Michael Kersjes, Space is Special Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 03/31/2001
* USD 436,850.00

Space is Special has been collaborating for several years with NASA and Space
Camp to provide some students with disabilities exposure to hands-on science
experiences along side students who do not have disabilities. This project will
expand the project to reach many more students, their parents, and teachers. The
following are goals to expand past efforts beyond West Michigan to encourage
more communities and school districts to improve the mathematics, science,
engineering, and technology education of students with disabilities. Space is
Special (SIS) will: (1) Use science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
education to enhance the self esteem of special education students. (2) Create
opportunities for these students to work at a high level of proficiency in
science and mathematics. (3) Provide more venues for mainstreaming these
students by demonstrating their ability to be mainstreamed at Space Camp. (4)
Give parents the experience of success for their children and provide an avenue
for building on abilities rather than disabilities. (5) Help change the
attitudes of students with disabilities to reach for higher goals, to enroll in
more advanced courses, and to insist that they be given the right to take normal
course loads in mathematics, science, and technology. (6) Give students with
disabilities the opportunity to live, learn, and work in a team setting. (7)
Encourage special education students to go on to higher education and pursue
careers in technical fields. (8) Create a full set of educational materials--
including slides, video tapes, and written lesson plans and experiments--so that
teachers of special education students can increase their effectiveness at
giving these students opportunities to demonstrate their skills in these fields.
To achieve these goals, SIS proposes a three-year pilot project to demonstrate
the effectiveness of specific activities and materials on a state-wide basis in
Michigan. If successful, the pro ject can become the foundation for similar
efforts elsewhere. The project will develop a curriculum and establish a Web
page for the project that will include inputs from current and past SIS
participants that can be used as an educational resource by special education
classes anywhere. The project will focus on involving special education teachers
directly in the project. Teachers will be selected who will observe project
teaching methods and will attend Space Camp with a group of students from their
districts. The concept of "master teacher" will be implemented with the first
group of teachers. These teachers then later can be used to train more special
education teachers in the SIS concepts and demonstrate student success in
science, mathematics, engineering and technology. A Space Camp summer teachers
institute will encompass a week-long training session at camp with special
attention to taking lessons from the experience back to the classroom.