* 9732959
* CAREER: Near-Optimum Low-Complexity Soft Decision Decoding  of Linear Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Marc P. Fossorier, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 05/31/2003
* USD 250,000.00

Error control coding has become an integral part of almost every digital
communication system . The objective of this proposal is to investigate several
important problems in coding and to establish teaching plans to develop
competent engineers and scientists for the fast changing area of digital
communications. The proposed research includes three inter-related areas: (1)
soft-decision decoding of linear codes; (2) turbo decoding; and (3) coded
modulation for unequal error protection (UEP) applications. The first research
area is composed of two parts. In the first part, a new unified analytical
approach which lets us tightly bound the error performance of many reliability-
based algorithms at practical SNR is to be investigated. Although numerous such
algorithms have been proposed for more than 30 years, no such bound exists yet.
In the second part of (1),it is proposed to devise efficient soft decision
decoding schemes for long powerful block codes with reduced decoding complexity.
No existing algorithm can decode such codes without a tremendous computational
effort. In area (2), it is proposed to reduce the delay associated with turbo
decoding. This long decoding delay prevents the use of turbo-codes in real time
communication systems despite their astonishing error performance at very low
SNR values. Finally, it is proposed to devise coded modulation schemes with UEP
applications based on conventional signal constellations. Very few such schemes
have been proposed despite the increasing demand of coding schemes able to adapt
to different channel conditions, such as satellite broadcasting for HDTV. The
second part of this proposal concerns the teaching plans of the PI. Based on the
principle that students are the primary reason most electrical engineering
programs exist in universities, the PI's teaching main goal is to develop
students into engineers and scientists who will be able to make significant
contributions to the development of data communicatio n systems. Also, the
particular geographical and cultural situations of the University of Hawaii with
respect to other US-mainland universities are considered.