* 9732847
* Poling of Ferroelectric Thin Films; Application to          Integrated Memory, Sensing and Actuation Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Timothy Sands, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2001
* USD 235,920.00

9732847 Sands Thermally-assisted and electric-field-driven alignment of
spontaneous electric dipole moments in bulk ferroelectric ceramics is well
understood. This "poling" process is in fact essential to the achievement of a
macroscopically observable piezoelectric effect. With respect to the emerging
thin-film applications of integrated ferroelectric films ranging from
nonvolatile memory to chemical sensors to piezoelectric microvalves, the
understanding and manipulation of poling effects is limited at present to the
manipulation of 1800 domain boundaries. Other potentially important poling
effects, including control of as-deposited film texture, thermally-assisted
manipulation of non-1800 ferroelastic domain boundaries, and field-driven phase
changes leading to shape memory behavior, have received comparatively scant
attention. It is the primary goal of the proposed research to elucidate, model
and manipulate the distribution of spontaneous electrical dipoles in
ferroelectric films and to understand the relationships between poling behavior,
properties (ferroelectric and piezoelectric) and device performance. With regard
to poling, the primary differences between thin films and bulk ceramics are 1)
the biaxial in-plane mechanical clamping effect of the substrate, 2) the much
smaller grains in thin films, 3) the grain-shape anisotropy and crystallographic
texture of thin films, and 4) the higher electrical breakdown fields of most
thin films. The following scientific objectives will be pursued: - Evaluate and
model the combined effects of temperature and electric field on the manipulation
of spontaneous polarization in Pb-based perovskite ferroelectric films e.g.,
Pb(Zr,Ti)03 or PZT as a function of the degree and type of mechanical clamping.
Determine the role of crystallographic texture on domain structure, poling
behavior and properties. Model and demonstrate poling via electric-field-driven
phase transformations and the associated shape memory effects. These objectiv es
will be addressed by experiments that employ PZT/metallic
oxide/template/substrate combinations designed to yield ferroelectric films with
microstructures ranging from nominally monocrystalline to
uniaxially(fiber)-textured to random polycrystalline. The effect of mechanical
clamping will be explored by comparing the same prototype device structures
before and after substrate removal. Electric-field-driven poling effects will be
investigated as a function of temperature by hysteresis measurements and in situ
transmission electron microscopy. Finally, the understanding attained by these
investigations will be applied to the design and fabrication of prototype
memory, sensing and actuation devices, with emphasis on both the initial device
performance, and the role of microstructure on the reliability and stability of
the devices. The involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in projects
that span the fundamental science to the device prototype under the constraints
of manufacturability will prepare students for future careers in materials
integration for functionally-enhanced Microsystems. The Principal Investigator
and his students have access to the facilities necessary to perform pulsed laser
deposition, sputtering, four-circle x-ray diffraction, electrical testing,
transmission electron microscopy (in situ, analytical and high-resolution),
electron-beam lithography and all processes required for CMOS Si and Si-surface
micromachining. These facilities are located in the Principal Investigator's
laboratory and in the shared facilities of the Integrated Materials Laboratory
(IML), the Berkeley Microfabrication Laboratory, The National Center for
Electron Microscopy (NCEM/LBNL) and the Berkeley Sensor & Actuator Center
(BSAC). ***