* 9732660
* Studies of Localized Impurities in Quantum Dots using       Synchrotron Radiation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Yi-Han Kao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9732660 Kao This University/Industry collaborative GOALI project focuses on
preparation and characterization of doped quantum dots to identify and gain
understanding of mechanisms responsible for their unusual properties. New types
of doped quantum dots will be designed, prepared, and characterized using
synchrotron radiation at the National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Various doped quantum dots, especially rare-earth doped
oxides, as well as thin films and nano-channel grids, will be prepared and
studied. Synchrotron radiation experiments will include x-ray excited
luminescence (XEL), extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), response
time of doped quantum dots to x-ray pulses, geometrical resonance, and studies
of coherent light emission in nanowires and nanodots. The XEL and EXAFS
measurements are expected to be particularly useful for probing the local
environment surrounding impurity atoms and for understanding impurity-host
interactions. The project is co- supported by the DMR Electronic Materials
Program and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). %%% Basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science having strong
technological relevance are addressed by this project. The basic knowledge and
understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
the performance of advanced materials by providing a fundamental understanding
and a basis for designing and producing improved nanostructures. An important
feature of the program is the integration of research and education by providing
an important educational opportunity through the GOALI aspect of the project for
students to experience both academic and industrial research approaches and
environments. ***