* 9732848
* Controlled Heat and Metal Transfer in Gas Metal Arc         Welding-Base for New Rapid Prototyping Technique
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Radovan Kovacevic, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 03/31/2003
* USD 226,000.00

9732848 Kovacevic As research into 3-D welding continues, the ability to produce
fully dense, structurally strong metal parts directly from 3-D CAD data comes
nearer to reality. This project will lay the foundation for developing a
technique of controlling the dimensional accuracy of parts obtained by 3-D
welding, one of the newest rapid prototyping methods. In 3-D welding, a droplet
of the melted electrode wire is detached to form a metallic deposit. Rapid
prototyping or rapid manufacturing may be accomplished by controlled deposition
of the drops. A metallic part can be made layer by layer, with the drop size and
detachment timing defining the resultant shape of the part, as well as its
mechanical and metallurgical properties. The proposed system for rapid
prototyping based on 3-D welding addresses the challenge of simultaneous
geometric regulation of dimensional tolerances and mechanical and metallurgical
properties of the part, by combined heat and mass transfer control. 3-D welding
has the potential of offering numerous advantages over other rapid prototyping
techniques. Final parts may be constructed with a large variation in dimensions
and geometry by the introduction of robotic control of the welding torch. 3-D
welding would allow the direct production of parts made of different materials.
It is projected that the very low operating cost, the rapid processing time, and
the control of properties makes 3-D welding unique among current rapid
prototyping techniques. The combination of the theoretical and experimental
approach will provide better understanding of the physics and the basis to
optimize this innovative technique.