* 9732060
* Conference: New Directions in Theoretical Public Economics, June 1998, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1998,04/30/1999
* Frank Page, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1999
* USD 1,000.00

Project Abstract This award supports a conference, New Directions in
Theoretical Public Finance, held at the University of Alabama in Spring, 1998.
The aim of the conference is to bring together leading researchers in emerging
areas of theoretical public economics to address via research presentations and
discussions the new problems in public economics identified below. Many of the
new paradigms and insights in public economics are the result of applications of
modern game theory (e.g., evolutionary games) and general equilibrium methods to
problems in public economics. This conference furthers the trend toward the
application of modern methods to public economics by bringing together more
experienced researchers in public economics with younger game theorist and
mathematical economists interested in emerging problems in public economics.
Competitive markets have proved to be effective institutions for allocating
scarce resources in complex societies. Globally, market-based economies have
flourished, while economies based on other forms of economic organization have
not. In an economy based on free markets and private property, what role should
government play in economic activity? The traditional view holds that government
has two main functions: (i) to rectify market failures and ensure that markets
are well-functioning (via, for example, regulation and maintaining a system of
courts and laws protecting private property and ensuring enforcement of
contracts); and (ii) to provide public goods, such as national defense,
education, roads (via taxation and expenditure). That branch of economics which
focuses on government and its role in the economy activity is called public
economics. With the emergence of a global economy, the traditional roles played
by national governments in economic activity (i.e., preventing and tending to
market failures and providing public goods) have become more problematic, and
the policy issues related to these traditional governmental activities have
become more subtle and complex. Important global environmental issues of public
economics have recently become prominent (e.g., Montreal, Rio de Janeiro, and
later this year Kyoto) and some of those issues, often highly controversial,
already are (and must be) dealt with at the global level. Simultaneously with
the movement toward a global economy, there has been in the US a gradual
realization that big government brings with it many problems which may interfere
with the efficient functioning of markets as well as with the development and
implementation of effective government policies. In the US Economy the
increasing demand for government programs and services brought by an expanding
and aging population together with the already high level of government
indebtedness have led economist to begin rethinking how traditional governmental
activities can best be carried out - and more importantly, to question whether
or not some traditionally governmental activities should be left to the market.
To what extent can the provision of public goods be decentralized via market-
like institutions? Can the financing, design and implementation of programs to
support health, education, welfare, and the environment be efficiently delegated
to smaller jurisdictions such as state and local governments? In what areas and
under what circumstances do national governments have a comparative advantage in
implementing such programs? What impact will the movement toward
decentralization and small government have upon a market economy. How can one
design an efficient, budget-balancing fiscal system that safeguards legitimate
public interests? What impact would such a fiscal system have on overall
economic activity? These are some of the pressing issues in public economics.
New theoretical paradigms which will provide a deeper understanding of the
interactions of governments and economies have begun to emerge in public
economics. Ultimately these paradigms will lead to new scientific approaches to
complex policy questions in public economics, some of which were touched on
above.