* 9732854
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Experimental Analysis    of Adpative Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/1999
* H. Peyton Young, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 04/30/1999
* USD 1,680.00

How do people play games? More formally, how do people make decisions in
strategic situations? This is a question that has concerned game theorists for
decades. Do they use the analytic techniques employed by game theorists or do
they use other approaches? Evidence from experiments conducted over the past 20
years has shown that in many situations people do not engage in the sort of
analysis that a game theorist would. In the last five years, there have been a
number of studies aimed at trying to determine if the decision making behavior
used by experimental subjects can be described by a few simple learning
heuristics and algorithms. The current study first identifies a recurring
problem in the methods used to identify player types in these studies and then
proposes an alternative experimental design to eliminate this problem. This
research is the basis for my dissertation and the funding from the grant will be
used in performing the experimental portion of the work. The basic problem with
previous studies is that the econometric and statistical methods they use are
not capable of discriminating between learning rules. The two basic classes of
learning rules differ according to the type of information players are thought
to base their decisions on: their own payoff history or past plays by their
opponent. Rules that are contained in the same class differ on the particular
amount of and manner in which this information is used. Previous studies
observed only strategy choices in the experiments and then attempted to use
econometric tests to determine simultaneously which type of information the
subjects used and how they used it. A simulations based study has shown that
these econometric tests fail to be able to succeed in both tasks. Based on the
reasons these methods fail, the proposed study includes an extra component in
the experiment intended to monitor the use of information by subjects. This is
intended to allow the experimenter to determine which type of information the
subjects are using in order to aid in the process of modeling their learning or
decision making behavior. The result should be a more accurate and reliable
means of identifying the use of learning rules among the subjects and possibly
even identifying behavior not described by current models.