* 9732294
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Environmental      Science and Engineering at Clarkson University
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Susan Powers, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa A. Maldonado, Ph.D., P.E.
* 02/28/2001
* USD 208,558.00

Proposal No.: 9732294 PI: Powers University: Clarkson U ABSTRACT It is proposed
that a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site be established at
Clarkson University in the area of environmental science and engineering. This
three-year program will bring eleven outstanding undergraduate students on
campus for a 10-week intensive summer research experience. The objectives of the
REU Site program will be: 1) to provide students who are traditionally
underrepresented in environmental science and engineering (women and minorities)
with an opportunity to conduct independent research; 2) to teach these students
about the process of conducting sound research and the importance of research in
solving environmental problems; and, 3) to expose students to the importance of
graduate school as an integral part of the educational pipeline leading to
successful careers in applied and basic research. The primary component of the
program will be the completion of a research project in the area of multiphase
environmental systems. Undergraduates will be assigned a self-contained aspect
of a larger research project and will work with graduate students and faculty in
the Departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chemistry, and Biology
to complete their project. Students will be matched with these faculty based on
the interests and abilities of the students and the specific needs of the
faculty. Dissemination of the research results will be emphasized; all students
will participate in research group meetings, write a report, and present their
work at a University-wide undergraduate research symposium. A seminar series
that covers issues related to conducting sound research and graduate school will
add some breadth to the students'experiences. The final component of the program
will be several community-building activities designed to foster cohesiveness
among the students and enhance their appreciation for belonging to a
multicultural group. Assessment of the program will i nclude continual
evaluation and improvement of our program to ensure the stated objectives are
achieved.