* 9732275
* REU Site in Biology: Conservation Biology in the            Agricultural Midwest
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Thomas Nelson, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 05/31/2000
* USD 100,936.00

9732275 The Eastern Illinois University (EIU) Zoology Department will provide
intensive research experiences for 9 undergraduate students during the summers
of 1998 and 1999. Student participants will form research teams to engage in
studies addressing conservation biology and landscape fragmentation. The goals
of this experience will be to foster in each participant an understanding of the
research process, and encourage each student's growth from dependent learner to
independent researcher to interdependent member of a scientific team.
Participants will be recruited nationally and selected based on their
professional goals, motivation and maturity, and academic achievements. Students
will be fully immersed in the research process as they choose their own research
problem, write a proposal, conduct the work, and report their results and
conclusions. Each participant will work closely with an individual faculty
mentor and team members. Opportunities to interact and collaborate with other
faculty members and research teams will be provided through an orientation
retreat, weekly group meetings, and a series of formal workshops and field
trips. In addition, visiting scientists, recognized leaders in conservation
biology, will each spend 1 or 2 days presenting seminars, participating in
informal discussion groups, and critiquing research projects. Students will have
ample opportunities to interact with mentors, fellow participants, and visiting
scientists in both formal and informal settings. EIU is strongly committed to
undergraduate research and will make important contributions to this program,
including provision of a block of dormitory rooms and a common dining area for
participants, waiver of tuition for three credit-hours, and free use of campus
facilities, including the library, computer labs, and recreation center.