* 9732197
* REU: Glacial Geological Research for Undergraduates,        Matanuska Glacier, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Edward Evenson, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 12/31/1999
* USD 41,864.00

This proposal is a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site.
Undergraduate students will conduct research for six weeks on the Matanuska
Glacier, a large valley glacier in south central Alaska. The glacier's terminus
is easily accessible from the Glenn Highway. Students will stay at the Matanuska
Glacier Research Camp, about two kilometers from the glacier's terminus. The
Camp is maintained by the Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory which
also sponsors some of the ongoing research. Students will participate in field
work that will involve collecting water samples, maintaining equipment,
downloading data, filtering water for suspended sediment, and tabulating data.
Each student will identify a research project to which he/she will devote
several hours a day. Directed research projects may be in subdisciplines of
glacial geology, sedimentology, glaciohydrology, or hydrogeology. The faculty
associates will supervise the students' research to ensure appropriate projects
are defined and that the students are able to collect the necessary information.
Students will be expected to complete their undergraduate thesis projects at the
respective home institutions during the subsequent school year and will be
encouraged to present the results at a national meeting.