* 9732609
* REU: Watershed Development and Engineering in Urbanizing    Regions
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Yaping Liu, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Vicki Booker
* 04/30/2002
* USD 215,190.00

Proposal No.: 9732609 PI: Steenhuis University: Cornell U ABSTRACT This proposal
seeks to engage underrepresented minorities and women in research on watershed
development and engineering at Cornell University with cooperation of Alabama
A&M, Florida A&M, Clark Atlanta University and the University of Puerto Rico.
The philosophy of the proposed program will be to engage students in the forming
of a question or hypothesis, planning of a method to answer the question or test
the hypothesis, critically analyzing the results, drawing conclusions, and
presenting the findings. The focus is on those problems within the watershed
that have biological and/or environmental components. For this, we will initiate
an interdisciplinary approach which involves faculty with background in either
biological, environmental or soil sciences. Topics will include the experimental
and simulation studies of the movement of agri-chemicals, organisms (such as
Cryptosporidium) and other chemicals through the landscape, the reduction of
nitrogen in animal feeds, composting, and the effect of municipal sludges on
metal mobility. The integration of these student projects on a watershed scale
will be emphasized during the weekly meetings. A summer REU Program is proposed
for ten students. We have also included a possibility for the summer REU
students to continue their research at the home institutions. A structured
setting for students during the summer Program will be established, which
includes: (1) an introductory session that discusses the critical elements of a
research program (2) a weekly seminar with formal presentations by faculty
mentors and REU Fellows, dealing with the topic of watershed scale integration
of the studies, and general topics (libraries, bibliographic databases,
computing resources, critical analysis of the approach, basics of experimental
design, and opportunities for graduate programs), (3) regular meetings with the
faculty mentor at least twice a week, (4) a discussion during week 7 in which
the REU students present their progress to the group, and (5) a final
presentation during week 10 in a department-wide setting. Also, various group
building activities will be organized. Proposed is an aggressive recruitment
procedure to expand the pool of minorities that benefit from the REU experience.
The project is a cooperative effort between Cornell and Alabama A&M and involves
the participation of three more minority universities in recruitment and
mentoring during the academic year.