* 9732245
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Biomedical Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2003
* Solomon Eisenberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 12/31/2003
* USD 393,987.00

Proposal No.: 9732245 PI: Eisenberg University: Boston U ABSTRACT The proposed
REU Site program will provide mentored research experiences for twelve
undergraduate interns within the context of ongoing research programs in the
Department of Biomedical Engineering at Boston University. Undergraduate
students will be recruited nationally for participation in the REU program. The
REU interns will work on their individual projects as members of research teams
in the laboratories of the participating investigators. The research projects
span a wide range of research activities representative of Biomedical
Engineering and include both modeling/simulation and experimental work. All
interns will be exposed to the entire spectrum of research activities included
in this proposal through joint weekly meetings in which the interns discuss
their work with each other. These sessions will also be used to provide a forum
for presentations and group discussions about a variety of topics intended to
supplement the research experiences and encourage the interns to pursue graduate
training in Biomedical Engineering. Additional group sessions will be devoted to
ethical issues in science and engineering in general, and biomedical engineering
in particular. An orientation at the beginning of the program will introduce the
interns to the undergraduate research experiences and help familiarize the
participants with the process of initiating independent inquiry in which there
are a number of degrees of freedom in the methods chosen and the outcomes
obtained. Oral and written technical communication skills will also be
introduced. The goal of the REU Site program in Biomedical Engineering is to
create an environment and culture to encourage the undergraduate participants to
pursue research careers in Biomedical Engineering by exposing them to the
intellectual challenge and excitement of independent inquiry.