* 9732039
* REU:  Wyoming Infrared Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Steven Howell, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 04/30/2001
* USD 185,100.00

9732039 Canterna The Wyoming Infrared Observatory (WIRO) will continue its
Summer Undergraduate Research Assistantship Program (SURAP) as a National
Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site for the
summers of 1998, 1999, and 2000. The principal goals of SURAP are: To introduce
the undergraduate student to a realistic and fulfilling experience in
astrophysics research, including current concerns on science ethics. To acquaint
each undergraduate student with the diverse research fields in modem
astrophysics. To offer each undergraduate student an opportunity to work
directly with active professionals and be given the responsibility to become
independent, creative researchers. To place each undergraduate student in a
socially diverse environment which includes student colleagues from different
cultural backgrounds and a wide variety of geographical and educational
institutions. To encourage each undergraduate student to publish their results
and communicate their research findings at professional meetings. To expose the
undergraduate students to a wide variety of additional scientific and outdoor
endeavors unique to the Wyoming and Rocky Mountain region through a series of
field trips. Six to eight participants will be chosen from universities and
colleges throughout the nation. Candidates are selected by faculty advisors,
based on their academic performance, interest in a research career, and
recommendations. The final SURAP participants are chosen to fulfill SURAP's goal
to have students from diverse backgrounds. Student projects are designed to
match student research interests and be completed within the summer. Efforts are
made to recruit freshmen and sophomore undergraduates, women, and
underrepresented minorities. A concurrent academic/laboratory course and
research seminar will accompany the tutorial research program to help the
students place this experience in a wider academic context and provide a general
direction to the program. This course includes an introduction to modem infrared
detectors, image processing, experience in observing with a modem, computer
controlled telescope, and academic instruction in fundamental, modem
astrophysics. The focal point of the course will be a student-oriented, temporal
monitoring program of interesting astronomical objects (e.g. LPV's, AGN's, CV's)
using WIRO's computer-controlled, 24-inch reflector at Red Buttes. All students,
regardless of their principal research program, will participate in acquiring
and reducing visual, near IR, and mid-IR photometric data. In addition, all
students will observe at the 2.3 meter telescope with the faculty. Students who
complete research projects with their advisors are encouraged to present their
results at a American Astronomical Society meeting or at the National Conference
on Undergraduate Research. James P. Wright Program Director