* 9732148
* Neuroscience Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Brian MacPherson, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9732148 This REU Site will provide research experience for students who would
otherwise not have the opportunity. In addition, it will attract large numbers
of highly qualified graduate students to the University of Kentucky. The program
will provide an interactive environment for faculty and graduate students to
expose undergraduate students to the many facets of a graduate career. It will
inform undergraduate students about career opportunities available in the field
of neuroscience over the wide spectrum of industry, academia, medicine, and
public service. Students will be given an intensive short course on
neuroscience, covering basic anatomical, physiological, developmental, and
behavioral aspects. Later in the summer, a mini-symposium on a selected research
area will bring leading national researchers to UK for seminars and informal
discussions with students. Students will be immersed in a research project of
their own choosing, working in the lab of a faculty member who acts as mentor.
The goal is production of publishable data, and to this end all students will
present the results of their research in a setting resembling a regional or
national professional meeting. This program should give students an appreciation
for the nature of biomedical research and the various opportunities for careers
in this field.