* 9732687
* Research in Random Matrices and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Harold Widom, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 215,689.00

Proposal: DMS-9732687 Principal Investigator: Harold Widom Abstract: Random
matrix theory has had remarkably wide applicability: the spacing distributions
arising in random matrix theory have over the past few years been shown to have
deep applications in number theory; there are applications in numerical analysis
and computational complexity where condition numbers of random matrices are
important; random matrix theory has motivated developments in the Riemann-
Hilbert method, which in turn finds applications to a variety of problems in
integrable systems and inverse scattering. In physics the applications range
from many-body systems (both atomic and nuclear), to quantum chaos to quantum
transport in mesoscopic systems. Four areas for research are specified. The
first is related to the fact that in certain random matrix ensembles the measure
describing the eigenvalue distribution is the Gibbs measure for charges
interacting via a potential at inverse temperature beta equal to one, two or
four (corresponding to orthogonal, unitary and symplectic ensembles,
respectively). The limiting spacing distributions for these ensembles are now
quite well understood but the methods are applicable to these values of beta
only. The question for general beta, while quite difficult, is mathematically
interesting and quite important in statistical physics. A new approach looks
promising and we intend to pursue it. The second area of research is the
question of universality of the limiting distribution of the largest eigenvalue
in matrix ensembles. This would be analogous to the universality of the Gaussian
distribution for sums of independent random variables, the central limit
theorem. Thirdly, we propose to study the order statistics of the spacings
between eigenvalues (which is different from the spacing distributions between
consecutive eigenvalues mentioned above). For example, what is the probability
distribution for the largest or smallest spacing? There are known results for
independent random variabl es but, apparently, none yet for for random matrices,
whose eigenvalues are far from independent. Finally, we hope to complete earlier
work on the asymptotics of solutions to the periodic Toda equations by
determining the asymptotics on the so-called critical curves, where the
asymptotics will take a very different form. The theory of Wiener-Hopf operators
and operator determinants should play a decisive role in this investigation. In
the 1950s Eugene Wigner, in his now classic study of highly excited states of
large nuclei of atoms, introduced a mathematical model to describe the spacing
between these states. This model goes under the name of random matrix theory.
Since Wigner's pioneering work, it has been shown that the mathematics of random
matrices has far-reaching applications to condensed matter physics, atomic
physics and the new area of quantum chaos. In mathematics itself, random matrix
theory has surfaced in a multitude of different contexts. It is natural to ask
why the subject has such wide applicability. In probability theory the bell-
shaped curve is pervasive because of a theorem which says roughly that when one
adds quantities which are random and independent, the sum follows the bell-
shaped curve regardless of the distribution of the quantities themselves. The
distribution functions of random matrix theory appear to have a similar
universality for a class of problems in which there is a high degree of
dependence in the underlying processes. In the present project the mathematics
of random matrix theory will be further developed with an eye toward possible
applications.