* 9732763
* Artificially Structured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 330,000.00

9732763 Chien This project deals with artificially structured materials,
primarily quasi two-dimensional multilayers and one-dimensional nanowire arrays.
Such materials exhibit novel properties due to their geometry, the interplay
between constituent materials, and the degrees of freedom in their fabrication.
The multilayer work will address key questions in
ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic (FM/AF)exchange coupling and
magnetic/superconducting multilayers. Thus, the materials fabrication work will
address the question of whether FM/AF coupling can be established between
transition metal and rare earth moments. A further topic to be investigated in
detail is the spatial variation of the FM/AF coupling as the individual layers
in the multilayer arrays are traversed. The magnetic/superconducting multilayers
employing ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic constituents offer an excellent
opportunity to investigate the pair-breaking mechanism arising in
antiferromagnetic/superconducting planer interfaces, and superconducting ground
state properties expressed in junction interfaces. Novel fabrication techniques
have been developed to produce bismuth nanowire arrays that have been found to
exhibit very large magnetoresistance. The origins of this and related electrical
transport properties remain obscure and will be further investigated. The
research involves graduate students in a range of fundamental projects that also
have potential for major impact on technological areas such as information
storage technology and the microelectronics industry. %%% This project deals
with artificially structured materials such as quasi two-dimensional multilayers
and one- dimensional nanowire arrays. Such materials exhibit novel properties
due to their geometry, the interplay between constituent materials, and the
degrees of freedom in their fabrication. These materials are of interest from
fundamental viewpoints, but additionally have important technological
applications in magnetic recording readheads, wide-range magnetic field sensing
devises, and field emitters for flat panel displays. The magnetic interaction
between multilayers leads to a phenomenon known as exchange biasing. This
exchange biasing is at the heart of the new generation of high performance
magnetic recording heads. Several key questions in the nature and mechanism of
exchange biasing, and materials synthesis aspects of exchange biasing, will be
explored. Nanowire arrays of bismuth will be investigated to understand origins
of magnetoresistance in this semi- metallic material. The arrays show promise
for applications for field sensing devices. The mechanism of the large
magnetoresistance is poorly understood and the influence of fabrication methods
on this transport property will be systematically investigated. The research
involves graduate students in a range of fundamental projects that also have
potential for major impact on technological areas such as information storage
technology and the microelectronics industry. ***