* 9732949
* Determination of the Rate of Nucleation of Aerosol          Particles in Clear and Cloud-Processed Atmospheric          Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1998,01/31/2004
* Lynn Russell, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/2004
* USD 425,330.00

ATM-9732949 Russell This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project in
the Atmospheric Chemistry Program integrates a research and a teaching component
into a five-year career plan. The research part of this plan undertakes a series
of studies to advance our current understanding of both the chemical compounds
and the meteorological conditions that are necessary for nucleation of new
particles to occur in the atmosphere. The teaching part uses creative new
technology-based resources to interest and teach students, incorporating
important opportunities for mentoring students on their research and
presentation skills. The research program applies the recently-developed
technique of time-of-flight mass spectrometry to the little-understood mechanism
of sulfuric acid-water nucleation, then extends this empirical evaluation of the
nucleation rate to ternary mixtures with ammonia and to organic compounds. The
strength of the approach is that it does not depend on bulk liquid properties to
describe the behavior of clusters, and hence does not suffer from the associated
uncertainties. The technique will integrate the mass spectrometric measurement
technique with a variable-volume reactor vessel for generation of clusters in
supersaturated conditions to allow the thorough characterization of the effect
of mixing times on the observed nucleation rate. In parallel, modeling is used
to investigate the effects of different boundary-layer and free-tropospheric
conditions on the observed rate of nucleation. By implementing a unique new
particle dynamics model with the capability to calculate the simultaneous
nucleation, coagulation, condensation, and activation of externally-mixed
populations of particles, the nucleation rate in areas of mixed aerosol
populations are evaluated. These results have important implications for the
possibility of nucleation of new particles in cloud outflow regions, as well as
for regions of air where air masses mix. The teaching part of this career plan
takes adva ntage of partnerships with four government-sponsored laboratories to
use new technologies as teaching tools in the classroom. Students will discover
the images provided by the latest satellite technologies and will experience a
simulated 'research flight' aboard the NCAR C130 aircraft, to increase their
interest in and knowledge of research in Atmospheric Chemistry. Undergraduate
coursework will also incorporate relevant policy and economic information to
highlight the importance of the Atmospheric Chemistry to political legislation
and business decisions for the fraction of students planning to pursue careers
in public policy, law, management, and education. Undergraduate and graduate
thesis programs are both emphasized as techniques to teach students how to work
on independent projects and to provide them with early encouragement for
pursuing careers in science by interactions with researchers. Another important
part of the mentoring included in this plan is directed toward correcting the
reported shortcomings of women and other traditionally underrepresented students
through the creation of additional speaking opportunities for students in
courses and in a new seminar series for graduate students.