* 9732151
* Undergraduate Research Training in Cell, Molecular and      Neurobiology Using Marine Animals
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Michael Greenberg, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2003
* USD 250,000.00

9732151 The Whitney Laboratory is an Institute of the University of Florida. It
was established in 1974 as a center for basic biological research, particularly
in those areas in which marine organisms serve as experimental models. Marine
model systems have had a long and successful history of use in fundamental
research, and their value remains undiminished. However, fewer and fewer
scientists are likely to exploit the research potential of marine animals,
because costs have limited the laboratory experience with these animals provided
by most universities to their undergraduate students, who have not been
encouraged to explore the biological diversity of marine models. In response to
these problems, the Whitney Laboratory began, in 1985, to offer undergraduates
the opportunity to become full participants in experiments on the physiology,
anatomy, biochemistry, and molecular biology of marine animals. This REU Site
enables 10 students each summer to select and carry out research projects in
consultation with faculty mentors. The academic experience of the students is
further enriched by participation in the seminar programs of the Laboratory and
by informal interaction with undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and established scientists who visit from the United States and other
countries.