* 9732338
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Industrial        Mathematics and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Arthur Heinricher, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2002
* USD 169,569.00

The REU in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics at WPI focuses on mathematics
and statistics applied to industrial problems. Teams of 2 - 4 students will work
for eight weeks on problems that come from businesses and industries that have
collaborated in the past years with the Center for Industrial Mathematics and
Statistics (see the Center's web page http://www.wpt.edu/~cims). The students
will work closely with a company representative who will introduce the problem
and help guide their work toward a solution that the company can really use.
They will also work closely with a faculty advisor to maintain a focus on the
mathematical issues at the core of the problem. Organized visits to each of the
sponsoring companies will give the students the dimension of the importance of
their project by learning more about the range of problems facing the companies.
In addition there will be presentations and discussion sessions with
mathematicians working in industry. The whole experience is designed to provide
the students with a glimpse of the ways that advanced mathematics is used to
solve real-world problems. The projects will help develop some of the skills in
communication and teamwork that are crucial for success in a nonacademic
environment. Each participant will receive a stipend of $ 2400 and university
housing. A travel stipend of up to $ 400 will be available as needed.