* 9732579
* Artificial Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 285,000.00

9732579 Kastner The research suggested in this proposal concerns the properties
of quantum dots and single electron transistors. The properties of these quantum
dots ("artificial atoms") are sufficiently different from ordinary electronic
devices to require fundamental studies with the long range goal of translating
these novel structures into technologically mature systems. This requires
determining the energy levels and transition probabilities for these artificial
atoms whose diameters are typically 1000 times the size of ordinary atoms.
Transistors based on the artificial atom principle, the "single electron
transistors" (SET), are the goal of the next generation of electronic devices.
The research proposed here focuses on two topics, namely 1) how do electrons in
an artificial atom interact with those in nearby metallic leads and 2) what is
the nature of the phase transitions of the electron droplets in high magnetic
fields. The coupling of topic 1) is believed to be give rise to behaviors
closely related to the Kondo effect, which results from the coupling of
localized electrons on a magnetic impurity to the Fermi liquid in a host metal.
The second topic relates to the magnetic field induced phase transition from a
singlet state to the ferromagnetic state in droplets with many electrons. The
Kondo problem will be investigated for SETs carrying various numbers of
electrons. The phase transitions will be studied by measuring the magnetic
susceptibilties for magnetic fields greater than the critical field of ca. 1.7
tesla. %%% Research suggested in this proposal deals with fundamental problems
of the behavior of quantum dots, also called artificial atoms. Such systems have
great potential to become nano-scale electronic components, including "single
electron transistors" (SETs), which will become the heart of the next generation
of practical electronic devices. The properties of quantum dots are so different
from those of ordinary atoms that the fundamental physics governing their
behavior is not yet fully understood. Such understanding will facilitate a more
efficient and controlled manufacture of SETs and their incorporation in
practical technological devices. Two problems are attacked in the research
described in this proposal. Both of them deal with electric current flow into
and out of the SETs via the leads made of ordinary metal. ***