* 9732031
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Description and Analysis of Mekens, a Tupi Language of Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Amy Dahlstrom, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2000
* USD 18,108.00

The principal task of this project is to provide a detailed description and
analysis of the language of the Mekens people. They collectively refer to
themselves and to their language as Sakurabiat (sakirabiat) nowadays. Mekens is
one of the five surviving languages of the Tupari linguistic family (Tupi
stock), and it is spoken in the state of Rondonia, Northwest of Brazil, by about
23 speakers. Due to its small number of speakers and to the fact that only two
children are currently learning it, Mekens figures among the most endangered
languages of the world. It is also, together with the majority of Brazilian
languages, one for which very little information is known. Therefore, this
research will enrich linguistic knowledge by gathering and analyzing primary
linguistic data of an endangered language that has never been studied before,
and for which very little material is available. Except for an article
describing its phonological segments (Hanke et. al. 1958), the only other
materials are the results of the researcher's own preliminary work with the
language. The specific goals of the project are (i) to proceed with the
documentation of the language, through the collection of a wide range of
linguistic data, both through elicitation and through the recording of natural
speech, such as conversation, and narratives, (ii) to provide a description and
analysis of the language, in terms of its morphological and syntactic
properties, (iii) to continue the implementation of the literacy project, which
was started in Summer 1996, (iv) in the long term, to contribute to a Tupi
comparative project currently in development by linguists associated to the
Museum Emilio Goeldi (Brazil). Field research will be conducted in the Mekens
settlement in Rondonia (Brazil) for a period of twelve months. This research
project aims to provide the basis for the researcher's doctoral dissertation, in
which an analytic-descriptive grammar of Mekens will be presented, providing a
coherent accou nt of the many interesting morphosyntactic phenomena found in the
language, such as the switch-reference system in verbal person marking, and the
system of auxiliaries which marks person and position of the verb S/A arguments
and tense/aspect of the clause, adding to the current understanding of these and
other phenomena in natural languages.