* 9732707
* Diffusion Studies and Defect Spectroscopy with Isotopically Controlled Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Eugene Haller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 240,000.00

9732707 Haller This condensed matter physics project uses separated isotopes to
investigate self-diffusion under equilibrium and non-equilibrium conditions. In
addition, local vibrational mode spectroscopy will be used to investigate low
atomic mass impurities. The self-diffusion constants of (a) gallium in aluminum-
gallium-arsenic heterostructures, (b) silicon in silicon epilayers, and (c)
gallium and antimony in gallium antimonide heterostructures will be derived from
secondary ion mass spectroscopy profiles. The temperature, alloy composition and
doping dependencies of the diffusion constants will be investigated. These data
are critical for the basic understanding of fundamental mass transport in solids
and for development of a comprehensive model of diffusion in semiconductors.
Future device processing models are expected to profit directly from these
quantitative results. The vibrational mode spectroscopy experiments are designed
to provide information about defect structures, lattice dynamics and atomic
arrangements at defect sites in semiconductors. The work provides a valuable
arena for training graduate students in both advanced technology and fundamental
physics. %%% This condensed matter physics project uses separated isotopes to
investigate self-diffusion under equilibrium and non-equilibrium conditions. In
addition, local vibrational mode spectroscopy will be used to investigate low
atomic mass impurities. The self-diffusion constants of (1) gallium in aluminum-
gallium-arsenic heterostructures, (2) silicon in silicon epilayers, and (3)
gallium and antimony in gallium antimonide heterostructures will be derived from
secondary ion mass spectroscopy profiles. The temperature, alloy composition and
doping dependencies of the diffusion constants will be investigated. These data
are critical for the basic understanding of fundamental mass transport in solids
and for development of a comprehensive model of diffusion in semiconductors.
Future device processing models are expected to profit directly from these
quantitative results. The vibrational mode spectroscopy experiments are designed
to provide information about defect structures, lattice dynamics and atomic
arrangements at defect sites in semiconductors. The work provides a valuable
arena for training graduate students in both advanced technology and fundamental
physics. ***