* 9732046
* REU Site:  Summer Research Experiences in Materials and     Manufacturing Engineering for Community
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Joseph Callinan, Loyola Marymount University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa A. Maldonado, Ph.D., P.E.
* 05/31/2001
* USD 407,504.00

Proposal No.: 9732046 PI: Es-Said University: Loyola Marymount University
ABSTRACT The purpose of establishing a REU Site at Loyola Marymount University
is to involve in research undergraduate students who might not otherwise have
that opportunity. Community college students from Los Angeles will constitute
the target group. A further intention is to make every effort to identify and
select students from groups which are traditionally underrepresented in the
engineering profession. The research component will focus on investigating the
effect of varying the cold rolling modes on the crystallographic texture and
mechanical properties of aluminum-lithium alloys and rhenium metal, factors
affecting warpage profiles of 7050 aluminum alloy, developing a personal
computer-based approach to computer-aided design and manufacturing and
determining shrink compensation factors for Rapid Prototyping machines. *
Twenty-four students will be organized into four teams during three consecutive
summers for a ten-week session each year. Using the Materials and Manufacturing
Engineering Laboratories, each team will conduct extensive research using state-
of-the-art equipment. * The research equipment includes an NSF-funded x-ray
diffractometer with a pole figure attachment, a rolling mill, metal cutting
equipment, microhardness machinery, density apparatus, two universal mechanical
testing machines, furnaces, two light-optical microscopes, rapid prototyping and
computer-aided manufacturing laboratories that will enable students to engage in
higher level research. * The faculty and project staff will train students in
the safe use of the research equipment in the University's state-of-the-art
Materials and Manufacturing Research Laboratories. * Local industrial
laboratories have agreed to invite students to tour their research facilities. *
The ethics of Materials/N4anufacturing Research practices and procedures for
professional engineers will be the focus of weekly workshops for studen ts. The
faculty at LMU have extensive experience in engaging undergraduate students in
research with significant numbers of students continuing to graduate studies.
Joint faculty student research often results in presentations for national and
international scholarly conferences and publications in scholarly journals.