* 9732022
* Numerical Methods for III-Posed Problems and Large Scale    Eigenvalue Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2001
* Dianne O'Leary, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 296,213.00

This work concerns two topics in numerical linear algebra: 1) Regularization of
ill-posed linear systems; 2) Solution of large, sparse eigenvalue problems.
These topics share common features: a wide range of application problems; the
use of iterative methods for large-scale problems; and interesting problems in
matrix perturbation theory. When continuous ill-posed problems are discretized
they result in ill-conditioned linear systems which must be regularized to yield
accurate solutions. This part of the work has several goals. The first is to
prove the folk theorem that if the components of the data vector with respect to
the singular vectors of the matrix decay sufficiently fast then the conjugate
gradient iteration will produce a regularizing set of solution vectors. The
second is to compare the numerous formulations of discrete ill-posed problems to
see which are most effective. The third is to further develop preconditioners to
speed convergence of solution algorithms. The fourth is to improve data-
gathering techniques so that the attainable accuracy from imaging is better,
thus, for example, revealing smaller tumors or more information about distant
stars. Over the past decade many new algorithms for finding clusters of
eigenvalues of large matrices have been proposed. Although the effectiveness of
some of these algorithms has been demonstrated empirically, analytic results are
sparse. Fortunately, a large number of these methods share a common framework,
so that it is possible to develop analytic tools that are widely applicable. As
a start toward this goal, attention is focused on a new, promising method---
singular vector enhancement---that fits in the framework. A preliminary analysis
of a special case has already yielded valuable results on the relation of
eigenvalues and singular values. The results of this project will impact the
solution of ill-posed problems such as medical image enhancement, astronomical
data processing, nondestructive testing, and spectroscopy, as well as eigenvalue
problems arising in systems modeling (Markov chains), computational chemistry,
and structural analysis.