* 9732388
* WORKSHOP: Language Engineering Workshop for Students and    Professionals Integrating Research and Education (WS98)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* Frederick Jelinek, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2000
* USD 750,000.00

While spoken language systems are now used for many applications, language
engineering technology is still not adequate for all important tasks. For
instance, automatic recognition of natural conversational speech results in
incorrect transcription of one- third of the words spoken. Parsing sentences
from newspaper articles leads to faulty automatic analysis of half the
sentences. The need to make progress in this important area is obvious. The
number of available language engineering personnel is small and relatively few
universities presently educate students capable of performing the required
tasks. The Center for Language and Speech Processing at the Johns Hopkins
University is organizing a six week workshop on Language Engineering from July
13 to August 24, 1998, in which teams of professionals and students will work
together to advance the state of the art. Three topics will be addressed: (1)
Dynamic Segmental Models of Speech Coarticulation; (2) Rapid Speech Recognizer
Adaptation to New Speakers; (3) Core Natural Language Processing Technology
Applicable to Multiple Languages. University professors, leading industrial and
government researchers presently working in widely dispersed locations, graduate
students, and six or more undergraduate students selected through a nationwide
search will participate in this workshop. Significant technological innovations,
training of students, cross-fertilization of ideas from various disciplines,
initiation of collaborative research, and creation of valuable training and test
corpora are expected to result from this endeavor.