* 9732702
* SGER:  Dynamical Models of Gene Networks in Development.
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Garrett Odell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1999
* USD 42,328.00

O'Dell 9732702 The goals of this project are three-fold: To develop a
mathematical framework and computer software for representing and solving
differential equation models of gene networks, to assemble a minimal model of
the segment polarity gene network of Drosophila melanogaster and to test and
refine that model against results in the literature and laboratory experiments,
adding components to the model as necessary. Molecular genetics has produced a
growing wealth of data on a host of functionally important genes. These data
present both an opportunity and a serious challenge to biologists seeking to
explain developmental mechanisms. Most, and maybe all, developmentally important
genes act within dynamic networks whose essential behaviors are determined by
complex webs of interaction among their constituents. Because of their dynamic
nature, these essential behaviors cannot be directly inferred from the simple
arrow diagrams that biologists typically use to summarize their experiments. The
resolution of the actual dynamic interactions occurring simultaneously within
even very small networks into accurate predictions of overall network behavior
is not possible without the use of computer tools. Thus, computer models offer a
powerful and unique approach to analyzing the behavior of such complex dynamic
networks. The goal of this proposal is to develop and illustrate a general
computer modeling approach that can be generally used to study gene networks in
many different contexts. The basis of this approach is to formulate equations
describing how the concentration of each network constituent varies continuously
in time as a function of its interactions within the network, and then use them
to explore the network's behavior. The segment polarity gene network in
Drosophila which establishes patterned cell fates across the cellular blastoderm
will be used as a model.