* 9732675
* Knot Theory and Molecular Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Eswar Phadia, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 74,978.00

The primary objective of this proposal is for the
Principal&lt;br/&gt;Investigator to acquire a thorough background in the
techniques&lt;br/&gt;of molecular biology, both theoretical and experimental,
and&lt;br/&gt;exposure to contemporary research in the modeling of long-
strand&lt;br/&gt;biological molecules from chemical, physical, and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;perspectives, in order to bring to fruition a research
program&lt;br/&gt;that will develop and apply techniques of knot theory to
obtain&lt;br/&gt;new understanding of the dynamics of DNA, RNA and
polymeric&lt;br/&gt;proteins. In addition, this proposal will lead to
the&lt;br/&gt;development and implementation of model graduate programs
in&lt;br/&gt;biomathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
will serve as a visiting faculty&lt;br/&gt;member in the Department of
Biomathematics at Mount Sinai School&lt;br/&gt;of Medicine from July 1, 1998 to
June 30, 1999. This experience&lt;br/&gt;will shape the PI's research program in
mathematics and its&lt;br/&gt;applications during the grant period and in
subsequent years. &lt;br/&gt;The modeling of the relationship between the
structure and&lt;br/&gt;function in DNA and other biological molecules is an
area of&lt;br/&gt;increasing importance and one that has many unexplored facets.
&lt;br/&gt;The vast storehouse of DNA sequence data currently
being&lt;br/&gt;generated will only become useful when the dynamics of
its&lt;br/&gt;molecular function are understood. Knot theory has
already&lt;br/&gt;emerged as an important descriptive and foundational language
for&lt;br/&gt;developing models of molecular function. The application
to&lt;br/&gt;these problems of new techniques of knot theory has the
potential&lt;br/&gt;to revolutionize our understanding of molecular biology
by&lt;br/&gt;enabling the development of the kind of valid and
complete&lt;br/&gt;descriptions of molecular dynamics that are required for
the&lt;br/&gt;accurate prediction of structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expertise that the PI will obtain will also
enrich the&lt;br/&gt;educational experiences and broaden the career options
for&lt;br/&gt;students in his subsequent academic endeavors. The PI
will&lt;br/&gt;engage in interdisciplinary interactions with students
and&lt;br/&gt;faculty in the biological sciences and will work to
implement&lt;br/&gt;graduate programs in biomathematics. Graduates of such
programs,&lt;br/&gt;both at the master's and doctoral levels will enjoy
excellent&lt;br/&gt;employment opportunities in the pharmaceutical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS
Office of&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division
of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences (DMS).&lt;br/&gt;