* 9732795
* Development and Analysis of Robust and Efficient Algorithms for Large Scale Production/Distribution Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* David Simchi-Levi, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 06/30/2002
* USD 281,495.00

9732795&lt;br/&gt;Simchi-Levi&lt;br/&gt; This grant provides funding for the
analysis of large scale logistics systems. In such systems, finished products,
which are assembled from a set of components, may be produced and stored in
various locations prior to their distribution to retail outlets. Thus, the
logistics system includes suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses and retail
outlets as well as raw materials, work-in-process inventory and finished
products that flow between the facilities. The objective is to coordinate
production, routing and timing of shipment so as to minimize system-wide cost,
including manufacturing, inventory and transportation, while satisfying all
demands. The focus in this research is on logistics systems that employ two
types of transportation modes; a private fleet, or Less Than Truck Load
carriers. In both cases, the goal of the research is to understand the
underlying theoretical structure of optimal solutions and utilize it in the
development of practical and efficient algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; If successful, the
results of this research will lead to the development of new algorithms that are
effective,&lt;br/&gt;independent of the specific environment and the variability
of the data. That is, these algorithms are robust; they are designed to handle a
general setting rather than a set of library problems. These algorithms make it
possible to implement optimization based decision support systems that take into
account the interaction between the various levels of the logistics network, and
utilize the wealth of available information in the supply
chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;