* 9732691
* REG: Surface Analytical Instrumentation for Research on     Guest-Host Association Between Self-Assembled Monolayers andOrganic Adsorbates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Vinay Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2000
* USD 65,161.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9732691 Vinay Gupta/U. of Ill. Funds are sought for the purchase of
surface analytical instrumentation for research on guest-host association
between self-assembled surfaces and organic adsorbates. The research proposed
aims to address fundamental questions regarding the function of receptor
molecules immobilized at solid surfaces, and to understand how the molecular
organization of receptor layers supported on solid substrates can be manipulated
to enhance guest-host interaction with organic adsorbates? Towards this goal,
macrocyclic organosulfide molecules containing a receptor cavity will be
synthesized for immobilization within self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). Guest-
host association will be investigated in solution, and two types of selective
interactions will be the focus of the proposed research: one wherein the
inclusion of apolar adsorbates is driven by steric complementarity with the
receptor cavity; and another wherein polar interactions such as hydrogen bonding
aide steric matching. Using mixed SAMs formed by coadsorption of the macrocyclic
receptor molecules and n-alkanethiols, the microscopic structure of the
immobilized receptor layers will be manipulated. Role of surface density of
receptor molecules and steric barriers in accessing the receptor cavity will be
explored. To investigate the influence of molecular flexibility, the length and
rigidity of alkyl chains that tether receptor molecules to solid surfaces will
be varied. For characterization of the structural changes within the SAMs when
in contact with solutions, a commercial Fourier transform infrared (FTIR)
spectrophotometer will be modified to perform polarization-modulation
reflection-adsorption spectroscopy (PM-FTIRRAS). To monitor the rate and the
magnitude of guest-host complex formation, an apparatus to perform surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) spectroscopy will be designed and set-up. Tangible
outcomes of the research proposed are design principles for supramolecular
assemblies with ef fective chemical and biosensing functions. ***