* 9732577
* Formal Collaboration Protocols: First-class Interaction Semantics for Multi-user Distributed Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* P. David Stotts, Jr., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/2002
* USD 303,195.00

The rules governing the interactions among group members in current shared
computing applications are implicitly defined by scattered code fragments. A
better method from a software engineering viewpoint is to explicitly define the
collaboration semantics and implement them as a detached module in the system.
We call this a first-class collaboration protocol. The advantages of this
approach include ease of reading and understanding the rules, formal notation
for analysis of errors, ease of developing collaborative systems with modular
components, and dynamic adaptation of rules as collaboration progresses. Through
this research we will investigate such modular collaboration protocols, building
and evaluating several complex collaborative systems that use them: a group Web
browser (CobWeb) that allows many different protocols; multi-user virtual
environments (MUVEs); and an implementation of a game called Nomic, in which the
only possible move (initially, at least) is to propose and vote on rule changes.
This research will have increasing significance as collaborative applications
become more common; its impact will be to allow construction of collaborative
software systems that are more reliable (provably correct), cheaper to build,
and cheaper to maintain. Our results could find application in teleconferencing
systems, Web browsers, workflow tools, graphical virtual environments, and CMM-
compliant software development environments.
http://www.cs.unc.edu/~stotts/nsf/iis/css98/