* 9732532
* Investigation of Diamond-Forming Flames Using Advanced      Laser Diagnostics and Laser Enhancement of the Deposition   Rate
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1998,10/27/1998
* Robert Lucht, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/27/1998
* USD 190,216.00

Abstract - Lucht and Glumac This is a detailed investigation, both experimental
and theoretical, of the chemistry and transport processes in low-pressure
diamond-forming flames. The focus is on profiles of temperature and
concentrations of radical species near the deposition substrate. Extensive
measurements of temperature and of the radical species H (atomic hydrogen), OH
(hydroxyl), C (atomic carbon), and CH (methyne) are performed for a range of
flame pressures, stoichiometries, and total mass flow rates and are compared
with numerical flame models. The experimental work is performed in Dr. Robert
Lucht's laboratory which has the necessary low-pressure flame apparatus and
laser diagnostic equipment; the modeling is done in Dr. Nick Glumac's
laboratory. Temperature measurements are made using hydrogen coherent anti-
Stokes Raman spectroscopy (H2 CARS). The emphasis in the diagnostic studies is
in resolving the gradients in the near-substrate region. A flame model that has
been applied successfully in other flame synthesis environments is used. The
flame temperature profile and process parameters are used as input, and the
model predicts the species profiles; differences between experiment and
computation are investigated with a sensitivity analysis to explore the
influences of kinetic and transport rates.