* 9732256
* Research Experience in Molecular Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2001
* David Oliver, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9732256 This REU program will provide a rich research experience to
undergraduate students who will be recruited primarily from small colleges in
the midwest and historically black land- grant universities, where research
opportunities for students are rare. Formal communication and personal
networking will be used to attract students from these institutions. Iowa State
University has an active group of researchers who perform state-of-the-art
research in molecular biotechnology. For eight weeks during the summer, they
will guide ten students to participate in research projects involving molecular
techniques. Projects will include generation of recombinant DNA, genome
analysis, overexpression of foreign genes in bacteria and plants, molecular
genetics, and transgenic animals. The students' experiences will be enriched by
several activities outside the laboratory setting. These structured interactions
will include discussion sessions on bioethics and different aspects of
biotechnology research and careers. The students will also visit biotechnology
facilities on campus and in an industrial environment. In addition, several
social functions with mentors, graduate students, postdoctoral associates and
other biotechnology researchers will encourage informal interactions. The impact
of summer research training will be assessed through formal evaluations
immediately after the training. Informal contacts with the students and their
parents will be used to monitor progress and career decisions of the students.
This program should excite the students about research and foster interest in
research careers.