* 9732386
* SGER:  Supplementary Monitoring of ENSO Signals in the      Eastern North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Robert Smith, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1999
* USD 96,778.00

SGER: Supplementary monitoring of ENSO signals in the Eastern North Pacific
Robert Smith To understand the effects of climate variability on marine life in
the eastern North Pacific requires that we know what the oceanic environment is,
how it is changing, and what the oceanic environment was in the past. In recent
weeks and months there has been mounting evidence of the onset of a major El
Ni¹o in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean. The relatively scarce observations
from past El Ni¹o episodes show that the coastal ocean along the west coast of
North America can be significantly affected, manifesting higher sea surface
temperatures and coastal sea levels, lower primary and secondary productivity, a
deeper thermocline, and enhanced poleward flow over the shelf. However, the
scant evidence, from different locations at different times, also suggests that
the extent, intensity and nature of the effects may differ among different
episodes. The present onset of El Ni¹o, combined with the beginning of the
GLOBEC Northeast Pacific Pilot Monitoring effort, provides a unique opportunity
to gather a more complete data set. We are currently funded as part of the
GLOBEC pilot monitoring program. This proposal seeks to initiate the GLOBEC
pilot monitoring program along two transects off the central Oregon coast (44.6Ý
and 43.2ÝN) in November 1997 several months earlier than planned, and to extend
the monitoring in November 1977, February and August 1998 to include northern
California sections (41.9ÝN and 38.7Ý N) where regular hydrographic sampling
programs have existed in the past two decades. This would augment five cruises
in 1998 that will monitor the hydrography, subsurface currents derived from ADCP
measurements, nutrients, chlorophyll, and zooplankton species composition and
abundance. If the present ENSO event becomes a full El Nino, occupations of
these lines in November 1997, February and August 1998 would help determine the
extent, duration, and evolution of the anomalous conditions.