* 9732960
* CAREER:  Measuring the Spectrum of the Cosmic Microwave     Background Anisotropy on Angular Scales from 0.15 to        4 Degrees
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2004
* Mark Devlin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 04/30/2004
* USD 544,112.00

9732960 Devlin The main scientific goal of the research is to the study the
anisotropy of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation. The CMB is the
photon remnant of the Big Bang. The observations of the fluctuations in light
intensity of the CMB, and by analyzing the data, the fluctuations in the matter
density of the universe at roughly 100,000 years after the big bang can be
inferred and this information used to predict the present distribution of matter
in the universe. The anisotropy in the CMB provides a key test of models of
structure formation of the Universe. The knowledge of the sizes of fluctuations
on different angular scales may allow the measurements of cosmological
parameters such as the mass density of the universe, the expansion rate, and the
baryon density. These parameters will enable us to learn about the universe
today, its past, and its future evolution. The focus of the research is an
aggressive plan to produce new results in CMB research. The plan is to combine
the best aspects of ground-based and balloon borne experiments. The plan is to
measure the spectrum of the anisotropy of the CMB on angular scales of from 0.15
to 4 minutes of arc with unprecedented accuracy. The technique of using ground-
based observations has already been proven with previous measurements made in
Saskatoon, Canada.. These measurements have very long integration times, but are
limited by the poor stability of the atmosphere at the site. Balloon borne
observations have negligible atmospheric interference, but are limited by
integration time. A telescope built for a balloon measurements has been
converted into the Mobile Anisotropy Telescope (MAT) which will be used to make
observations from a high plateau (5,200 m) in Chile. The atmosphere is stable at
this site and integration times can be extended for as long as necessary. The
improvement in the measurements will require the use of state-of-the-art
detector technology. A 115 element array of transition edge superc onducting
bolometric detectors operating at 300 mK will be built for use with the MAT
telescope. The array will to used to collect data which will yield independent
measurements of the CMB anisotropy over a large fraction of the sky. The net
result will be an improvement over the sensitivity of the Saskatoon data by an
order of magnitude or more, and an increase in angular resolution by a factor of
three. The other goals are to establish a new laboratory for (CMB) research, to
develop a research program that incorporates undergraduates and graduates, and
to play a central role in developing an astrophysics curriculum. The curriculum
will range from courses for general undergraduates and astronomy/astrophysics
majors to courses for graduate students. Major progress has already been made
along each of these directions. Data on the CMB with a balloon borne telescope
has been obtained. Undergraduates will be able to use a newly established
laboratory. The undergraduate students will come from a variety of backgrounds,
including physics, mechanical engineering and computer science. The development
of a new astronomy course for non-majors will be exciting and instructive for
both the faculty and students. The plan is to extend the scope of the research
and education activities by initiating an outreach program with the City of
Philadelphia high schools which will provide area students with supervised
projects in observational astronomy. ***