* 9732131
* Modulated Polarization Microscopy:  A New Instrument For    Visualizing the Cytoskeleton of Living Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Martin Poenie, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2002
* USD 387,806.00

Visualizing microtubules and other cytoskeletal structures in most types of
living cells has been a difficult problem. A new type of microscopy, called
modulated polarization microscopy, which can routinely image individual
microtubules and other cytoskeletal structures as well as vesicle movements
along cytoskeletal tracks will be developed. Modulated polarization microscopy
images cytoskeletal structures based on their birefringence but takes advantage
of the fact that birefringence is sensitive to polarization angle. When
birefringent structures are illuminated with plane polarized light of varying
angle and viewed between crossed polarizers they oscillate in intensity. This
behavior is not seen with structures that are not birefringent and provides a
means for separating weakly birefringent elements from the cytoplasmic
background. A prototype instrument has been built using Faraday rotators to
modulate the plane of polarized light presented to the specimen. Images obtained
using this microscope demonstrate its potential for imaging the cytoskeleton. An
advanced version of the moldulated polarization microscope with greatly improved
sensitivity, contrast, image quality, and resolution will be built. Improvements
in the new microscope will be based on analysis of problems with the original
prototype.