* 9732697
* Acquisition of Specialized Instrumentation for Research &amp;   Development of Materials, Devices, and Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Kenneth Sohn, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2000
* USD 65,000.00

9732697 Misra It is proposed by New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) under
the National Science Foundation Research Equipment program to acquire an BP
4156A Precision Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer and a Cascade Microtech (Summit
10552) low noise probe station. The HP 4156A with ultra-low leakage SMUs can
measure up to 1fA and I(V, automatically extract process parameters, perform
AC/DC device characterization. The low noise probe station will have femtoguard
noise level with a micro-chamber that will accommodate wafers up to 6-inch
diameter. The instrumentation will support a unified research effort across many
undergraduate and graduate areas including physics, electrical engineering,
materials science, environmental engineering and manufacturing. A strong body of
research is currently in place at NJIT to support this instrumentation, with
faculty expertise covering the range from wafer level testing, characterization
of thin films and SOI, to individual device design, fabrication and testing,
ultimately to the development of integrated systems for applications in
manufacturing and industry. Research areas include new device design, plasma
charging damage to thin gate oxides, large molecular ion implantation to
silicon, tunneling through thin dielectrics, optical waveguides on silicon, Hall
effect devices etc. This body of research is directly affiliated with NJIT's
one-of-a-kind to a university, class 10, 6-inch capable cleanroom for silicon-
based microprocessing that provides access to advanced state-of-the-art process
methods and equipment to perform complex design, modeling, simulation, process
characterization and prototype development, and generates synergy between
industry and NJIT students, faculty and staff, leading to joint research
opportunities and efficient technology transfer. NSF funding will help the
undergraduate and graduate students to have hands on experience of the advanced
characterization systems. Since NJIT has a significant presence of minority and
w omen (-40% and -19% respectively) students it is expected that some of these
students will have the opportunity to work on the state-of-the-art
characterization system. The proposed instrumentation provides a unifying theme
combining individual research and problems of emerging importance in the light
of device scaling. Novel electronic, magnetic and optical devices can be
designed and evaluated using the proposed sensitive measurement system. ***