* 9732736
* Investigation of Pairing Symmetry and Normal State          Properties of Electron-Doped Copper Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9732736 Greene This experimental research project is
concerned with the electron- doped cuprate superconductors, with emphasis on
their pairing symmetry and normal state behavior. Electron doped superconductors
in the family R(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4-y), with R=Nd,Pr,Sm,Eu, will be prepared in
single crystal and thin film forms. The objectives of this project are to
produce and characterize the highest quality single crystals and thin films of
the electron-doped materials, and to perform comprehensive physical property
measurements which can provide reliable experimental constraints on theories for
the superconductivity and for the anomalous normal state in all the copper
oxides. Emphasis will be given to measurements to definitively determine the
pairing symmetry of the superconducting state of the electron doped materials
and to search for more definitive evidence for a "pseudogap". It is expected
that a detailed comparison of the properties of these materials with their hole-
doped counterparts will be quite important in advancing the overall
understanding of the copper oxides. This research program is interdisciplinary
in nature and involves one or more postdoctoral and graduate students in its
activities. These involvements provide excellent preparation of these young
researchers for careers in industry, government laboratories or academia. %%%
This experimental research project is concerned with the "electron-doped"
varieties of the cuprate high transition temperature superconductor family. In
chemical terms, these can be described by the formula R(2-x)Ce(x)CuO(4-y). Here
the symbol R stands for one of the rare earth elements Neodymium, Praseodymium,
Samarium, or Europium; while Ce is Cerium, Cu copper, and O oxygen. In these
materials the electrical conduction is believed to be "n-type" or by electrons,
rather than "p-type" or by positive holes, as in the conventional cuprates such
as YBaCuO. These materials are of fundamental and applied interest.The
researchers will grow samples of such materials as single crystals and as thin
films. The objectives of this project are to produce and characterize the
highest quality single crystals and thin films of the electron-doped materials,
and to perform comprehensive physical property measurements which can provide
reliable experimental constraints on theories for the superconductivity and for
the anomalous normal state in all the copper oxides. Emphasis will be given to
measurements to definitively determine the pairing symmetry of the
superconducting state of the electron doped materials and to search for more
definitive evidence for a "pseudogap". It is expected that a detailed comparison
of the properties of these materials with their hole-doped counterparts will be
quite important in advancing the overall understanding of the copper oxides.This
research program is interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or more
postdoctoral and graduate students in its activities. These involvements provide
excellent preparation of these young researchers for careers in industry,
government laboratories or academia. ***