* 9732986
* CAREER: Robust Learning Control with Application to         Intelligent Building Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2004
* Peter Young, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2004
* USD 275,000.00

9732986 Young The research focuses on the development of new methodologies for
robust controller analysis and design, which will be combined with reinforcement
learning techniques to develop a new control paradigm: robust learning control.
These new analysis and design tools will then be used to address two specific
application areas for intelligent building systems: structural control and
environmental control. These problems are highly multidisciplinary in nature,
and present interesting and important research challenges. At the same time
simplified versions of these problems will be used as effective educational
tools in a multidisciplinary undergraduate teaching laboratory.

The theoretical and computational part of the work will aim towards developing
computationally efficient analysis and synthesis methods for a general class of
robust performance problems for complex multivariable uncertain systems. These
will allow one to address problems with parametric uncertainty and (possibly
nonlinear) dynamic uncertainty, with both unknown disturbances and known fixed
inputs. These theoretical results will be used as the basis for studying
reinforcement learning controllers, by developing an uncertainty model for the
learning process within the above robustness framework. This will in turn be
used to develop a new controller design methodology for robust leaning
controllers, which combine the best aspects of robust and reinforcement learning
control. The controller will have guaranteed insensitivity to plant/parameter
variations and disturbance signals, while at the same time it will be capable of
precisely tuning itself to the nonlinearities and time-variations of a
particular plant.

The first application area for these new techniques will be vibration supression
in tall buildings. The buildings will be subjected to loading which might arise
from earthquakes and/or high winds. The goal is to equip the building with
sensors and actuators under computer control, creating an intelligent building
which has the ability to sense and react to its enviroment. Computer
simulations, based on mathematical models, will be comtined with wind-tunnel
experiments on a dynamically-scaled physical model. A DSP-based real-time
digital feedback control scheme will be used to implement advanced feedback
controllers, operating at a sufficiently high bandwidth to effect control of
wind-induced vibration on the structure.

These techniques will also be applied to design controllers for building
environmental systems. These Heating, Ventilation, and Air-Conditioning (HVAC)
systems present very challenging control problems because they are complex
nonlinear time-varying systems, and yet the controller is required to function
on first powering up, preferably without human intervention. Furthermore, high
performance is required for energy efficiency, while at the same time robust
stability is essential for safety reasons. The new robust learning controllers
will be tested both in simulation and on an experimental HVAC system. ***