* 9732547
* Balloon-Borne Measurements of Vertical Profiles of Aerosols, Condensation Nuclei, and CloudCondensation Nuclei
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2002
* USD 554,560.00

This project focuses on continuing and extending vertical aerosol profile
measurements at Laramie, Wyoming (41░N, 105░W). The stratospheric measurements
are important to assess the level at which stratospheric aerosol concentrations
are maintained during volcanically quiescent, or background, periods, and thus
to understand if the stratospheric aerosol level has been perturbed by
anthropogenic (or natural) influences over the past 30 years. In particular, the
impact of increasing air traffic is a concern. Direct effects of air traffic on
aerosol concentration will be studied by looking for intersections of the
balloon-borne measurements with the wakes of air traffic in the region.
Characterizing the direct effects of tropospheric aerosol and the indirect
effects of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) in global climate models is a large
source of uncertainty in our understanding of the global heat balance, which can
be reduced through more refined measurements of tropospheric aerosol and
CCN.&lt;br/&gt;The continuing measurements will consist of condensation nuclei
(CN) and optically detectable aerosol (with a radius between 0.15 and 2.0 um),
from the surface to 30 km, and CCN from the surface to about 13 km. The balloon
flight frequency will be about once per month as it has been in the past. In
addition to measurements in Laramie, yearly measurements from Lauder, New
Zealand (45░S) will be continued. Two CCN counters and a new multi-angle aerosol
instrument will be deployed, providing vertical profiles of CCN spectra for the
first time. The second CCN counter will be built under this project. The two CCN
instruments will allow CCN measurements at two supersaturations, thus providing
CCN spectra. The multi-angle aerosol instrument, which is being developed under
other support, will be used in studies of the index of refraction of
tropospheric aerosol particles. To supplement these measurements, collaborations
with two other investigators are planned. Dr. Darin Toohey, University of
California at Irvine, will make approximately seasonal profile measurements of
ClO/BrO from Laramie in conjunction with these aerosol measurements, in order to
study mid latitude heterogeneous processing of ClO/BrO. An Italian colleague
plans to participate with a balloon-borne laser scatterometer to investigate the
index of refraction of tropospheric particles.&lt;br/&gt;