* 9732810
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Analysis &amp; Modeling in    Financial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Jaksa Cvitanic, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 216,000.00

DMS-9732810&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; STOCHASTIC ANALYSIS AND MODELING IN FINANCIAL
MATHEMATICS&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Principal Investigators: IOANNIS KARATZAS and
JAKSA CVITANIC&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Research is proposed on
various open mathematical problems of stochastic&lt;br/&gt; analysis and
control, which arise in the context of the modern theory for &lt;br/&gt;
financial markets. Most of these problems are formulated in the &lt;br/&gt;
context of a continuous-time model for a market with one riskless &lt;br/&gt;
and several risky securities, and involve &lt;br/&gt; (i) questions of single-
agent optimization, multi-agent equilibrium,&lt;br/&gt; hedging and pricing of
contingent claims in markets with prices that&lt;br/&gt; can depend on the
investment strategy of a "large investor";&lt;br/&gt; (ii) optimization, least
expensive hedging, and pricing, in markets&lt;br/&gt; with transaction
costs;&lt;br/&gt; (iii) questions of fair pricing in arbitrary incomplete
markets,&lt;br/&gt; including markets with portfolio constraints;&lt;br/&gt;
(iv) maximization of the probability of hedging, in various models;&lt;br/&gt;
(v) study of new, game-type options;&lt;br/&gt; (vi) dynamic measures of
risk;&lt;br/&gt; (vii) stationary equilibrium in strategic market
games;&lt;br/&gt; (viii) related questions of stochastic analysis such as
existence and&lt;br/&gt; uniqueness of certain Forward-Backward Stochastic
Differential Equations,&lt;br/&gt; existence and uniqueness of viscosity
solutions to certain PDE's and&lt;br/&gt; variational inequalities, solving non-
standard stochastic control problems&lt;br/&gt; where the loss function has a
random component.&lt;br/&gt; It is expected that known tools from stochastic
analysis and martingale&lt;br/&gt; theory, convex duality theory, functional
analysis, stochastic control&lt;br/&gt; and viscosity solutions to partial
differential equations and variational&lt;br/&gt; inequalities, will prove
valuable in the resolution of these questions,&lt;br/&gt; but also that new
tools will have to be developed to solve nonstandard&lt;br/&gt; problems that
arise. Thus, the project should result in the advancement&lt;br/&gt; of the
understanding of both the theoretical and applied aspects of these&lt;br/&gt;
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The significance of the proposed research is
related to the fact that&lt;br/&gt; one of the main gaps between theory and
practice of financial markets&lt;br/&gt; is the prevailing assumption in most of
the models that the markets are&lt;br/&gt; perfect, implying that every
financial contract can be priced in a unique&lt;br/&gt; way, and its risk can,
in principle be fully controlled (hedged).&lt;br/&gt; In reality, however, this
is not the case; markets are "imperfect" or &lt;br/&gt; "incomplete" due, among
other things, to investment constraints, transaction &lt;br/&gt; costs,
different interest rates for borrowing and lending, different&lt;br/&gt;
patterns of information, presence of "large" or "informed" investors&lt;br/&gt;
who can influence prices, etc. Thus, it is very important to develop&lt;br/&gt;
new methods for studying the risks and the ways of pricing financial&lt;br/&gt;
instruments in imperfect markets, some of which are suggested in this&lt;br/&gt;
proposal. In particular, these methods should prove useful in newly&lt;br/&gt;
developing markets such as re-insurance, catastrophic insurance,
energy&lt;br/&gt; derivatives, credit-risk derivatives and other insufficiently
liquid markets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;