* 9732800
* Dynamical Properties of Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Christopher Lobb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2001
* USD 264,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9732800 Lobb This experimental research project deals
with dynamical properties of superconductors, with emphasis on high Tc
materials. The Hall effect will be studied in NCCO and PCCO superconductors of
varying stoichiometries, in order to determine whether the anomalous sign change
of the Hall effect arises from vortex pinning or from charge acquired by the
vortices. The Hall effect and vortex correlations will also be studied using a
Giaever flux transformer, which provides coupling between two vortex systems. A
second dynamical regime that will be studied arises when fluctuations near the
superconducting-normal transition in zero field lead to time-varying phases. The
critical exponent parameters associated with this transition will be probed with
a comprehensive set of measurements, from DC current-voltage characteristics, to
mutual inductance measurements up to 100kHz, to microwave response measurements.
These measurements will be done in thick (3-D) YBCO samples as well as in
progressively thinner samples, so that the crossover to 2-D can be studied. This
research program is interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or more
postdoctoral and graduate students, who receive excellent training in
preparation for careers in industry, government laboratories or academia. %%%
This basic experimental research project deals with the behavior of
superconductors which are not in the ideal lossless supercurrent state.
Electrical resistance can arise in a Type II superconductor subjected to current
flow and to an external magnetic field. In this case a Hall voltage of a
puzzling nature can be observed, and is a focus of the present research. A
second regime of interest in the present work occurs for temperatures close to
the critical transition temperature, where fluctuation effect s will be studied.
The work is primarily carried out on high Tc materials. The Hall effect will be
studied in NCCO and PCCO superconductors of varying stoichiometries, in order to
determine whether the anomalous sign change of the Hall effect arises from
vortex pinning or from charge acquired by the vortices. The Hall effect and
vortex correlations will also be studied using a Giaever flux transformer, which
provides coupling between two vortex systems. The fluctuation effects are
characterized with a comprehensive set of measurements, from DC current-voltage
characteristics, to mutual inductance measurements up to 100kHz, to microwave
response measurements. These measurements will be done in thick (3-D) YBCO
samples as well as in progressively thinner samples, so that the crossover to
2-D can be studied. This research program is interdisciplinary in nature and
involves one or more postdoctoral and graduate students, who receive excellent
training in preparation for careers in industry, government laboratories or
academia. ***