* 9732297
* Deformable Volumetric Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Shiaofen Fang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 06/30/2001
* USD 125,171.00

Voxel-based volumetric objects normally have much more complex physical
properties and spatial structures than surface-based geometric models. Thus,
traditional physically-based deformation modeling techniques are often
ineffective and costly in the volumetric domain. This project will focus on
developing efficient and accurate modeling techniques, computational methods and
visualization algorithms for deformable volumetric objects. A new landmark-based
volume deformation model and related rendering algorithms will be developed. In
this model, a volume deformation is represented by a relatively small set of
landmark points defined in a volume space. Three-dimensional scattered data
interpolation methods will be applied to generate smooth deformation functions
over the volume space. Landmark points and their movements can be used for both
the interactive deformation manipulations and the deformation pattern
representations of specific types of deformable objects. Instead of directly
modeling the object's physical or biological properties, this approach employs
an inverse method to derive the deformation pattern of a given class of objects,
using a parameterized spring model, directly from existing or experimental data.
Fast deformable volume rendering algorithms will also be developed to support
the visualization of the volume deformation process. To avoid unnecessary
deformation computation and multiple volume resampling, the deformation
computation will be integrated into the rendering process without explicit
volume reconstruction. For region-specific deformations of different sub-
structures in a complex and hierarchical volumetric environment, deformation
operations can also be applied to a Volumetric-CSG model to support deformable
volumetric object manipulation. Several applications of this research will be
pursued, including craniofacial growth, volume morphing, medical object modeling
and interactive volumetric animation.