* 9732799
* Towards Friction-Free Work: A Multi-Method Study of the Use of Information Technology in the Real-Estate Industry
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Rolf Wigand, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 02/28/2001
* USD 69,997.00

The goal of this pilot study is to examine how the pervasive use of information
technologies (IT) in the real-estate industry changes the way people and
organizations in that industry work. Real estate was chosen because it has
already adopted many new technologies, but, as a transactional intermediary,
will be greatly affected by the on-going shift to electronic transactions. The
objectives of our overall study are: 1) to describe how the use of IT changes
the ways individual knowledge workers conduct their work, 2) describe
organizational changes related to the use of IT, and 3) describe how change in
individual work changes organizational structures and processes. In this pilot
study, we focus specifically on developing instruments and procedures for the
first two objectives and the theoretical framework for objective 3. In
particular, we conduct ethnographic studies of individual real estate agents and
their adaptations to the introduction of IT and case studies and surveys of a
sample of real estate agencies. This study will provide a deeper scientific
understanding of how work and IT are interrelated and how organizations view
information technology as enablers of business goals. Further, findings will
illuminate issues regarding new forms of organization such as "companies of one"
and virtual organization. In turn, these findings are expected to provide
critical general knowledge for the design of IT in context.
http://florin.syr.edu/~crowston/real-estate.html &lt;br/&gt;