* 9732092
* A Non-Thermal Annealing Process Applied to Neutron          Transmutation Doped Silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1998,10/31/2000
* David Donnelly, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/2000
* USD 125,603.00

9732092 Donnelly The project seeks to investigate and develop a new annealing
technique that is able to both repair damage to a crystal and electrically
activate dopants in silicon without the use of thermal energy. The annealing is
accomplished by focusing a high energy laser pulse onto a small spot on the
surface of the sample. Experiments have shown that the entire sample is
annealed, even in regions far from the laser focal spot. It is speculated that
the laser launches a shock wave in the sample, and that this wave causes the
crystal to anneal. Because the laser pulses are short (nanoseconds), the process
is expected to be accompanied by much less diffusion than occurs in thermal
processes. Diffusion is one of the limiting factors in the design and
fabrication of next-generation high density low power devices. A "critical need"
for the semiconductor industry, as stated by SIA, is the development of a
"minimum anneal" for low leakage shallow junctions. The above mentioned non-
thermal process is clearly a candidate for this "minimum anneal". While the
process is attractive for a step in device fabrication, there are fundamental
questions that must first be answered. The two most pressing questions involve
the optimum parameters for annealing, and the actual mechanism by which the
annealing occurs. Determination of optimum parameters will allow the technique
to be applied to a variety of different materials, and eventually to patterned
devices. Understanding of the annealing mechanism will further understanding of
the materials science aspects of the project, and will also assist in the
application of the technique to different materials. The answers to these
questions will be obtained by further experiments which vary the parameters
involved in the annealing process, by investigating alternated methods of
achieving annealing without the introduction of thermal energy, and by modeling
the passage of a shock wave through a damaged crystal lattice. ***