* 9732805
* Geometric Methods in the Representation Theory of Affine    Hecke Algebras and Quantum Groups
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* George Lusztig, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 568,500.00

9732805 Lusztig This award supports the continued study of periodic W-graphs
attached to affine Hecke algebras and the investigation of their possible
connections with unrestricted representations of semisimple Lie algebras in
positive characteristic. The principal investigator will also study canonical
bases of quantized enveloping algebras from the point of view of perverse
sheaves. He will continue the study of unipotent representations of semisimple
p-adic groups, as well as character sheaves on (possibly disconnected) reductive
groups. Representation theory of Lie algebras and Lie groups, initially
developed at the turn of the century, studies the structure of symmetries and
their realizations. This theory encompasses many areas in mathematics and has
fundamental applications to theoretical physics. In the past twenty years, the
study of representation theory of a special class of affine Lie algebras and Lie
groups led to many new unexpected discoveries in mathematics and theoretical
physics, as well as to a synthesis of many established areas in both
disciplines. In particular, it yielded a pure mathematical description of a
simplest quantum field theory -- a prototype theory of fundamental interactions.
It is expected that representation theory of new classes of infinite-dimensional
Lie algebras and groups might substantially deepen our understanding of
mathematics and theoretical physics during the next decade.