* 9732398
* U.S.-Japan Workshop on Earthquake Disaster Prevention for Lifeline Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/1999
* Donald Ballantyne, EQE International Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 03/31/1999
* USD 39,970.00

For the past several decades, the United States and Japan have been sharing
information and technologies on ways to mitigate the effects of earthquakes on a
variety of facilities. One group of facilities which has received considerable
attention in recent years has been lifelines. Both governments recognize the
importance of these systems after earthquakes and also acknowledge their extreme
vulnerability to earthquakes. As a result, researchers have been encouraged to
identify new and better approaches for seismic evaluation, design and
construction. Special attention has been given to existing lifeline facilities.
This project is to organize and hold the Seventh U.S.-Japan Workshop on
Earthquake Disaster Prevention for Lifeline Systems. In continuing the previous
tradition of alternating the location of the workshop site, this seventh
workshop will beheld in Seattle, Washington in November of 1997. This workshop
is significant that will enable researchers to present detailed study findings
from the January 17, 1994 Northridge, and January 17, 1995, Kobe earthquakes.
This project is an activity under the amspices of U.S.-Japan Natural Resources
(UJNR) Program. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) costs
share 50% of funds required for this workshop.