* 9732651
* U.S. Czech Materials Research on Electromagnetic Waves in   Periodic and Randomly Disordered Systems and Magnetic Field Effects on Photonic Band Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Alexei Maradudin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/2003
* USD 22,890.00

INT 9732651&lt;br/&gt;Maradudin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Czech research
project between Dr. Alexei Maradudin of the University of California-Irvine and
Dr. Vladimir Kuzmiak of the Czech Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics
will examine: 1) the propagation of electromagnetic waves in dispersive and
adsorptive periodic and randomly disordered systems and 2) magnetic field
effects on photonic band structures of two- and three-dimensional periodic
systems. The researchers also intend to determine the properties of localized
electromagnetic modes introduced by embedded defects characterized by frequency-
dependent dielectric functions. An additional component of their cooperative
effort will feature the Anderson localization of electromagnetic waves in two-
dimensional systems characterized by a randomly disordered dielectric function
in the presence of dissipation. Results are expected to reveal new features that
expand potential applications for photonic crystals and build upon our
fundamental knowledge of the nature of electromagnetic fields inside more
complex structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This materials research project
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;