* 9732888
* Travel Support for American Investigators from Academia to  Attend the 3rd International Discussion Meeting on          Relaxations in Complex Systems; Vigo, Spain; 6/30-7/11/97
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Donald Plazek, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 7,500.00

9732888 Plazek Relaxation and diffusion in complex materials and systems play
an important role in important problems of many branches of science, technology
and engineering. In recent years, the study of relaxation and diffusion has
grown and become interdisciplinary in nature with involvement from colleagues in
condensed matter physics, chemistry, chemical engineering and materials science
and engineering. Rapid developments across many areas in this vast field on an
international level make it profitable to bring together researchers from around
the world to discuss the recent advances, explore new ideas, promote
collaborations and stimulate future research. The Conference at Vigo, Spain
(June 30 - July 11, 1997) is organized to follow two very successful previous
meetings. The meeting is supported by several agencies of Spain, by the Max
Planck Institut fur Polymerforschung-Mainz and the Naval Research Laboratory.
Application is made to NSF for a grant to support partially the travel expenses
of American colleagues, particularly the young investigators. %%% The main
objective of this International Meeting is to discuss the current important
issues in the studies of relaxations in complex materials and systems.
Scientists with backgrounds as varied as condensed matter physics, statistical
mechanics, physical chemistry, materials science and engineering, glass science,
polymer science and engineering, metallurgy, thermodynamics and rheology will
have the opportunity to discuss critical issues which impede progress in this
vast interdisciplinary research field. Following the tradition of the past two
Meetings (Heraklion 1990, Alicante 1993), the conference will cover recent
advances in relations in the following areas: a) Theories and models of
relaxation b) Computer simulations c) Glass transition, relaxations in
supercooled liquids, glasses, co lloids and melts d) Relaxations in polymers,
physical aging, plastization and antiplastization e) Polymer dynamics on
surface, at interface and in confined spaces f) Viscoelastic and rheological
properties of polymers, solutions, ionomers, polyelectrolytes, copolymers and
blends g) Polymer diffusion h) Solid State Ionics, conductivity and NMR
relaxation, ionic diffusion i) Structural relaxations of electronic and optical
materials, gels and ceramics j) Dielectric studies k) Optical and laser
relaxation spectroscopy l) NMR, X-ray and neutron scattering ***