* 9732865
* Ion Implantation Doping Isolation of III-Nitrides
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2001
* Stephen Pearton, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2001
* USD 223,035.00

9732865 Pearton This project will investigate n- and p-type doping of GaN and
related alloys by ion implantation and high temperature annealing to achieve
greater understanding of doping in GaN and related materials. Research
activities include study of several major topics: (i) use of Mg/O or Be/O co-
implantation to achieve high (>10E18cm-3) p-type doping of GaN and AlGaN. By
varying the doses of each co-implanted species existing theory will be tested,
and the role of O established by comparing its effect to that of other species;
co-implant species include N, Ar or F. (ii) comparison of different acceptor
dopants: Ca was found to have a similar ionization level to that of Mg, i.e.,
~170meV. Zn, Cd, Be will be implanted, and C, Ge and Sn will be co- implanted
with group III species to assess their functionality as acceptors. (iii)
comparison of different donor dopants; the doping properties of the group VI
species, S, Se and Te are, as yet, not established in GaN. (iv) use of ultra-
high annealing temperatures to achieve higher activation efficiency. Preliminary
data indicate higher doping can be achieved for annealing at >1500 C. The major
problem at these temperatures is preservation of the GaN surfaces - various
methods of AlN deposition will be investigated as a solution. (v) investigation
of new implant isolation species, such as V, Fe or Co, which might create
thermally stable deep levels in GaN and have application to produce device
isolation. The significance of this work will be the development of a more
complete understanding of doping in GaN and related materials providing a
materials science basis for selective area implantation in the development of
advanced devices. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
area of materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of electronic/photonic devices. The basic knowled ge and understanding
gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the performance
and stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
materials combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration
of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area. ***