* 9732665
* Operation of the National Center for Atmospheric Research and Support of Other Scientific Activities
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2008
* Richard Anthes, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2008
* USD 0.00

The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) operates the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). NCAR, with UCAR's leadership, will
contribute to strengthening the atmospheric sciences. NCAR and UCAR will also
continue to contribute strongly to the overarching goals in NSF's strategic
plan. NCAR's priorities over the next five years fall into six main areas: (1)
Fundamental Research. In keeping with the mission of NSF, the foundation of
NCAR's program is fundamental research, particularly research of sufficient
complexity to command the resources of a national center. This program includes
solar physics, fluid dynamics and turbulence, cloud and precipitation physics,
atmospheric chemistry mesoscale meteorology, and climate. (2) Understanding and
Predicting the Earth System. Building on the broad base of fundamental research,
NCAR and its many university collaborators will carry out major crosscutting
efforts toward understanding and predicting the earth system. This includes
research on prediction of weather on short temporal and small spatial scales,
longer-term prediction of monthly and seasonal means, and studies of the
influence of human, solar, and other forcing processes on weather and climate.
(3) Advanced Scientific Facilities. NCAR will continue to put a high priority on
developing new and cutting-edge scientific facilities that can be efficiently
and cost-effectively supplied by a national center. This effort will include
computing systems, instruments and observing systems, community models,
datasets, advanced networking and communications tools, and provision of these
facilities to the community. (4) Human Dimensions and Societal Impacts. NCAR
will place increasing emphasis on studying the impacts of climate and weather on
society; on human influences on the climate system; on society's ability to cope
with weather- and climate-related impacts; and on the use and value of
meteorological, climate, and other atmospheric-related information in a variety
of contexts. (5) Education and Training. NCAR will continue and strengthen its
efforts in education. The Advanced Study Program will support a strong
postdoctoral fellowship program and graduate research assistantships to
encourage the development of creativity, independence, and breadth in young
scientists. Other educational activities will increase diversity in the
atmospheric sciences. (6) Applications and Technology/Information Transfer. NCAR
will transfer information, technology, and research results to the public and
private sectors and to university colleagues and constituents in three major
ways. Through direct transfer, public domain access to make information freely
available to the broadest audience, and licensing.