* 9732917
* A Practical Approach to Nonlinear Robust Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Randal Beard, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2002
* USD 155,212.00

9732917&lt;br/&gt;Beard&lt;br/&gt;Linear H-infinity control is a technique for
designing control laws that are robust with respect to bounded variations in
system parameters and bounded external disturbances. In recent years, linear
H-infinity techniques have been extended to nonlinear system. The nonlinear
H-infinity control problem is solved by two first order nonlinear partial
differential equations called Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs equations. These equations
are extremely difficult to solve except in very special cases and they are
difficult to approximate by standard techniques except for low order systems.
The inability to solve these equations has lead to a failure to realize the
potential of nonlinear H-infinity control techniques.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
outlines a plan to investigate innovative and computationally practical
techniques for approximating closed-loop nonlinear H-infinity optimal control
laws. The approach is to approximate the Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs equation in a
two step procedure. First, an iteration in policy space is used to reduce the
nonlinear partial differential equation to an infinite sequence of linear
partial differential equations. The second step uses the Galerkin spectral
method to approximate each linear partial differential equation. The result of
this process is a feedback control law, with a well defined region of
attraction, that converges to the nonlinear H-infinity solution as the order of
approximation increases. The two step process outlined above suffers from
Bellman's "curse of dimensionality," i.e., the required computations and memory
increase exponentially with the order of the system. This "curse of
dimensionality" is overcome by exploiting the structure in the problem for a
fairly general class of nonlinear systems.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance the state of the art by supplying a practical method for approximating
nonlinear H-infinity control laws. This result will be helpful to researchers
working in the area, allowing them to test their ideas on real world problems,
and to practicing engineers who wish to implement the latest developments in
control theory research. The proposed research also advances the state of
knowledge by illustrating how to mitigate the "curse of dimensionality" by
exploiting the structure of optimal control for a certain class of nonlinear
systems. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;