* 9732279
* Systematics and Evolutionary Biology: A Continuing Program  of Undergraduate Research at the American Musuem of Natural History (New York City)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Melanie Stiassny, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 119,997.00

9732279 The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) is an inspirational place
for young scientists to work, and its REU program offers an unrivaled
opportunity to expose students to the challenge of original research in fields
of biology that they rarely have the opportunity to fully explore at their home
institutions. The AMNH program draws in the research and mentoring expertise of
the AMNH's outstanding scientific staff, and provides students with a coherent,
hands-on introduction to research in the broad areas of systematics and
evolutionary biology. In entering into the Museum community, students are
offered an extraordinary opportunity to broaden their experience of biological
disciplines and participate in the highest caliber research at a premier
research institution. AMNH offers comprehensive, interactive educational
experience that centers around projects carefully designed to introduce
undergraduates to the excitement, challenge, and relevance of systematics and
contemporary evolutionary biology. In addition to the core component of hands-on
research, students participate in round-table discussions where they discuss
their research progress and problems, "show and tell" their latest findings, and
thrash-out ideas in an informal and supportive setting. A Species Lecture Series
introduces students to eminent museum faculty whose lectures address current
debates in systematics and evolutionary theory. At the end of each summer
program, students participate in a Student Seminar where they give formal slide-
illustrated presentations to a supportive, yet critical, audience of mentors and
peers. On leaving the AMNH, students are tracked and, in many cases, supported
through their remaining undergraduate, graduate, and even postdoctoral careers.