* 9732995
* CAREER: An Integrated Study of Image Estimation and         Compression Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Pierre Moulin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

The main goal of this project is to develop an analytical, multidisciplinary
approach to research and education in Image Processing, integrating important
aspects of engineering problems that are often treated separately. In
particular, this study incorporates realistic statistical models for image data
and physical sensors, and seeks solutions to estimation and compression problems
based upon fundamental statistical principles. The educational component of this
project aims at better preparing students for their engineering careers by
developing their multidisciplinary and analytical skills, and exposing them to
multiple facets of complex engineering problems. This theme is present at all
levels of this project: Firstly, motivated undergraduate students are encouraged
to participate in the research. Secondly, an undergraduate Image and Video
Processing course and laboratory exercises allow the students to learn,
visualize and assimilate fundamental concepts. Thirdly, an advanced graduate
Statistical Image Processing course is being developed with the objective of
integrating, applying and solidifying concepts taught in Information Theory,
Estimation Theory, and Statistical Optics. Fourthly, an interactive, virtual
Image Processing lab is being developed as part of two Distance Learning
projects. The research component of this project addresses key problems in image
restoration and compression and quantifies the benefits that may result from the
use of more accurate and sophisticated models. The methodology developed is also
applicable to ill-posed statistical inverse problems such as Synthetic Aperture
Radar imaging, astronomical imaging, and tomography. Complexity regularization
theory plays a central role in this research. Complexity-regularized estimators
are inherently in compressed form, and fundamental relationships between
estimation performance and rate-distortion theory are explored in that context.
Additionally, novel techniques for optimizing for optimizing the operational
rate-distortion performance of several image coding systems are being developed.