* 9732155
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Mountain Lake    Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* Eric Nagy, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9732155 The Mountain Lake Biological Station (MLBS) was founded in 1929 as a
teaching and research facility of the Biology Department of the University of
Virginia. It is located on a mountain top in the Allegheny Mountains of
southwestern Virginia. For almost twenty years MLBS has been developing a theme
of experimental studies in ecology and evolutionary biology that has attracted a
vigorous group of researchers from major colleges and universities nationwide.
This REU Site continues a highly successful program that has provided
opportunities for ten students to spend ten weeks each summer at MLBS conducting
their own independent research projects in the area of population biology.
Student projects are overseen by field biologists who return to MLBS year after
year because of its biological diversity and range of research opportunities and
resources. REU participants are selected for their enthusiasm for field
research, scientific sophistication, and interest in pursuing the sciences of
ecology or evolution as a career path. Admission is highly competitive; less
than 10% of applicants are accepted. Participants design, execute, interpret,
and present their own studies. Many projects are published in peer-reviewed
journals. Not including 1997 participants, 42% of REU students have gone on to
pursue graduate degrees in biology. Students also have the chance to interact
closely with other undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral and faculty
researchers, and teaching faculty. REU participants attend weekly seminars on
the conduct of scientific research and life as an academic. The meetings allow
regular periods for students to share questions, concerns and discoveries.
Participation in the program is open to any undergraduate conducting independent
research at MLBS, whether they are supported by the NSF/REU Site grant or not.
This serves to foster a greater sense of collaboration and interaction among
research groups at the station.