* 9732257
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Natural History of a West Indian Herpetofauna
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1999,04/30/2003
* Robert Powell, Avila University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2003
* USD 171,414.00

Avila College proposes a series of exciting summer programs annually providing
nine undergraduates with research experiences in tropical studies. Participants
will learn and develop skills by interacting with faculty as they work on
projects dealing with herpetological communities on Hispaniola. To foster
student development, a 3-phase program is planned: orientation -- introducing
students to research methodology and ecological studies in the West Indies;
apprenticeship- developing skills; and individual research -- resulting in
publication-quality reports. Seminars on research and graduate studies are
included to facilitate applications of acquired knowledge and skills to
participants' future academic pursuits. Presentations will be made by scientists
in both the United States and Dominican Republic. Evaluation will be by
participants, their academic advisors, and one outside faculty member not
involved directly with the program. This program is designed to induce
participants to favorably consider graduate studies and to increase the
likelihood of their choosing careers in science. The faculty will "coach"
students, instilling a vision of research by explaining the rules and delivering
a feeling of the excitement that comes with addressing hypothesis-driven
questions with conceptual orientations. A focus on frog and lizard communities
provides opportunities to apply theories and methods widely used in ecological
research while working with organisms that are abundant, accessible, and
remarkably well and visibly adapted to their environment. Investigations will
address aspects of niche dimensions and/or conservation issues. Students may
choose projects within these topics or develop investigations of their own,
including, but not limited to, physiological or ethological studies of selected
taxa.