* 9732508
* U.S-Japan Cooperative Science: The 1700 Cascadia Earthquake and its Probable Tsunami in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2000
* Brian Atwater, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/2000
* USD 43,000.00

9732508&lt;br/&gt;Atwater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to
support a 6-month research visit by Dr. Brian F. Atwater, Western Earthquake
Hazards Team, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), University of Washington, for
collaboration with Dr. Kenji Satake, Geological Survey of Japan (GSJ), at
Tsukuba. These two scientists will collaborate on two projects about a January
1700 tsunami in Japan and the American earthquake at Cascadia that probably
caused it. The first is the writing of a book about these events and the series
of discoveries that linked them. The book will be written in English plain
enough to reach a broad audience of American and Japanese citizens concerned
with earthquake and tsunami hazards. The second collaborative project may
clarify earthquake and tsunami hazards in the United States by revising the
estimated size of the 1700 tsunami in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate
objective of the research is to learn the position of sea level in 1700 at
several sites in Japan. These sites have been subsiding so rapidly in the past
50-100 years that the documented level of the 1700 tsunami in Japan, if
referenced to modern sea level, may be too low by a meter or more. Both projects
will implement two U.S.-Japan agreements to use tsunamis and coastal geology in
assessing earthquake hazards. One of these accords, the U.S.-Japan Earthquake
Disaster Mitigation Partnership, is part of the Common Agenda for Cooperation in
Global Perspective, while the other was a recently signed annex to the new
Memorandum of Understanding between the USGS and GSJ. The project will be
beneficial to U.S. engineers, public officials, and others to justify
earthquake-resistant design, tsunami-inundation zoning, and other public-safety
measures at the Cascadia subduction zone. In Japan, the project may encourage
the use of coastal geology to reduce losses from future
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;