* 9732041
* Automated Deduction and Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Phokion Kolaitis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 180,000.00

This project investigates several different computational aspects of equational
matching and unification with emphasis on the equational theory AC of
commutative semigroups and its extensions. The investigation is carried out in a
three-pronged plan. First, a study of counting problems in equational
unification will attempt to identify the exact complexity of computing the
number of minimal complete unifiers modulo an equational theory. This counting
problem reflects more accurately the computational difficulties of equational
unification than the corresponding decision problem does; moreover, it brings
out certain differences between equational matching and unification that are
masked, when only decision problems are considered. In the second part of the
Investigation will be a systematic investigation of efficient listing algorithms
in equational unification; these algorithms should enumerate all minimal
complete unifiers of two given terms, but should also satisfy certain desirable
performance guarantees, such as a reasonably bounded delay in listing any two
consecutive unifiers. Progress in the area may lead to the discovery of novel
unification algorithms and to the development of a rigorous methodology for
comparing such algorithms. Finally, there will be an experimental investigation
of associative-commutative matching problems; the main aim is to identify hard
random instances of such problems and possibly to unveil threshold or phase-
transition phenomena in associative- commutative matching. This investigation
may also produce new benchmarks for the experimental evaluation of matching and
unification algorithms.