* 9732516
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electro-optic Field      Sensors and Their Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/2000
* USD 29,365.00

9732516 Zhang This award provides funds to permit Dr. Xi-Cheng Zhang, Department
of Physics, Applied Physics and Astronomy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, to
pursue with Professor Hyun-Shik Kang, Department of Physics Education, Chonbuk
National University, Korea, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on
electro-optic field sensors and their applications. Much of the activity
initially will concentrate on learning from the Korean collaborator techniques
used for growth and fabrication of high quality ZnTe crystals. These electro-
optic crystals then will be used as broad band field sensors for the coherent
measurement of freely-propagating ultra wideband pulsed terahertz
electromagnetic waves (THz beams). The present collaboration will add an
international dimension to Dr. Zhang's research presently funded under NSF Grant
No. ECS-9701486. The U.S. researcher expects this new collaboration to be
beneficial to ongoing research under his NSF grant. The PI reports that the ZnTe
sensor is so sensitive that it eliminates the need for metallic antennas and
electrical connections that can interfere with accurate measurement and
characterization of the electromagnetic environment. Other benefits include
improved measurement accuracy by reducing susceptibility to electrical noise
pick up, thus, eliminating the need for electrical power at the sensor head; the
sensor head can be placed in hostile or remote areas; and the device's
compactness allows measurement in small cavities. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project
will provide international training and experience for a U.S. graduate student
in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of ph otonics and
optoelectronics research.. Korean participation is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***