* 9732061
* Scientific Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Janet Peterson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2002
* USD 150,000.00

The Department of Mathematics at Iowa State University is hosting a summer NSF-
REU program which has scientific computing as it's theme. Scientific computing
has become a powerful and essential tool in conducting research in science and
engineering. The goal of this program is to expose a small group of
undergraduates to research in an application area which uses scientific
computing. The program will be conducted for eight weeks during the summer
months. To be eligible for participation in the program the applicant must be a
citizen or permanent resident of the United States. The participants should have
at least the equivalent of two years of calculus and come computing background.
Each participant will be involved in an ongoing research project which will
include at least one faculty mentor, a graduate student and two to three
participants. The research topics that are proposed cover a wide range of
aspects of scientific computing such as modeling, grid generation, numerical
simulations, and visualization of simulations. The projects will give the
participants an introduction to applications areas such as computational
biology, fluid dynamics, porous media flow, modeling of chemical reactions, and
superconductivity. In addition to the research project, participants will attend
workshops on the computational tools that will be needed to complete their
project as well as some topics in mathematics that are not usually covered at
the undergraduate level. At the end of the eight week period the students will
write a paper which will appear in the Department's preprint series and the
students will also give a multi-media presentation on their research project.