* 9732322
* REU:  Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates in     Mechanical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* John Kennedy, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2003
* USD 324,250.00

Proposal No.: 9732322 PI: Kennedy University: Clemson U ABSTRACT The proposed
Research Experiences for Undergraduates site in the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at Clemson University will involve students from Clemson and other
institutions in a ten-week program of research, seminars, and workshops. The REU
site will compliment the department's Senior Departmental Honors Program, which
requires seniors to complete a research project and write a senior thesis. All
of the activities will focus on the various aspects of research: problem
formulation, experimentation, analysis, publication and presentation. The
participants will be challenged intellectually and will learn to work
independently. The one-on-one contact with faculty and interaction with graduate
students will also introduce these students to the opportunities in graduate
education and the career options in research and academia. The research projects
will span the areas of thermal and fluid science, mechanical and manufacturing
systems, engineering mechanics, and materials. Students will work intensively on
a prearranged research project which matches their interests with that of a
departmental faculty member. In addition, they will attend lectures on research
ethics, graduate education, teaching as a profession, and professionalism.
Workshops will be conducted on written and oral presentation. The program will
culminate in the preparation of a written report, by each student, of their work
and a poster session in which they will describe their work to interested
parties from the university and regional engineering community.