* 9732083
* Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Eric Siggia, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2002
* USD 411,000.00

9732083 Siggia This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials
Research, Physics, and Molecular and Cellular Biology. Phenomenological methods
developed in condensed matter physics will be applied to problems in cell
biology ranging from the mechanics of biomolecules to the formation of
organelles. In contrast to approaches taken by cell biologists, for selected
problems physical theory can make semiquantitative predictions before the
biochemistry is known, and connect models to experiments in ways biologists
cannot. Quantitative force-distance measurements of DNA interacting with
condensing agents (histones and polyamines) will be modeled in order to extract
binding agents, protein-protein interactions and the kinetics of association.
General questions about folding pathways in RNA and its behavior when
mechanically extended will be investigated by a kinetic Monte Carlo code for the
secondary structure, including `pseudo-knots.' Classical studies of chromosomes
in meiotic prophase strongly suggest the morphology of a polymer brush. Polymer
theory then explains a number of their properties that were otherwise mysterious
and makes semiquantitative predictions about forces and tensions which are
feasible to check experimentally. The biases that cause topoisomerase II to
resolve the engangled sister chromatid arms during mitosis may be understood in
terms of a multiphase polymer blend. Collaborations will continue with the
laboratory of Lippincott- Schwartz at NIH including work on the quantitative
analysis of photobleach experiments; testing whether data for the drug induced
dissolution of the Golgi is compatible with an interorganelle surface tension
driven flow; and, develop and test physical-chemical models for the organization
of the Golgi and other steps in protein secretion. A kinetic Monte Carlo or
molecular dynamics code will be developed for short polymers consisting of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic monomers and will be used to simul ate dynamical
processes in bilayer membranes such as fusion and budding. Realistic numbers of
lipids and almost reasonable times can be attained this way. Similar generic and
coarse grained models for the proteins that catalyze fusion can be included, and
the simulations then are a heuristic tool from which to develop a simple
physical picture as to how proteins destabilize the bilayer. An effort will be
made also to extend prior calculations of anomalous scaling in passive scaler
advection to the velocity field. At present there are no deductive theories as
to why velocity fluctuations become increasingly non-Gaussian as the scale size
increases. %%% This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials
Research, Physics, and Molecular and Cellular Biology. Phenomenological methods
developed in condensed matter physics will be applied to problems in cell
biology ranging from the mechanics of biomolecules to the formation of
organelles. In contrast to approaches taken by cell biologists, for selected
problems physical theory can make semiquantitative predictions before the
biochemistry is known, and connect models to experiments in ways biologists
cannot. ***