* 9732149
* Undergraduate Neurosciences Summer Research Program in      Mechanisms of Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1998,05/31/1999
* Stephen Nowicki, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

DBI-9732149 Abstract The Undergraduate Neurosciences Program at Duke University
will give undergraduates the opportunity to become involved in neuroscience
research at a major research university. Research and training experiences will
be organized around the theme of "Mechanisms of Behavior." The emphasis on
integrative systems and behavioral neuroscience that unifies faculty research
interests within this interdisciplinary field at Duke serves as the common theme
for the individual projects available to student participants in the program.
The focus of the 10-week summer program for each student will be a research
mentorship with a participating faculty member. Two weekly seminar series -
"Research in the Neurosciences" and "Science Basics"- will be included in the
summer schedule. "Research in the Neurosciences" will focus on ongoing faculty
research so that students in the program gain exposure to the field of
neuroscience research beyond their mentor's specific interests. "Science Basics"
will address practical matters pertaining to science careers. The summer program
will begin with a two-day familiarization retreat and will close with a research
forum during which students will make formal presentations of their research
projects. Applications to participate in "Mechanisms in Behavior" will be
accepted from sophomore undergraduates. The Program is especially interested in
receiving applications from women and minorities as well as undergraduates at
liberal-arts colleges.