* 9732223
* LCE: Numerical Study of Turbulence-Radiation Interactions   in Reactive Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Michael Modest, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 02/28/2002
* USD 283,419.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS 9732223 Principal Investigator: M. Modest LCE:
Numerical Study of Turbulence-Radiation Interactions In Reactive Flows Radiative
heat transfer plays an important role in most fires as well as in commercial
combustion applications, with its effects usually being of the same order of
magnitude as those of convective heat transfer, and sometimes dominating the
overall heat transfer rates. In much the same way as convection is aided by
turbulence, so is radiation, which in the presence of chemical reactions may
increase several fold due to turbulence interactions. However, the calculation
of such turbulence-radiation interactions is extremely difficult and has to date
been neglected in all popular CFD solvers or is treated empirically by
arbitrarily lowering the predicted flame temperatures to account for the
turbulence-radiation interactions. A promising method for accounting for these
interactions is the probability density function (PDF) approach. Unfortunately,
the PDF method in its present state of development has a number of shortcomings,
which preclude its use in reactive flows. The purpose of this research is to
further develop the PDF method to resolve the sharp gradients, which exist in
reacting flows, and to model the scalar equations for the interactions. The
extension of the PDF method will permit it to be included in established CFD
codes. The accuracy of the new method will be verified by comparison with DNS
calculations and experimental data. This work is funded as part of the joint
NSF/Sandia initiative in Life Cycle Engineering.