* 9732173
* Engineering Sciences for Modeling and Simulation-Based      Life-Cycle Engineering:  An Engineering Design Framework    Integrating Robust Optimization and Structured Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Karen Donohue, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/29/2000
* USD 50,000.00

This grant provides initiation funding for research on engineering design
decision making under conditions of risk and uncertainty. Specifically, the
research will focus on design assessment and optimization methodologies for
design decision-making processes in the face of design preferences,
environmental uncertainty, risk, and incomplete data. The proposed methods will
integrate the notion of design theory, robust optimization, ordinal
optimization, and a control-theoretic approach to simulation experiments. As an
initial attempt toward the research endeavors, the PIs will examine critical
issues in design performance and design utility, establish formal
characterization of design uncertainty and risk, and develop design optimization
modules. With rapidly increasing computational capability, simulation-based
approaches have become feasible for large-scale complex systems. The current set
of solution methodologies will be expanded to include a hybrid procedure that
combines the benefits of traditional optimization routines with the flexibility
of computer simulation. An optimal-simulation-budget-allocation algorithm will
be developed, which can dynamically determine the best simulation lengths for
different scenarios under conditions of uncertainty/risk and thus significantly
reduce the total computational cost. The theoretic results will be further
strengthened through a detailed study of design cases in both mechanical
component design and large-scale system design. If successful, the framework
will provide a theoretic foundation for engineering design, which will allow
further development in design valuation, performance assessment, and design
optimization. The assessment and optimization methodologies will provide design
engineers with critical tools that capture key design factors, analyze the
effects of uncertainty, and optimize the design over its life cycle. The new
simulation methodologies will offer an evaluative, confidence-seeking mechanism
for design evaluation, which will also contribute to the computational tools and
methodologies available for general simulation problems.