* 9732161
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at the University of Florida
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Randolph Duran, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* John Stevens
* 12/31/2001
* USD 272,465.00

This award from the Chemistry Division, the Division of International Programs,
and the Directorate of Engineering provides support for a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site in the Chemistry Department, University of
Florida, directed by Dr. Randolph S. Duran. A total of ten students will
participate over the next three years in an summer research program with an
international dimension. The program will focus on recruiting American students
who have successfully completed an existing REU program at one of three Florida
sites. These participants will spend the summer working on a research problem in
France at well-known groups in either a university, `Grande Ecole,` or CNRS
Laboratory. Through separate French funding an equivalent number of French
undergraduate students will be sent into the three Florida REU sites, which will
share program elements. Participants will be exposed to research topics in a
number of important research areas in chemistry, physics, biosciences, and
engineering. One French and one American exchange scientist will act as a local
coordinator during the beginning of each summer, providing extra support from
the home country. A senior scientist from the home country will also advise
participants how to best profit from interactions with their host research
group. Students will be required to prepare a written research report that will
be evaluated by their faculty advisor.