* 9732798
* Reactions of CH3 and C1 on Cu/Si Model Alloy Surfaces:      Understanding the Direct Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Barbara Hinch, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program
and the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program,
addresses the molecular level mechanisms of the direct synthesis of silicone
precursors from silicon using copper catalysts, the Muller-Rochow process. The
research combines UHV adsorption studies carried out at Temple University under
the direction of Professor Strongin, with STM measurements of the reactant
surface carried out by Professor Hinch and coworkers at Rutgers University.
Scientists at Dow Corning Corporation are involved in the evaluation of reaction
kinetics and selectivity of the catalysts designed by the group based on the
results of the molecular level investigations of reaction mechanism.
Understanding gained from these studies is applied directly in the predictive
design of catalysts for the Muller-Rochow process. The information gained from
this work will have a direct impact on the commercially important silicones
industry. The investigation of the molecular level mechanism of the direct
synthesis of silicone precursors on Cu/Si surfaces is the focus of this research
project. A combination of basic studies of copper catalyzed adsorption,
morphological studies of the reacting silicon surface, and kinetic studies of
operating catalysts will provide information about this technologically
important process. Researchers at Temple University, Rutgers University, and the
Dow Corning Corporation all contribute to this research project.