* 9732550
* Research in High-Frequency Analog Electronic Circuits for   Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2001
* Paul Gray, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2001
* USD 530,280.00

This research is concerned with the creation of new methods of electronic
circuit design which will allow realization of smaller size, longer battery life
and lower cost in personal communication systems such as cellular telephones,
cordless telephones and wireless computer networks. In addition, new transceiver
architectures are being investigated which will allow multistandard operation
which is transparent to the user. Thus, a single personal communication handset
could be used anywhere in the world as it automatically adjusts to different
local standards and frequencies. Current implementations of portable
transceivers typically use a multi-chip, multi-technology approach with a number
of precision external filters, resonators, and other components in order to meet
the stringent performance requirement of the analog RF interface in such
systems. These transitional approaches severely limit the achievable levels of
power dissipation and form factor, and are not compatible with low- cost
adaptive multistandard operation. This research is exploring new architectures
and circuit techniques which will allow utilization of scaled CMOS VLSI
technology to integrate the entire transceiver function with only a few external
components. The challenge is to find new approaches that overcome the inherent
limitations of integrated passive components such as low Q values in integrated
inductors, capacitors and varactors, by utilization of the inherently high
bandwidth capabilities of scaled integrated MOS transistors. The investigators
expect to demonstrate at the end of this research project a single-chip
multistandard RF transceiver incorporating synthesizers, transmit path, power
amplifier, and receive path as well as providing interface to several different
RF standards. This prototype will be implemented in 0.35 micron CMOS technology.