* 9733621
* CAREER: Environmental Engineering Education and Research in Support of Risk-Based Decision-Making
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Thomas Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 06/30/2002
* USD 285,000.00

9733621 Young The objective of this research is to (i) establish the mechanisms
of desorption resistance for organic chemicals in soils and sediments, (ii)
develop predictive models and improved experimental techniques for assessing
desorption rate limitations and (iii) quantify the potential risk variation
resulting from desorption resistance by incorporating these predictive models
into contaminant transport and risk assessment models. The presumptive mechanism
underlying this research is that desorption resistance arises when organic
compounds migrate to remote locations within rigid, condensed natural organic
matter networks (NOMs) that significantly impede diffusion out of the matrix.
This hypothesis will be tested by examining organic chemical desorption
equilibria, rates, enthalpies and activation energies from natural materials
containing diverse NOM types and quantities into both aqueous and supercritical
carbon dioxide solvents. Predictive models of the desorption process will be
developed by correlating NOM structural characteristics with model parameters.
Desorption rate limitations will be incorporated into existing transport models,
forming the basis for revised risk assessment models that can be used to
estimate the impacts of the phenomenon on soil cleanup standards. The
educational plan seeks to illustrate the importance of fundamental physical-
chemical process models by linking them with chemical transport and risk
assessment models. Chemical equilibrium and rate models will be linked to
transport models for groundwater and surface water and, subsequently, to risk
assessment models. Training on how policy-makers and managers analyze
engineering design options, using tools such as risk and cost-benefit analysis,
is being integrated into courses. Case studies will be prepared using the soil
risk assessment model developed in this research.