* 9733994
* CAREER:  Atom Diffusion Studies During III-V Epitaxy:       A Combined MBE-STM Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Paul Thibado, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2002
* USD 293,990.00

9733994 Thibado This CAREER project is focused on measurement and modeling of
diffusion, nucleation and growth properties of individual atoms on III-V(OO1)
surfaces. A multi-chamber facility with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) will allow the study of sub-monolayer films
on otherwise flat surfaces as a function of substrate temperature and elemental
V-flux, quenching to room temperature and measurement of the island number
density, island size, and island separation distributions. From the combination
of these measurements and random walk simulations diffusion rate versus
substrate temperature, activation energy for diffusion, critical island size for
nucleation, and the role of element V-flux on the elemental III- atom diffusion
will be assessed. These studies will act as a test bed for a variety of
computational models, ranging from first principles theory to rate equation
modeling. The proposed research provides an excellent vehicle to accomplish a
broad educational objective of expanding career opportunities for students. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in research acquiring
skills in semiconductor heterostructure design, processing, and
characterization. The PI will also establish collaborations with national
laboratories and industry. A hands-on lecture-lab course, in which students will
utilize semiconductor samples directly from the MBE system to fabricate and
measure properties of devices, and to participate in quantum well laser surface
science aspects of metal-semiconductor interfaces will be developed as part of
research and education integration to enhance studentsO general experimental and
analytical skills, and to improve learning through discovery. %%% The project
addresses forefront research issues in a topical area of materials science
having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspect s of
electronic materials and devices. An important feature of the program is the
emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and education through
the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
research area. ***