* 9733744
* CAREER: Effects of Electronic Alignment in Laser Induced    M-H2 and M-CH4 Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Solomon Bililign, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 02/28/2003
* USD 374,285.00

Solomon Bililign of North Carolina A&amp;T University is supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in his studies on the effects of
electronic alignment in laser-induced metal-hydrogen (M-H2) and metal-methane
(M-CH4) reactions. Specifically, he will investigate how the electronic
structure and electronic orbital alignment of a metal atom affects the structure
and chemical reactivity of M-H2 and M-CH4 complexes. Far wing absorption
spectroscopy will be extended to study the continuum or scattering state of a
transient bimolecular collision complex and investigate depolarization, chemical
quenching, and reaction in LiH2, ZnH2 and ZnCH4 complexes. The ultimate goal of
these studies is to gain new understanding and detailed knowledge about the
physical and chemical binding of some metals with hydrocarbons. The educational
activities associated with this CAREER award include outreach programs to
schools in the community, links to industry, short term projects for
undergraduates and course development related to the research project both at
the undergraduate and graduate levels. The interactions of hydrogen or carbon-
hydrogen bonds with metal atom sites is of great interest and importance to
areas such as homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis and organometallic
chemistry. C-H bond activation by metal atoms is one of the most important and
basic reactions in chemistry and may lead to more efficient and less costly
catalytic reactions. Despite this importance, we do not yet have a complete
understanding of some of the simplest metal-atom-hydrocarbon reactions. These
detailed studies will bring new understanding and detailed knowledge about the
physical and chemical binding of metals with hydrocarbons. In addition, this
research program at a historically black university will provide a very basic
research infrastructure for the training and education of underrepresented
members of society and should prove to be very effective in attracting African
Americans and other underrepresented groups to advanced research in science.