* 9733341
* CAREER:  Geomimetic Coordination Polymers: Teaching Nature- and Students - New Tricks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2002
* Steven Keller, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2002
* USD 287,897.00

9733341 Keller Proposed experimental work is aimed at synthesizing solid-state
metal-organic framework structures that are topologically similar to silicate
minerals such as quartz and/or zeolites, and are expected to exhibit properties
characteristic of the structures after which they are modeled, viz., chirality
and non-linear optical activity, or microporocity, respectively. Ultraviolet-
visible spectroscopy, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry will be used to study the evolution of solution species into
extended solids. Preliminary results suggest that non-covalent interactions such
as hydrogen bonding can often determine the final structure. Due to the
multidisciplinary approach involving, for example, inorganic and organic
synthesis, X-ray crystallography, and materials characterization, research and
education will be integrated into a unique educational experience well-suited to
the instruction of both graduate and undergraduate students, who comprise
collectively, the scientists of the next century. In addition, significant
enhancement of the more general undergraduate science education experiences will
be realized through the incorporation of technology, history, and "real-life"
examples. %%% A basic theme of this integrated research and education program is
the design and preparation of solid materials in which atoms and molecules are
arranged in particular ways. For example, the construction of scaffold-like
materials that will contain cavities capable of absorbing specific guest
molecules or ions (like a molecular sponge) may find important uses in
environmental remediation or remote chemical sensing. ***