* 9733332
* CAREER: Probing the Structure of the Salmonella Chromosome
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Anca Segall, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2003
* USD 497,883.00

Segall 9733332 Many lines of evidence have shown that the structure of the E.
coli and Salmonella bacterial chromosomes affects interactions with various
enzyme complexes. Several probes of structure, including homologous
recombination, transposition by Tn7 and Tn 10, and site-specific deletion
mediated by the resolvase protein of the delta gamma transposon, have uncovered
the presence of chromosomal "barriers". However, neither the nature of these
barriers nor the basis of their action is known. Since these barriers are likely
to affect all systems that interact with chromosomal DNA (repair, replication,
and transcription functions as well as interactions between the chromosome and
extrachromosomal elements like viruses and transposons), it is important to
understand their nature and effects, and if and how they are regulated. The
first stage is to unequivocally identify and define the barriers or structural
elements. This research addresses this question in a systematic and more
extensive manner than has been attempted in the past. The experiments are geared
to understanding the three-dimensional structure of the chromosome within the
bacterial cell, and how this structure is affected by some basic features of
cell physiology. The probe that is being used is the site-specific recombination
system of phage lambda, which has several features that make it a flexible and
sensitive tool for the task at hand, and which will yield data complementary to
that obtained by the probes used previously. The questions that are being
addressed are: 1) Do all chromosomal sequences have equal access to each other?
2) Do circular extrachromosomal sequences (specifically plasmids) have equal
access to all chromosomal locations? 3) Do loci that are easily accessible to
extrachromosomal DNA but are poorly accessible to other chromosomal loci define
regions that constrain the structure of the folded chromosome? One of the most
limiting aspects of educating biology students today is hands-on laboratory
traini ng not in a classical classroom context, but in a real-life research
laboratory. Students with well-developed skills in this area are extremely
sought-after, but too few of them have the opportunity to enter research labs
and receive the necessary training in problem-solving skills and proficiency in
lab methods, experimental design, and data analysis. To begin to correct this
problem five summer research workshops are being formed for undergraduates where
students will work in teams on different facets of a research problem. Students
will be involved in the design, performance, and analysis of the experiments,
and will learn modern molecular techniques. The workshops should benefit
students most profoundly by exposing them to carrying out experiments under a
more realistic setting than can be duplicated in larger laboratory courses in
which students do set lab exercises. In addition, some of the experiments on
chromosome structure will be adapted and introduced into one new and one ongoing
laboratory course.