* 9733650
* CAREER: Nanometer Scale Imaging and Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Weihong Tan, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2003
* USD 275,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the development of new
optical microscopy methods, based on near field optics, which allow the direct,
in vivo imaging of biological processes on the cellular and sub-cellular scales.
Professor Tan and his students at the University of Florida will develop a suite
of analytical methods which hold the promise of monitoring biological events
with nanometer-range spatial resolution. Optical sensors of this scale will be
developed for representative mineral and enzymatic species, calcium ion and
glutamate. This CAREER research project will expose students to the
interdisciplinary aspects of biomedical sciences and chemical instrumentation.
Professor Tan will be a key figure in the development of a joint bioanalytical
chemistry program between the Department of Chemistry and the University of
Florida Brain Institute. One of the long standing issues in the area of cellular
biology has been the desire to observe chemical phenomena on the single-cell
level. Professor Tan and his students at the University of Florida are
developing imaging techniques based on near field optical methods which address
this very important area of research. Instrumentation having sub-micrometer
spatial resolution and microsecond time resolution would impact a number of
disciplines. The multidisciplinary aspects of the instrumentation development
portion of the project are complemented by Professor Tan's new `Bioanalytical
Chemistry` course for graduates and advanced undergraduates and the
establishment of a collaborative program with the University of Florida Brain
Institute.