* 9733256
* Synthesis of C-Glycosides
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Chao-Jun Li, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/2003
* USD 312,000.00

The focus of this research is the development of unprotected methods for
carbohydrate synthesis. Coupling of aryl- and alkyl substitutes propargyl
halides with various unprotected carbohydrates, mediated by a metal will be
investigated using aqueous solvent. The resulting products will be transformed
into C-glycosides without using protection-deprotection processes. The
methodology will then be extended to the syntheses of natural products,
including: (+)-goniofufurone, (+)-7-epigoniofurfurone, (+)-goniobutenolide A,
(+)-goniodiol and the main skeletons of papulacandin (A,B,C.D), chactiacandin,
and trachelospermum asiaticum. The focus of the educational activities will be
the development of an undergraduate course entitled `The World of Organic
Chemistry: Food and Drugs.` An outreach program targeting elementary and high
school students is also planned. With this Faculty Early Development (CAREER)
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research and educational activities of Dr. Chao-Jun Li of the Department of
Chemistry at Tulane University. Professor Li will focus his research efforts on
developing synthetic methods for the preparation of carbohydrates without
resorting to the long protection-deprotection strategies that have been relied
on in the past. The educational activities center around course development and
outreach.