* 9733532
* CAREER:  Role of Exopolysaccharides in Rhizobium meliloti/ alfalfa Symbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Juan Gonzalez, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 02/28/2003
* USD 407,216.00

9733532 Gonzalez Bacterial exopolysaccharide is required for establishment of
the nitrogen fixing symbiosis between Rhizobium meliloti and its host plant
Medicago sativa (alfalfa), but the precise role of exopolysaccharides in this
interaction is not well defined. Succinoglycan, the acidic Calcofluor-binding
exopolysaccharide of Rhizobium meliloti strain 1021 is required for effective
nodulation. R. meliloti mutants that fail to synthesize succinoglycan form empty
nodules that are devoid of bacteria and bacteroids and unable to fix nitrogen.
Rm l021 has also the cryptic ability to produce a second exopolysaccharide (EPS
II) that suppresses the symbiotic defects succinoglycan-deficient strains on
alfalfa nodule invasion. A common theme emerging from these studies is that
small quantities of low molecular weight exopolysaccharides are sufficient to
mediate successful invasion by R. meliloti mutants which fail to produce
exopolysaccharides, implying that low molecular weight exopolysaccharide may act
as a signaling molecule during this process. A low molecular weight EPS II
fraction consisting of 15-18 EPS II disaccharide subunits efficiently allowed
nodule invasion by non-infective strains when present in amounts as low as 7
picomoles per plant, suggesting that low molecular weight EPS II may act as a
symbiotic signal during infection. This project will perform genetic and
biochemical analyses of exopolysaccharide production by R. meliloti and identify
the genes involved in the production of the biologically-active low molecular
weight form of EPS II. This project will also investigate the roles of
succinoglycan and EPS II in symbiosis. The results will set the stage for the
identification of the putative plant receptors for the biologically-active
Rhizobium exopolysaccharides and their role in symbiosis. Polysaccharides are
increasingly being recognized as important determinants of virulence in both
plant and mammalian pathogens. Succingoglycan is one of the best-characterized
bacterial polysaccharides and has already advanced understanding of the
synthesis and biological roles of polysaccharides in other bacteria, including
human pathogens. Basic studies of polysaccharide biosynthesis might eventually
contribute to the design of enzymatic steps in the synthesis of complex
carbohydrates to control linkage specificity and stereochemistry. These studies
may lead to insights into the possible broader use of oligosaccharides as
signals in biological systems than has generally been recognized. These studies
promise to lead to a better understanding of plant-bacterial symbiosis which is
necessary for biological nitrogen fixation.