* 9733062
* CAREER:  Evaluation of Cr(2+) Doped Cadmium Chalcogenides   as Mid-Infrared Laser Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Uwe Hommerich, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2002
* USD 365,000.00

9733062 Hommerich This CAREER project aims at a comprehensive investigation of
chromium doped II-VI semiconductors for tunable solid-state laser applications
in the mid-infrared wavelength region. Synthesis of materials will be carried
out in an ongoing collaboration with researchers at Brimrose Corporation of
America. Materials will be optically characterized by spectral luminescence
studies, luminescence excitation and decay time measurements, optical
absorption, and laser performance studies over the temperature range 15 - 450 K.
Spectroscopic results will be modeled within the framework of crystal field
theory to derive crystal field strength parameters, electron-phonon coupling
strengths, and luminescence quenching activation energies. The results of the
modeling will be used to derive structure/property relations which can guide the
optimization of selected materials to achieve better laser performance.
Educational components include: a new course in optical spectroscopy and new
experiments for an advanced graduate laboratory; and activities to increase
student participation in research from K-12 through the graduate level. This
project aims to increase the skilled work force in an important field of
optoelectronics with a special emphasis on enhancing the participation of
underrepresented students. %%% The project addresses research and education
issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to photonic materials. An important feature of the program is
the emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant research area with a special emphasis on participation of
underrepresented students. ***