* 9733963
* PECASE:  Micromachined Microwave and Optical Integrated Circuits - Design Methodologies for High Performance Communication Circuits and Packages
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1998,10/31/1998
* Rhonda Franklin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 10/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9733963 Drayton High performance in communication systems that handle large
complex data formats from wireless and multimedia services is becoming
increasingly difficult to achieve high frequency @ designs. This is due to the
limited speed/bandwidth capability and cross-talk/interference immunity of
electronic designs. As data size and structure increase, communication systems
must operate faster. Faster speeds can be achieved in two ways: (1) by
increasing the operating frequency or (2) by using photonic circuits. Increasing
the operating frequency of electronic systems has an upper performance limit,
particularly in terms of cross-talk and interference. Photonic circuits, on the
other hand, can achieve higher speeds hence wider bandwidth and offers excellent
cross-talk/ interference immunity. Unfortunately, the delivery of disparate data
types at very fast rates has been achieved in telecommunication applications
using photonic devices, but these designs types are not readily available for
microwave applications. This proposal will focus on developing innovative
package and circuit design methodologies for HF circuits using a
multidisciplinary approach. This approach will involve three general areas: (1)
advanced materials, such as polymers and M-V's, (2) advanced processing
techniques, such as micromachining, and (3) design methods for microwave and
optical integrated circuits. Collectively, these areas will be used to address
the research and educational needs for novel HF circuit designs and for HF
designers of future communication systems. The goals of this research plan are -
to explore the use of novel photonic designs to achieve functions traditionally
performed by microwave circuits; - to use polymers and III-V materials with
micromachining techniques to develop packages and circuits based on the
microwave and optical integrated circuits; - to develop methodologies for
packages and circuit components; - to develop circuit components implemented in
silico n platform for system-level integration, - to study how photonic waves
interact with high frequency electronic circuits (f &gt; microwaves) The goals
of the education plan are - to offer modem applied problems into conventional
learning environments (i.e. the classroom and laboratory); - to provide
interactive learning methods in our classroom environment via hands-on
laboratory and classroom interactions; - to use multi-disciplinary approaches to
solve classical and modem applied problems; - to provide up-to-date learning
opportunities through distance learning tools (i.e. internet and Web-based
learning modules) to re-educate practicing engineers and other researchers in
the field. This plan will impact the development of novel design methodologies
for HF applications. The multi-disciplinary approach will allow advanced
materials and novel fabrication processes to be investigated during the
development states of design, potentially yielding low cost approaches.
Furthermore, the implementation of microwave and optical integrated circuits to
achieve microwave functionality will allow the realization of more flexible
design schemes in mixed signal platforms. A-1