* 9733434
* CAREER:  Generative Designer Assistance Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Linda Schmidt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2002
* USD 268,932.00

This CAREER award provides funding for the creation of a prototype generative
designer assistance tool that combines a function-based generation strategy with
the geometric modeling capabilities of today's computer-aided design systems.
The prototype tool will integrate an existing boundary solid modeler with a
graph-based function modeling system, providing a platform for the
transformation of a functional description of a design into a solid model of the
components that comprise a potential design solution. Function-driven,
hierarchical design algorithms with optimization modes, will be developed to
transform an initial functional description of a design into an entire space of
functionally feasible and physically valid designs. A supporting algorithm to
recognizing emergent functions and function sharing opportunities will be
proposed and tested. This award also funds the expansion of a current graduate-
level course, Mechanical Design Formalisms, with new modules examining creative
design methods to answer the question, `Is one design method more creative than
another?`. An undergraduate version of the Formalisms course will be offered in
Year Two of the award. In addition to coursework, this award fund the
continuation of an undergraduate research project to develop a Mechanical Design
Learning Tool, targeting students in grades three through six. Through a visual
interface, students will manipulate icons representing simple mechanical
components in order to solve problems like `create a rolling cart`. The tool
will feature animation sequences that illustrate the mechanical concept
discovered by correct icon manipulation. Successful generative design tools will
assist designers in completing routine or, on a more interactive basis,
challenging design tasks. Their design interpretation techniques can be used to
preserve a company's design knowledge, a significant goal for a design
environment characterized by geographically dispersed design teams and paperless
design databases. Generative design tools will have impact beyond use by
experienced designers. They are training tools for novice designers and tools
for engineering students in design classes. Generative design tools also embody
the foundational principles necessary for building design learning tools
suitable to engage elementary students in learning mechanical engineering
concepts. The proposed work's impact will reach into the university classroom,
eventually providing design learning tools to students of all ages, engaging
them in engineering pursuits at pre-college and college ages.