* 9733565
* CAREER: Nonlinear Dynamics of Smart Materials Used for      Structural Vibro-Acoustic Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Thomas Royston, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 03/31/2003
* USD 315,500.00

This CAREER project addresses the complex problem of modeling, analysis, and
experimental investigation of nonlinear characteristic related to smart
materials, such as piezo-ceramic composites, and investigates their application
in vibro-acoustic energy conduction transduction, dissipation and excitation.
This research is vital for meeting critical needs in applications such a
structural noise and vibration control, non-destructive testing and evaluation,
health monitoring of structures and machinery, music and micro-electro-
mechanical systems. The education plan is integrated fully with the proposed
research topic. It included outreach activities involving inner city youth
through the medium of music via a non profit program called Music Education
Reaching Instrumental Talent (MERIT). In this program, the PI plans to
incorporate a sequence of instructions on `Science and Engineering in Music.` In
addition, he plans to augment the laboratory experience in UIC Minority
Engineering Recruitment and Retention Program with `Science and Engineering of
Musical Instruments,` in which students first study traditional musical
instruments, and then design and develop their own musical instrument. The
project will result in a better understanding of vibro- acoustic energy
transmission, and engineering concepts via musical acoustics.