* 9733802
* CAREER: Modeling, Dynamical Analysis, and Control of        Microcantilever Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Murti Salapaka, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2003
* USD 310,000.00

9733802&lt;br/&gt;Salapaka&lt;br/&gt;Micro-cantilevers have revolutionized
microscopy in the past decade. Ingenious ways of using them have been deviced to
probe and manipulate material at very small scale. Research made possible by
such structures is the reason for numerous articles in reputed journals such as
Science and Nature. They have found widespread use in diverse areas such as
biology (DNA strands have been manipulated using micro-cantilevers) and
semiconductor processing. Some of the recent research which utilize micro-
cantilevers are in the areas of nano-machining and electron spin
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspite of the importance of control design for
such systems, a systematic study of the role of controllers has been neglected.
The proposed project will perform such a study where the primary objective is to
obtain control-oriented models for micro-cantilever based devices, and the
utilization of such models to design and implement controllers. Based on such
models a methodology to assess the limits of performance of such a device will
be developed. Initial research has indicated that vast advances can be made by
such a study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For effective design of controllers for such
systems a good understanding of the underlying physical principles is required.
There are novel phenomena which affect the performance adversely but can aid the
sign process. As an example, thermal noise in systems utilizing micro-
cantilevers can be the limiting factor in the achievable performance. However,
using thermal noise, nominal model and bounds on modeling errrors can be
obtained in a straightforward manner. Such phenomena will be studied and
exploited for modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing research has indicated that
complex behavior is possible in the cantilever-sample dynamics. Control design
can play an important role in stabilizing desirable behavior that exist amidst
the complex dynamics. Increased speeds of operation and better resolutions are
the important benefits of such a design, which will be pursued under this
project. Also, with increasing miniaturization the quantum-mechanical effects in
the micro-cantilever start to become relevant and a need to control such effects
becomes important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty in any model for a
cantilever based device is unavoidable. One of the reasons for such uncertainty
is that the cantilever dynamics is determined by the material being probed by
the cantilever. Moreover, some disturbances present in such devices are
characterized in a stochastic framework while others are described in a
deterministic, time-domain setting. Thus controllers which can handle
performance specifications with respect to such disturbances in the presence of
uncertainty can be particularly valuable. The study of better techniques,
software development and implementation of such controllers in a device which
employs a micro-cantilever is proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A course which
educates the student in modeling, validation and implementation issues of design
will be developed. This course will comprise of an appropriate combination of
theory and experiment. Aspects relevant to micro-cantilever based devices will
also be incorporated. Lectures to be given by entrepreneurs will highlight the
financial issues to be considered for the success of a project. In another
course, recent methodologies of&lt;br/&gt;controller design which rely on
convexity theory will be presented. This course will unify most of the convex
analysis techniques that are being utilized in the design of contollers.
Efficient computational tools to design such controllers will be given.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;