* 9733017
* CAREER: New Methods for the Analysis and Deployment of      Sustainable Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* John Miller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2003
* USD 285,000.00

This CAREER award supports research leading to the development of a new
methodology using project delivery and project finance methods as variables for
optimizing the public infrastructure portfolio to replace the nation's current
ideological confusion over `privatization` with reasoned engineering analysis.
Recent experiments with alternative delivery methods have produced hard evidence
that, for many projects, more than one project delivery method is viable. As
project delivery and finance methods are considered variables, the optimization
problem facing infrastructure decision makers is dramatically different. The
emerging task is to sensibly manage these variables to produce collections of
viable individual projects (facilities or services) that are also viable at the
portfolio level, i.e. they meet overall public infrastructure needs within
multiple capital restraints. The PI's research to date indicates that for public
and private finance methods, and alternative project delivery methods to
seamlessly co-exist, `linearity` must be re-established at the portfolio, not
the project level. Managing the infrastructure portfolio with these variables is
the focus of the PI's research. Based on detailed case study work, this research
will develop the tools which will permit an integrated analysis and optimization
of the public infrastructure portfolio. These tools include new discounted cash
flow (life cycle cost) models that can be commonly applied to all project
delivery methods, and new linear optimization algorithms which extend capital
rationing models to situations where there are multiple sources and limits on
capital, along with a variety of viable project delivery strategies at the
project level. The goal of the research is to permit governmental infrastructure
strategists, using sound engineering analyses, to investigate how different
levels of private and public sector funding (together with changes in the amount
and source of capital) affect the identity, number, and distribution of projects
that can be completed using the various project delivery strategies.