* 9733769
* CAREER: Innovative Experimental Mechanics for Heterogeneous Construction Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Eric Landis, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 05/31/2002
* USD 235,000.00

9733769 Landis The primary theme of this career development plan is to promote,
advance, and apply innovative experimental analysis techniques to heterogeneous
construction materials. This theme applies to both the research and the
educational components of the plan. Concrete and portland cement-based materials
are the focus here, but many of the concepts and techniques developed will be
applicable to wood, rock, composites, and other materials with a heterogeneous
microstructure. The objective of the research is to quantify specific
microstructural damage and failure mechanisms in cement- based materials through
advanced experimentation and data analysis. In order for there to be significant
advances in our ability to model and predict failure mechanisms, we must have a
quantitative understanding of the physical microstructural processes involved.
The research addresses this need for quantitative microstructural property
versus performance data. The overall objective of the educational work is to
update experimental mechanics and data analysis treatment in the undergraduate
and graduate civil engineering curriculum, and to highlight the role of
mechanics and materials in the different civil engineering subdisciplines. This
objective will be realized through the integration of new classroom and
laboratory modules into existing undergraduate and graduate courses. The
cornerstone of the education program will be an innovative freshman level
construction materials course in which the common themes of problem analysis and
design are introduced to new engineering students using materials as the
vehicle. The laboratory component of this course will be designed to reveal
relationships between the material's microstructure and performance properties.
The link between the research and education components is the innovative use of
the laboratory. The ease of numerical simulations has in varying degrees altered
the use of experimental analysis in both education and research. The goal of
this workplan is therefore to emphasize the importance to mechanics and
materials of working in "real" rather than "virtual" laboratories. As this work
is multidisciplinary, collaborations with experts in digital image processing,
cement microstructure and x-ray physics and planned. ***