* 9733880
* CAREER: Querying Information Sources Across The Internet
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Luis Gravano, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2004
* USD 299,984.00

The goal of this research project is to help users find the information that
they need over the Internet. Unfortunately, Internet information sources vary
widely in the types of information and access interfaces they provide.
Furthermore, the number of available sources is overwhelming to users.
Therefore, using this wealth of resources effectively presents challenging
problems. To address these problems, the research goals of the project include:
(1) smart query processing over HTML documents, using information like query
logs, citations, and user feedback to find the most useful documents for a
query; (2) extraction of succinct summaries of information sources with varying
capabilities and interfaces, so that the evaluation of user queries can focus on
only the most useful information sources; (3) integration of query results from
multiple heterogeneous information sources, so that users can query multiple
sources and still receive a single, coherent query result; (4) integration of
text, relational, and image repositories, so that users can use all available
information regardless of its format. The educational objectives include the
expansion of the curriculum in databases and information systems at Columbia
University. In particular, a new course covers the latest trends in database and
information systems. In summary, this project will develop the tools to provide
users with seamless and transparent access to the large number and variety of
Internet sources. In effect, users will be able to express their information
need in simple ways, and receive the relevant data with no further involvement
in the processing of their queries. http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~gravano