* 9733916
* CAREER:  Integrated Synthesis of Mechanical Systems with    Unconventional Actuations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Suresh G. Ananthasuresh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/2003
* USD 298,425.00

This grant provides funding for a CAREER award. The principal goal of this
project is to develop systematic design methods for the shape synthesis of
mechanical structures subject to unconventional actuation. The following three
synthesis problems will be addressed: (1) Synthesis of novel micro- and meso-
scale devices with embedded electro-thermal-compliant actuation such that they
deform desirably upon applying an voltage differential between two points; (2)
Synthesis of a structure for prescribed normal mode shapes; and (3) Shape
synthesis of piezoelectrically driven structures. In each case, the coupled
interactions among the field equations of multiple energy domains will be
modeled and used in conjunction with the numerical optimization methods to
develop the optimal synthesis algorithms. The educational plan includes
involving undergraduates in research, and developing design-oriented graduate
courses and a curriculum for graduate and undergraduate students in the rapidly
growing area of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS). A new outreach activity
of `Taking MEMS to high schools` is included as part of this integrated research
and education activity to inspire and encourage high school students to pursue
careers in science and technology. If successful, this research will result in
design methodologies for optimizing shape to exploit the full potential of
materials and unconventional actuations used in modern mechanical systems such
as MEMS and Smart Structures. This will impact the MEMS, and micro-sensor and
actuator industries making their products more competitive because of improved
quality and lower cost. The successful implementation of the educational plan of
this project will result in mechanical engineering graduates with
interdisciplinary skills for the 21st century.