* 9733948
* CAREER: High Performance Computing and Network Optimization Methods with Applications to Intelligent Transportation     Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Ismail Chabini, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2004
* USD 286,000.00

Abstract CMS 97-33948 PI: Ismail Chabini Massachusetts Institute of Technology
"CAREER: High Performance Computing and Network Optimization Methods with
Applications to Intelligent Transportation Systems" This CAREER award supports
research designed to integrate methodologies in high performance computing and
network optimization methods to solve problems arising in Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) applications. The research has three main
directions: 1) developing and analyzing mathematical formulations, efficient
algorithms and computer implementations for problems arising with ITS equipped
with on-line information and control technologies. Problems include: dynamic
modeling of the interactions between demand and supply components; generation of
consistent and anticipatory route guidance; dynamic signal control and ramp
metering and their integration with dynamic traffic assignment; and development
of efficient algorithms for the computation of time- dependent shortest paths.
2) expanding network optimization methods and the knowledge base in the field of
design and development of new algorithms and their computer implementation and
testing to solve very large scale real-life applications. The emphasis is on the
development of new methods that are amenable to efficient coarse grain parallel
implementations. 3) developing high performance computing systems for parallel
implementations of dynamic transportation network models and algorithms in order
to meet the real-time requirement of ITS; developing parallel optimization
methods to generate solutions to very large scale off-line real-life
applications; and developing mathematical measures to analyze, assess and
predict the performance of parallel computing systems. Education activities
include: contribution to the development of a new curriculum and paradigm for
the education of future transportation professionals; innovation in improving
the learning and teaching experience b y participating in the implementation of
the concept of MIT learning networks; contribution to a departmental initiative
that aims to develop a new curriculum for undergraduate education; development
of a textbook; outreach activities; and transfer of research into practice.