* 9733184
* CAREER: Maintaining Power Quality Through Simulation,       Experimentation And Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Annette von Jouanne, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2003
* USD 329,941.00

ECS-9733184 Von Jouanne Power Quality (PQ) is becoming an ever increasing
concern with the growth of both sensitive and disturbing loads in the
residential, commercial and industrial levels of the power system, and the
current movement toward deregulation in the electric utility industry. With the
increased attention on high efficiency and controllability of industrial
processes, as well as reduced weight, volume and cost of consumer products, the
application electronic converters is showing a rapid rise. While solid-state
power electronic equipment, such as Adjustable Speed Drives (ASDs), provide
efficient conversion of electric power, the switching-mode operation causes PQ
problems such as harmonic distortion of voltages and currents leading to several
adverse effects including the malfunction of sensitive electronic equipment,
equipment overheating, lower operating efficiency (and higher losses) and
interference with communication systems. PQ related disruptions, ranging from
system malfunction and hardware damage to costly data loss and downtime
currently, cost U.S. companies more than $25 billion annually. In response to
these concerns, the objective of the proposed career plan is to develop a strong
PQ program at Oregon State University (OSU) as follows: Simulate distributed
nonlinear load effects on the power system/industrial facility network.
Experimentally analyze critical PQ situations by subjecting representative loads
to typical poor PQ conditions generated by a programmable AC source. Evaluate
ASD ride-through capabilities (multiple makes and ratings up to 300hp) through
voltage sags, static capacitor switching and input distortion. Investigate and
develop improved PQ compensators and ASD ride -through devices. Develop a novel
"Standard PQ Guide" for industry and utility personnel to use in the design of
new or existing facilities to ensure a high PQ environment and compliance with
IEEE 519. Disseminate this information through a series of courses and practical
worksh ops for industries and utilities, and incorporate it into both the
undergraduate and graduate course curricula. The unique contribution of the
proposed research and education plan is two-fold. Results of the power
system/power electronic simulations and experimental analyses will contribute to
the development of a novel "Standard PQ Guide" (manual). This Guide will
significantly aid design engineers and utilities in harmonic compensation, and
compliance with existing and upcoming PQ standards, as well as future planning.
Using the PQ Guide will help engineers get up to speed on PQ issues as well as
'clean up' existing facilities to significantly reduce costly downtime. With the
recent and continuing growth of the semiconductor manufacturing industry in the
Pacific Northwest, utilities and industries have expressed the need for
assistance in improving their PQ. The proposed PQ Guide will address this need.
The second novel contribution is the dissemination of the results of the
proposed PQ work through a series of innovative industry, utility and university
seminars. These seminars will include theoretical PQ analysis in a classroom
setting combined with a unique hands-on laboratory experience in the Motor
Systems Resource Facility (MSRF). These seminars will also include instruction
on how to use the proposed PQ Guide. No other PQ courses offer the "hands-on"
opportunities that the PI is proposing here, which will greatly enhance the
effectiveness of the learning experience. The PI has conducted several
successful seminars addressing PQ issues. The proposed career plan includes
specific plans to stimulate and educate a new generation of energy systems
engineers on the importance of PQ.