* 9733207
* CAREER: Immuno-Optical Biosensors for Plasma Factors/       Application of TQM in Bioengineering Education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1998,09/30/2000
* Kyung Kang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 09/30/2000
* USD 160,000.00

9733207 Kang Protein C (PC) is an important blood plasma protein which prevents
unwanted clots and also dissolves formed clots in the human body. With PC
deficiency, either by hereditary or acquired, the human body can encounter
serious medical complications due to blood coagulation that can lead to
embolisms that injure lung, heart, and brain tissue, and can cause death. A
practical, clinical PC biosensor for the diagnosis of PC deficiency should have
the attributes of high sensitivity, high specificity, and real-time measurement.
The proposed mechanism depends on a highly specific antigen-antibody reaction.
It involves binding antibodies at the surface of an optical fiber, injection of
the sample into a micro chamber (300 micro liter) encasing the fiber, reacting
light emitting secondary antibodies with the absorbed PC molecules on the fiber,
and quantifying the PC concentration by the emitted light intensity. It is
proposed to apply total quality management (TQM) concepts in both graduate and
undergraduate bioengineering education and research. This project emphasizes the
structured team approach to bring together basic scientists, bioengineers
(biomedical and bioprocess engineers), clinicians, business, and legal
professionals to address optimum process development for the production of the
best bioproduct at minimum cost. ***