* 9733210
* CAREER: Molecular and Genetic Characterization of the Early Steps of Toluene Utilization in Thauera sp. T1
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2004
* Peter Coschigano, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2004
* USD 503,736.00

9733210 Coschigano The aromatic hydrocarbon toluene is a hazardous substance
that poses health risks to humans, particularly to the central nervous system.
Individuals with long term exposures may exhibit memory loss, attention and
concentration deficiencies, and poor abstracting abilities. Toluene is one of
the most water soluable components of gasoline and other fuels and has been
listed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as a priority pollutant. It
is also a widely used industrial solvent, being used in a large number of
chemical processes. This project will be the first use a combined genetic and
molecular approach to study the non-oxygen mediated metabolism of an aromatic
hydrocarbon using a bacterial isolate tentatively identified as a Thauera sp.
that can degrade toluene under denitrifying conditions. Preliminary genetic and
molecular studies have already proven useful in gaining insight into the
mechanism of the toluene metabolic enzymes of strain T1, specifically the TutD
gene product. This project will elucidate function of TutD and its regulation
and identify additional enzymes in the pathway of toluene degradation using
molecular genetic approaches. An essential component of this research is to
provide an opportunity for both undergraduate student exposure to scientific
research and for graduate student training. Ohio University has a number of
programs to encourage undergraduates to participate in laboratory research and
this proposal will help to provide an opportunity for such research.
Opportunities for graduate student research at the Masters and doctoral level
will also be provided.