* 9733610
* CAREER: Accurate and Robust Admission Control in Integrated Services Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 02/28/2003
* USD 200,000.00

ATM and next generation IP networks will provide the fundamental building blocks
for integrated services networks: the ability to reserve network resources on
behalf of bursty real-time applications. However, provisioning network resources
accurately is quite challenging in the real-world environment characterized by
heterogeneous and highly bursty traffic streams which exhibit rate variations
over multiple time scales. The goal of this research is to design accurate and
robust admission control and resource management algorithms that scale to large
internetworks. In particular, we plan to study the following three problems.
First, in a shared public network, applications cannot be trusted to adhere to
their specified traffic parameters and therefore must be policed. However,
deterministic policing must not preclude statistical resource sharing, which is
essential for efficient resource utilization. We are designing an accurate
envelope-based resource allocation algorithm that enables the network to
statistically multiplex traffic streams while simultaneously enforcing
applications' specified traffic parameters. Second, many applications will be
unable to specify their traffic parameters in advance so that the network must
somehow reserve resources even for applications with unknown resource
requirements. We are developing a measurement-based service that adaptively
measures the envelope of the aggregate traffic flow to predict future resource
requirements and performance parameters for such ill-characterized applications.
Finally, internetworks are characterized by a large number of heterogeneous
components so that a resource management scheme must scale to such realistic
environments. We are devising end-to-end resource management techniques that
exploit coarse-grained representation and allocation of network resources.