* 9733739
* CAREER: Telephone Call Centers: Human Factors in the        Management of Queueing Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Noah Gans, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2003
* USD 251,012.00

Telephone call centers constitute a large, but hidden, industry in the United
States (US), and their use continues to grow rapidly. They are used extensively
for reservation-taking in the travel industry and for providing customer
services in retail financial services and telecommunications. `Inbound` call
centers, which provide customer service and take orders for customer-initiated
sales, are queueing systems: a customer phones in; if all customer service
representatives (CSRs) are busy, she waits in queue; when a CSR becomes free she
is switched to the CSR and service begins. Relatively little research in the
management science literature has been devoted to the analysis of call center
performance and control, and important features of call center operations have
not been addressed by this literature. Many of those features have to do with
the fact that it is people, rather than `jobs,` that require service and that it
is people, rather than equipment, that do the processing. Research questions
include the following. (1) How much does customer waiting time cost an
organization? Little work has been done to model the costs that congestion
incurs through the erosion of consumer satisfaction. (2) A typical center fields
many types of calls, and CSRs may be cross-trained in a number of types of call.
How should one train workers for this environment? Of the many workers that may
be qualified to handle an incoming call, to whom should that call be routed? (3)
Workers learn on the job and get better as they accumulate experience. They also
`turn over` (quit or are fired). In this case, what are the tradeoffs among
direct labor costs, costs associated with turnover, and customer waiting costs?
The call center environment is a fascinating vehicle for these lines of research
precisely because it is an example of a relatively simple production system in
which marketing, human-resource, and operational problems are all intertwined.
We think of the telephone call center as a simple model for more complex systems
and believe that a better understanding of call centers will ultimately offer
insight into how important human factors should be accounted for in the
management of a broad range of modern service systems. The project's educational
plan also seeks to foster students' understanding of how human factors should be
accounted for in the management of service systems. To achieve this goal,
research findings and insights will be incorporated into the curricula of a
number of introductory undergraduate and masters courses. Similarly, integrative
materials, such as cases and simulation exercises, will be developed to help
students in more advanced courses to better understand these problems. Finally,
Ph.D. education and training will help to promote the integration of traditional
management science models with more behaviorally-oriented decision sciences.