* 9733281
* CAREER: Interfacial Flow in Surfactant Monolayers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,02/28/2001
* Daniel Schwartz, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2001
* USD 152,500.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9733281 D.Schwartz/Tulane Single layers of amphiphilic molecules
can be formed on the surface of water contained in a "Langmuir trough," which
allows control of two-dimensional (2D) density and surface tension. Such
monolayers have traditionally been used to study the phase behavior of liquid-
crystalline materials. This project aims to extend the usefulness of these
systems to the area of rheology. Recent work has demonstrated that monolayers of
particles can also be formed. The rheology of surfactant and colloidal
monolayers will be studied using a combination of specialized optical microscopy
techniques (Brewster angle and fluorescence microscopy) and interfacial
rheometric measurements. These experiments will lead to a better understanding
of processes where monolayer flow is important, such as foam coarsening and
emulsion coalescence. They will also serve as valuable tests for theories
describing the behavior of colloidal suspensions under shear. Performing flow
experiments in 2D has several unique advantages: the theoretical description of
the flow is simplified, the entire flow field is directly observable, and the
thermodynamic variables can be varied to control the orientation and
conformation of the surfactant molecules to a greater degree than is possible in
3D fluid phases. This project will utilize these advantages to study several
important issues in the rheology of complex fluids for the first time. The
experiments will include both rod-shaped and disk-shaped surfactant molecules
and will encompass a variety of liquid-crystalline phases, including nematic
(and polar nematic), discotic, and hexatic. The recent discovery of the first 2D
small molecule nematic phase (by this research group) will make these
experiments possible. Also, since hexatic phases are peculiar to quasi-2D
systems, the rheology of such phases are not understood. Studies of rod-shaped
particles under shear will lead to a particle-level understanding of the effect
of interpartic le interactions and proximity to a wall. Monolayers of spherical
particles will be examined as a model system with which to study intriguing
behavior in colloidal suspensions including shear thickening/thinning and the
connection to shear induced melting and re-entrant solidification. The
simplifications afforded by 2D studies will permit detailed comparisons between
the experiments and relevant theories, such as Leslie-Ericksen theory for
nematic flow, and allow the development of new theory for hexatic phase
hydrodynamics. Since liquid-crystalline behavior is ubiquitous in 2D systems
like monolayers, fundamental understanding of the rheology of 2D liquid
crystalline phases will be directly relevant to processes involving surfactant
monolayer flow. For example, the coalescence of oil droplets in emulsions is the
basic process regulating emulsion stability and is partly controlled by
rheological properties of the surfactant monolayer. Stability may be desirable,
as in paint and coating technologies, or undesirable, as in some surfactant-
based oil recovery schemes. A basic understanding of surfactant monolayer
rheology will permit the design of appropriate surfactants for these
applications. Similar issues are involved in the stability and collapse of
foams. The rheology of colloidal suspensions is not only scientifically
interesting but directly relevant to materials processing in a vast array of
industries. The studies are aimed at making the connection between particle-
level structures and processes and macroscopic flow behavior. The simplification
of 2D and the ability to observe individual particles over the entire flow field
will allow such connections to be made.