* 9733907
* CAREER: An Investigation of Protein Dimer Interactions by   Exploiting the Unique Properties of Chemokines
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1998,08/06/1999
* Patricia LiWang, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/06/1999
* USD 230,000.00

9733907 LiWang Chemotactic cytokines (chemokines) are a family of structurally
interesting proteins that have been subdivided into two subfamilies, each
showing different dimer structures. The research hypothesis for this project is
that since chemokines from both subfamilies have similar monomer subunits and
yet have completely different dimer interfaces (with a relatively high sequence
identity) there are likely to be changes in sequence that will allow one stable
dimer type to be turned into the other dimer type. Therefore, the specific aims
involve mutation of a representative member of each subfamily: First, human
MIP-1( will be rationally mutated such that this chemokine forms a stable dimer
that more closely resembles the dimer of human IL-8. The next goal is to
rationally mutate IL-8 such that it forms a stable dimer that more closely
resembles that of MIP-1(. After initial analysis and perhaps several rounds of
mutagenesis, a detailed structure determination by NMR of the most promising
mutants will be carried out. The teaching aims are to give students a greater
understanding of the relevance of Biochemistry coursework in modern basic
science research, pharmaceutical research and in medicine; to establish a class
project in a senior-level Biochemistry course that provides an opportunity for
students to attempt to solve a real research problem; and to improve classroom
participation. In addition, a plan is presented to continue the modernization of
the graduate level NMR curriculum, and to implement problem sets that use
actual, entire multidimensional data sets. The chemokines provide a unique
opportunity to investigate the details of protein dimer and multimer formation.
This research will allow a detailed analysis of the interesting structural
properties of chemokines and will also be valuable in learning the details of
protein-protein interactions in general. The teaching goals will allow the
gradual development of a better educator in the biochemical sciences, and inclu
de exploring several ways in which to make modern biochemistry accessible to
students, both in lecture and with the introduction of a project requiring
research into recent scientific advances. In addition, teaching will be improved
at the graduate and undergraduate level by introducing the use of computers for
molecular graphics and for the interpretation of actual multidimensional NMR
data sets.