* 9733644
* CAREER:  Motion Planning and Active Vision Strategies for   Optimizing Visual Feedback in Robot Control
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1998,12/31/2003
* Rajeev Sharma, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 12/31/2003
* USD 388,934.00

This project investigates two complementary ways of improving computer vision
based robot control particularly in uncertain and changing environments. First,
by developing motion planning techniques that account for properties of the
visual data -- exploiting the available visual feedback and overcoming sensing
limitations. This requires extending the notion of robot configuration space to
include image feature space and using topology-preserving learning schemes to
handle modeling uncertainties. Second, by developing active vision strategies
for optimizing visual feedback in robot control -- systematically extending the
range of robot operation beyond that possible by static cameras. Defining
invariances under camera motion would allow the decoupling of active camera
control from robot control. Both deterministic and stochastic strategies will be
explored for exploiting the camera motion in cooperation with the robot motion
plan. This research will be interleaved with supporting educational activities
which include developing new graduate courses in robotics and human-computer
interfaces, revising undergraduate courses in related areas, and developing two
new educational tools. The first tool will be for collaborative group projects
on the web especially for projects involving video images. The second tool will
be for training and visualization using an augmented reality interface that
allows interactive mixing of virtual and real objects.