* 9733043
* CAREER: Modeling and Control Methods for Complex and        Uncertain Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Carolyn Beck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9733043&lt;br/&gt;Beck&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in the design of high
performance control systems is dealing with the effects of system nonlinearities
and uncertainty. Examples of uncertainty include unmodeled dynamics, external
disturbances, and parameter variations. The main methodology used to account for
uncertainty integrates structured uncertainty descriptions into the system
models, resulting in what are commonly referred to as uncertain systems. During
the last decade, a large body of control research has been focused on uncertain
system design and analysis, and a variety of techniques are now available.
Unfortunately, both the modeling and design processes for uncertain systems
typically result in large complicated models. Due to the complexity of these
models, design and analysis can be extremely difficult and in some cases
intractable. Furthermore, the modeling process itself for these uncertain
systems is ill-defined; as a result there have been relatively few real
engineering applications of these methods. Thus, although the uncertain systems
framework and many of these associated design methods are ideally suited for a
number of applications areas, very few real applications have been pursued and a
noticable gap has developed between both the pace and extent of the theoretical
development and the practical use of this theory on engineering
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One relevant but relatively unexplored
application area for this theory is modeling and control of power systems.
Currently, the methods used by industry for power systems control design consist
mainly of system linearization around worst-case loading conditions followed by
conventional linear methods for analysis and design of the control settings.
These design tools rely on standard time domain and frequency domain analysis
procedures, in addition to modern state-space techniques. The resulting control
designs are tested for robustness over a range of operating conditions using
numerous detailed time domain simulations of the nonlinear system. This approach
is practical, and has for the most part served the intended purpose, however,
there are no systematic procedures and no guarantee that either robust stability
or performance criteria will be met using this approach. Furthermore, due to
economic and environmental factors, there is an increasing need for power
systems to behave robustly over a larger range of operating conditions than
standard linearization techniques can accommodate. The design and analysis
techniques developed over the last decade for uncertain systems provide for
guaranteed robustness over varying operating conditions. Additional applications
in bioengineering systems will be pursued including the development of uncertain
and time-varying models for automating intravenous anesthetic delivery during
surgery and for describing human postural sway and balance
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle objectives of the proposed research
are: (1) to develop systematic modeling and model reduction techniques for
nonlinear, time-varying and parameter-varying systems which can be incorporated
into the existing uncertain systems framework; (2) to utilize practical
applications for this development, emphasizing power systems; (3) to develop
computational tools for implementing these methods, and to apply the techniques
in order to facilitate the control design process for these systems; and (4) to
develop a general educational program that provides research opportunities for
both graduate and undergraduate students in linear and nonlinear systems
modeling and control, and which contains both applied and theoretical aspects.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;