* 9733329
* A CAREER Plan:  New Mixed-Valent Layered Perovskites to     Elucidate Structure-Property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Margret Geselbracht, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2003
* USD 247,822.00

9733329 Geselbracht Understanding structure-property relationships is the key to
unlocking the ability to tailor-design new superconductors and other materials
with interesting electronic and magnetic properties. This CAREER award will
support research focused on the synthesis and characterization of new mixed-
valent materials with layered perovskite-type structures. Specifically, new
mixed- valent titanates and niobates will be targeted via direct preparation in
molten chloride fluxes. Characterization of the electronic and magnetic
properties of these materials will elucidate structure--property relationships
in a series of compounds with similar structures and varying compositions. The
results of this research will expand the repertoire of synthetic strategies to
early transition metal oxides and provide valuable insight into what structural
and electronic features are necessary for superconductivity in reduced titanates
and niobates. The educational plan will emphasize mentoring undergraduate
students in research and integrating the theme of structure-property
relationships in layered perovskites into the Introductory Inorganic Chemistry
course through the development of several new laboratory projects. In addition,
a student-based outreach program to local high school chemistry classrooms will
be initiated, and illustrative examples of structure-property relationships in
extended solids will be disseminated to the larger educational community through
the development of a World Wide Web site. %%% In an inherently interdisciplinary
field like materials research, the role of the solid state chemist is to lead
the drive to discover new materials with interesting properties. New materials
will, in turn, stimulate physicists, materials scientists, and engineers to
think about ways to harness these properties for technological applications. The
discovery of new materials lies at the heart of this research plan and remains
central to future progress in ma terials research. On a broader level, the
primary impact of this work will be the rich educational experience of
undergraduates participating in cutting-edge research. Through this project,
students at Reed College will experience how modern science is done and the role
of chemists in shaping the solid state materials of the future. ***