* 9733826
* CAREER: A Career Development Plan to Expand the Integration of Novel Molecular Techniques and Design Experiences into   Environmental Engineering Research and Teaching
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 03/31/2003
* USD 310,000.00

Raskin 9733826 This is an award to support a project proposed in accord with the
Guidelines for Submission of Proposals to the Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program, NSF 97-87. As such, this project has both a research and
educational component. Her research component is based on a continuation of work
initiated under NSF Grant No. 94-10476. It was aimed obtaining a better
understanding than now exists of the causes of foaming and bulking problems
associated with wastewater treatment by use of suspended growth bioreactors as a
step toward exercising control of these problems. Her new research objectives
are to expand her study of the role played by filamentous bacteria responsible
for causing these problems, optimize and validate procedures for their detection
and identification, and to apply nucleic acid probes and molecular beacons in
reactor studies to develop rational control measures for foaming and bulking.
The Principal Investigator's educational component includes improvement of
existing courses dealing with water quality and collaboration with Carollo
Engineers, a consulting engineering firm, to improve the design content of an
undergraduate, senior level course in water quality control. Her education plan
includes integration of dynamic mathematical models, results of her research and
a relevant field experience into her graduate- level course. She also plans on
development of a workshop/graduate level laboratory course that reflects the
increasing importance of molecular biology procedures and their application in
environmental engineering practice. Her plan is to maintain strong contacts with
several other environmental engineering consulting firms, biotechnology and food
processing industries and municipalities for guidance in curriculum development
applicable to strengthening her research and teaching activities. ***