* 9733788
* CAREER: Development of a Computer-Based Methodology to      Assist in Environmental Systems Analysis and Decision       Making and Its Applications in Watershed Management
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Ranji Ranjithan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 04/30/2003
* USD 309,980.00

9733788 Ranjithan The objectives of this research are to 1) investigate ways to
enhance the capabilities of genetic algorithms (GAs) for complex environmental
systems analysis, 2) develop and integrate into existing courses an interactive
training module to assist in teaching the fundamentals of GAs and their
potential uses in environmental systems analysis, 3) explore applications of the
methodology in watershed management through a series of realistic case-studies
and 4) integrate the case-studies and their findings in courses related to
environmental systems analysis and watershed management. Environmental
management problems are inherently complex because the governing physical,
chemical and biological processes and their interactions are nonlinear and
difficult to represent in convenient mathematical equations, further complicated
by the multitude of other important issues that must be considered, such as
economics, environmental impact and reliability. A major component of this work
is optimization for generation and identification of efficient alternative
solutions. Traditional optimization procedures impose severe restrictions in
using complex nonlinear relationships common to environmental problem solving.
Genetic algorithms have been shown to be powerful in addressing this issue and
have the potential to make significant improvement to the state-of-the-art. New
operators and procedures will be developed with the goal of extending the use of
GAs to present a limited set of alternative solutions to complex problems, each
of which satisfy all quantified constraints, but which are otherwise as far
apart as possible in the decision space. In this way a manageable number of
alternatives can be evaluated that constitute a wide assortment of choices on
the less quantified parameters. The academic plans include the development of
teaching modules and interactive techniques for both students and practitioners;
training aids will permit students to learn to use the tool and to compare its
results with those of other adaptive optimization techniques. To ensure that the
proposed systems methodologies are applicable in practice, an array of realistic
applications associated with watershed management has been identified and will
be investigated in collaboration with practitioners and other researchers. An
extensive case study of the Neuse River Basin in North Carolina will be
included. ***