* 9733000
* CAREER: Control of Electron Transfer Reactions Through      Electrostatic Potentials in Organized Media
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Claudia Turro, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 01/31/2003
* USD 305,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant to Dr. Claudia Turro
of the Chemistry Department, Ohio State University. The goal of the research is
to determine the role of electrostatic effects on electron-transfer reactions.
The surface potentials of micelles (macromolecules) will be tuned by varying the
composition of the micelles using cationic, neutral, or anionic detergents. The
rate of electron transfer will then be measured as a function of micellar
potential. Attempts will also be made to use electrostatic fields to control
directionality of electron transfer. The excited-state electron donors will be
well-known neutral ruthenium(II) compounds so that the decrease of the steady-
state luminescence and emission lifetime of their metal-ligand charge transfer
states can be used to obtain electron-transfer rates. The acceptors will be
viologen and pyridine-based species that have been incorporated into the micelle
surface synthetically. In addition to teaching undergraduate chemistry courses,
Dr. Turro is actively involved with mentoring women and minority students in
science. Electron transfer is an important process in biological systems and in
materials, and it is possible that charged groups within the large molecular
structure could have an impact on the path and on the time required for electron
movement. In this research, the influence of external electric field effects on
the rate and direction of electron transfer will be studied. Dr. Turro will
serve as a mentor to women and minority students at Ohio State University.