* 9733509
* CAREER: Nonlinear Control of Transport-Reaction and         Particulate Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2003
* USD 300,599.00

Abstract - Christofides - 9733509 The objective of this research is to develop a
general and practical framework for the synthesis of nonlinear model-based
feedback controllers for transport-reaction and particulate processes that
achieve the desired stability and performance specifications in the presence of
model uncertainty. The motivation is provided by: a) the abundance of highly
nonlinear transport-reaction (for example packed-bed reactors and chemical vapor
deposition processes) and particulate (for example crystallizers and aerosol
reactors) processes; b) the need for excellent control of these processes in
order to minimize energy consumption and cost, achieve tighter performance
specifications, and meet environmental and safety regulations; and c) the lack
of practical nonlinear control methods for transport-reaction and particulate
processes. The specific research projects planned include: 1) control of
diffusion-convection-reaction processes with time-dependent spatial domains, 2)
control of transitional (not fully turbulent) fluid dynamic systems based on
Navier-Stokes equations, and 3) model reduction and control of particulate
processes based on population balance models. The research will provide a
fundamental understanding on the nature of the model reduction and control
problems for transport-reaction and particulate processes. It will also
synthesize practically-implementable nonlinear feedback control algorithms that
enforce the requested stability and performance specifications in the closed-
loop system in the presence of model uncertainty. The control algorithms will be
applied to chemical vapor deposition processes, crystal growth processes,
transitional channel and boundary layer flows, crystallizers and aerosol
processes. The development of a software package and the collaboration with
companies (specifically, Trikon Technologies and Beta Squared) will be the means
for transferring the results of the research to the industrial sector. As part
of this CAREER a ward, several educational activities are also planned,
including: a) the integration of the model reduction and control methods into
the undergraduate math and control courses, b) the development of an
undergraduate process control lab, c) the development of a graduate level course
on model reduction and control of nonlinear distributed parameter systems based
on the results of the research, d) the design of open-ended projects for
undergraduate students based on the research, e) the development of an
industrial/graduate student internship program with companies in the
microelectronics area, and f) the establishment of a unified control curriculum
in the School of Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA.