* 9733587
* CAREER:  Solid State Chemistry of Unusual Zintl Phases and  Polar Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2002
* Arnold Guloy, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2002
* USD 279,999.00

9733587 Guloy The research component of this proposal aims to investigate ways
to tune the electronic structure and properties of Zintl phases and layered
intermetallic oxides. The research plan outlines unique strategies to: 1) apply
and assess the Zintl concept and its limits to the synthesis of `electron-
deficient' Zintl phases - a new class of inorganic pi-systems; 2) design and
synthesize new complex layered intermetallic-oxide intergrowth structures by
using layered intermetallic and oxide structures in a rational building-block-
multilayer approach. Since unique structures and properties are already apparent
in normal Zintl phases and polar intermetallics, it is anticipated that
exploratory synthesis and characterization will produce unusual crystal
chemistry and novel physical properties. These unusual materials represent a
promising class of electronic and magnetic materials with potential properties
ranging from semiconductors, thermoelectrics, superconductors and giant
magnetoresistance. The general aim of this research is to establish useful
structure(chemical bonding)-property relationships and to improve our chemical
understanding of the region between metals and nonmetals. The educational plan
of this proposal includes the development of courses in graduate and
undergraduate levels that will emphasize the importance of materials chemistry,
inorganic solid state chemistry, and descriptive chemistry of the elements.
Undergraduate and graduate training will be supplemented by collaborative
activities with other educational institutions and industrial research groups.
%%% The challenge to synthesize new materials and understand, control and
predict the structures and properties of solids continues to fuel the search for
new technological materials of relevance to the industrial sector. The discovery
of new classes of materials such as the Zintl compounds, together with a deeper
understanding of their diverse properties, and the impact of their development
and application forms the basis for undergraduate eductaion activities being
developed in this cutting-edge area of solidstate chemistry and materials
science. ***