* 9733113
* Empirical Evaluation of Soil-Structure Interaction Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Jonathan Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 06/30/2004
* USD 322,500.00

Author: Clifford Astill &lt;castill@nsf.gov&gt; at NOTE Date: 3/22/98 6:21 PM
Priority: Normal TO: acoles at nsf18 Subject: Abstract: CMS-9733113, Jonathan
Stewart, UCLA ------------------------------- Message Contents -----------------
-------------- Abstract: CMS-9733113, Jonathan Stewart, UCLA Recent improvements
in seismological source modeling, in the analysis of travel path effects, and in
the characterization of local site effects on strong ground shaking, have led to
significant advances in both code-based and more advanced procedures for
evaluating earthquake ground motions. Concurrently, seismic structural design
practice is evolving towards consideration of performance-based criteria, which
provide more reliable representations of structural behavior during earthquakes.
A missing link, however, is empirically verified design procedures for assessing
the effects of soil-structure interaction (SSI) on both the strong motions
transmitted to structures and the structural response to these motions.
Fortuitously, a significant amount of strong motion data has become available
over the last decade which affords the opportunity to obtain this empirical
verification. This is the objective of this CAREER project. The research
component of this project utilizes strong motion data in system identification
analyses to evaluate the effects of inertial and kinematic interaction on the
seismic response of buildings through more fundamental representations of SSI;
namely impedance and transfer functions. These empirical results are compiled
from analyses of data having suitable combinations of structural and free-field
strong motion recordings. Empirical results derived from strong motion data are
combined with data from forced vibration testing of structures and results of
numerical analyses to develop a framework for understanding the factors
influencing impedance and transfer functions. These results will elucidate
several important sources o f uncertainty in SSI analysis procedures, such as
the modeling of non-uniform site conditions, and the effects of foundation
embedment and/or deep foundation elements (i.e. piles and piers) on foundation
performance. The educational component of this project seeks to improve the
teaching of earthquake engineering at UCLA, to enhance knowledge transfer to
practicing engineers, and to encourage pre-college students to pursue careers in
science and technology. The teaching of earthquake- and geotechnical-engineering
at UCLA is improved at the undergraduate and graduate levels through curriculum
reform (including the addition of new courses), and the utilization of an
instructional style which blends fundamental theory with "field" data and
practical design problems. Knowledge transfer to practicing engineers is
facilitated through continuing education workshops and service on professional
committees. Outreach to pre-college students consists of lectures and
demonstrations in local middle- and high-school science classes. The research
plan compliments these educational objectives by providing "field" data that can
be utilized in classroom instruction. These unified educational and research
plans reflect the philosophy that research and teaching of complex seismic and
geotechnical phenomena must blend sound physical principles with well documented
field performance data in order to gain insight into a problem.
+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+= + Clifford J.
Astill Ph:703-306-1362 Fax:703-306-0291 castill@nsf.gov Nat'l Science Fdn 4201
Wilson Blvd., Rm545 Arlington, VA 22230 &lt;www.eng.nsf.gov/cms/castill.htm&gt;