* 9733123
* CAREER: Design and Integration of Piezoelectric Actuators in Civil Engineering Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1998,10/31/2004
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 10/31/2004
* USD 329,996.00

The primary goal of this CAREER project is to develop piezoelectric actuators
with high control capability and implement them in building structures. These
actuators are a piezoelectric wedge actuator, a piezoelectrically-driven
friction damper, and a shear-mode piezoelectric actuator. A truss mechanism is
introduced to further amplify the control force from the actuators.

The project consists of design and fabrication of the three actuators, their
modeling and tests, and their integration into a 1/4-scale steel frame
structure. Analytical models of the structure and actuators will be established
and experimentally verified in a laboratory. Effectiveness of these actuators is
measured by the reduction of peak displacement/acceleration responses of the
structure when subjected to earthquake ground motion. For all actuators, simple
but robust control algorithms with local deformation and force (acceleration)
feedback will be developed. Coordinated interdisciplinary collaboration and
industry participation are emphasized. The research results will be implemented
into two recently-developed graduate courses on smart structures and
disseminated to professional engineers by delivering in-house presentations in
several pioneer consulting firms. A small-scale, two-story plastic frame is
designed and manufactured for demonstration to K-12 students and senior
undergraduates to stimulate their interest in structural control and prepare
them for higher education.

This is a FY98 CAREER award.