* 9733837
* CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of                   Poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Valerie Ashby, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2003
* USD 368,697.00

9733837 Sheares Synthesis and Characterization of
Poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s This CAREER award will exploit a new synthetic
route developed in our laboratory for the synthesis of N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene
monomers to produce functionalized homopolymers and copolymers. The polymer
polarity, in addition to the potential for quaternization and crosslinking, will
be utilized to produce materials of both scientific interest and industrial
utility. Potential applications include new cationic polyisoprene-based
elastomers and new polymer blends. Additionally, there is potential for the
poly(N,N-dialkylaminoisoprene)s to be used in the modification of existing
materials such as polystyrene- polybutadiene rubber. Changes in adhesion,
processability, solubility, microstructure, morphology, thermal and mechanical
properties will lead to tailor-made products. In this research, a fundamental
understanding of the behavior of polar, diene monomers in anionic, free radical
solution and free radical emulsion polymerization processes will also be gained.
%%% The goals for this project are not only scientific, but are also
educational. These include the training of graduate students and the teaching of
undergraduates and high school students. Specifically, graduate students will
design and synthesize materials using a structure-property approach.
Undergraduates and high school student researchers will examine intriguing,
practical problems that can be answered with this chemistry. Multidisciplinary
collaboration with engineers, material scientists, and other chemists will be an
additional educational experience for students. Finally, it is expected that the
research results will be incorporated, where appropriate, into the teaching of
undergraduate and graduate courses to help students appreciate the utility of
basic concepts . This project, a combination of scientific research and
educational training, should have a significant impact in the area of tailor-
made, fu nctionalized materials. In the process, students will gain excellent
technical and creative skills in the field of materials science. ***