* 9733369
* CAREER Plasma Heat Transfer: Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Milind Jog, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 06/30/2003
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract - CTS-9733369 Milind A. Jog Thermal plasmas are increasingly used in
manufacturing and material processing where the high temperatures facilitates
energy transport and the free electrons and ions provide an environment for
chemical reactions. Typical applications are plasma spraying, chemical vapor
deposition, sintering, synthesis, speroidization, waste destruction, and net
shape manufacturing. In all of these applications, the heat transport from the
plasma is critical in determining the quality of the product. This proposal work
is to develop an increased understanding of the fundamentals of the transport
processes in the plasma and its interaction with solid/liquid surfaces, and to
develop models and correlations for the heat transfer. The processes associated
with heat transfer from the plasma to a solid surface are significantly more
complicated than for unionized gases because of the electrical sheath which lies
close to the solid surface. The proposed work involves the study of the heat
transfer to a single particle moving in a thermal plasma. The flow of the
neutral gas, the electrons, and the ions will be determined. Detailed analyses
of the electric sheath, the production and recombination of charged particles,
and the melting of the particle will be made. The melting front will be
determined using the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian method. The numerical
predictions will be compared to experimental measurements in the literature of
particle motion in induction plasmas and to visualizations of liquid droplets in
gas flows. Trends in droplet shape deformation will be predicted as functions of
Reynold's and Weber numbers and liquid/gas viscosity and density ratios.