* 9733928
* CAREER: A Career Application in Bioengineering Research and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2002
* David Meaney, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2002
* USD 210,000.00

9733928 Meaney Cells in the human body are aware constantly of their outside
environment and often respond to even small changes in surrounding mechanical
forces. However, the exact nature and course of these mechanically initiated
changes remains largely unexplained. If better understood, the adaptation of
cells to mechanical stress could be better controlled to understand and direct
cell growth, maintenance, and the restoration of cell function. The underlying
premise of the research and educational activities of this CAREER award is that
critical new advances in the control of cell function are accomplished by
combining molecular based control of biological systems with an engineered
modulation of the external mechanical forces sensed by the cell. An experimental
approach is used to understand how mechanical forces are sensed, or transduced,
by neuronal cells of the brain and spinal cord. The focus of research in this
CAREER award is on understanding how changes to the structural architecture of
the neuron can affect the sensing mechanisms for the cell. By developing
structure-function relationships for normal neurons, we seek to extend these
studies and accomplish our long term objective of using these sensing mechanisms
to assist in the repair or recovery of the diseased or injured neuron. The
central aim of the educational plan is to bring elements of cellular
bioengineering research to the undergraduate level and form a stronger interface
with the clinical sciences in the bioengineering undergraduate program. These
two elements as critical for bioengineering undergraduates to experience, since
they both bring undergraduates closer to the process of creating new knowledge
through basic research and viewing the practical applications of basic
bioengineering research in medicine. It is expected that the exposure to
research based laboratories and modern tools in biomedicine at the undergraduate
level will help prepare students for careers where research is a more pervasive
element and is constantly translated into improvements in health care
technology. ***