* 9733789
* CAREER:  Orbital Dynamics of Solar System Dust
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2004
* Douglas Hamilton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 04/30/2004
* USD 205,000.00

9733789 Hamilton The research goals are focused on understanding the origin and
evolution of micron to millimeter sized dust in the solar system. The current
distribution of dusty material around planets and in interplanetary space is a
result of the delicate balance of many dynamical processes. Micron and
millimeter sized dust grains are created, their orbits evolve, and they are
destroyed on very short timescales. Insight into these fundamental processes can
be gained by analyzing, interpreting, and modeling the detailed impact data from
the dust detectors aboard the Ulysses, Galileo, and Cassini spacecraft. In
particular, the objectives of this research are to use these unique data sets
to: 1) discover the source of the intriguing dust streams near Jupiter; 2)
modernize and strengthen dynamical arguments which suggest that dark dust from
Saturn's distant satellite Phoebe coats Iapetus' leading hemisphere; and 3)
characterize the distribution and dynamics of dust in distant circumplanetary
orbits. A multipronged approach, which includes data analysis, analytical
calculations, and numerical simulations, will be applied to these and other
related problems in dust dynamics. This study will lead to an improved
understanding of many fundamental features of the solar system, and will
highlight the important processes active in shaping our solar system today.
Moreover, since most of the processes currently acting on dust were also
important in the early solar system, the results of this investigation will help
clarify aspects of planetary formation. The educational component of this
proposal describes innovative ways to bring the exploration of orbital dynamics
into the undergraduate classroom. The orbital motions of the planets, their
moons, artificial satellites, and planetary spacecraft are topics that continue
to fascinate students of all ages. Students are also intrigued by the use of
computers and the information on the Internet and the World Wide Web. The
intrinsic appeal of t hese topics will be used to interest students by designing
and implementing easy-to use interactive computer programs to teach the
fundamentals of orbital motion. Drawing upon previous experience in setting up
and using several of these interactive programs in a classroom environment, and
upon the proven principles and methods of' active learning, innovative class
exercises for undergraduate students at all levels will be designed. Exercises
for upper level undergraduate Astronomy majors will be designed to expose
students to the methods of scientific inquiry and to aspects of ongoing
research. The exercises will also provide ways for students to test and to
better appreciate important analytic derivations, and will allow them to explore
their own interests in orbital dynamics independently. Exercises intended for
large introductory Astronomy classes will emphasize the spirit of scientific
inquiry and will be designed to address concepts that students traditionally
have difficulty grasping. The programs will be available on the World Wide Web,
which offers unbeatable access for students. In addition, the programs will be
computer platform independent, which will allow students to focus on
astronomical issues rather than on computer languages and/or operating systems.
These highly desirable properties will allow the PI to design effective teaching
tools for use in undergraduate classrooms. ***