* 9733450
* CAREER: Large-scale convex optimization with applications   to VLSI and control systems design
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Lieven Vandenberghe, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

9733450 Vandenberghe The project is devoted to research and teaching in the area
of optimization applied to computer-aided design and electrical engineering. The
research component focuses on recent interior-point methods for nonlinear convex
optimization, and their application to VLSI and control systems design. These
new optimization methods generalize similar interior-point methods for linear
programming (LP) that were developed in the eighties and that have been used
with great success in practice. Their recent extension to nonlinear convex
optimization, and to the semidefinite programming (SDP) problem in particular,
has had immediate practical and theoretical impact in several fields, notably
control theory and combinatorial optimization.

In control, it has been observed that various analysis and synthesis problems
can be formulated as semidefinite programming problems, and hence numerically
solved with great efficiency. There has been intensive research on identifying
control problems that can be cast as SDPs, as well as rapid progress in the area
of interior-point methods for solving those problems. As a result of this
activity, several software implementations have become available, which have
proven useful for small and medium-sized problems. The proposed research aims at
developing more powerful general-purpose codes that exploit the problems
structure in the SDPs encountered in control, and are capable of solving large-
sclale problems. This would significantly extend the practical use of linear
matrix inequality techniques in computer-aided control system design.

À Wire and gate sizing via semidefinite programming. The objective here is to
develop, implement, and test a new method for sizing circuits to which the
conventional delay optimization techniques, which are based on the Elmore delay,
do not apply. This includes circuits with a non-tree topology, e.g., clock
distribution meshes, and circuits with coupling capacitors, e.g., due to
coupling between interconnect wires.

À Placement via nonlinear convex optimization, in particular timing-driven
placement and placement combined with gate sizing. New methods for nonlinear
convex optimization make it possible to use more complex cost functions and to
handle new types of constraints, at a cost comparable to existing techniques.

À Circuit partitioning via semidefinite programming. Here the objective is to
analyze and test the use of semidefinite programming in spectral partitioning
methods for various NP-hard circuit partitioning problems. Spectral partitioning
methods are heuristics that use a relaxation solved via the eigenvalue
decomposition of the Laplacian matrix associated with the circuit. Interior-
point methods make it possible to efficiently optimize this special bound over a
family of matrices, and hence to obtain a better heuristic.

The education component of the project involves the development of a sequence of
graduate courses in optimization for engineering students, covering linear and
convex programming, large-scale and combinatorial optimization, dynamic
programming, and graph optimization. ***