* 9733898
* CAREER:  The Laboratory Experience: Introductory Physics    through Independent Research
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Rena Zieve, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2003
* USD 300,000.00

Zieve 9733898 This is a CAREER Award to a female scientist and is composed of
two subprojects. One component employs the controlled introduction of structural
defects to modify the phase diagram and vortex behavior of the superconducting
heavy fermion system (U,Th)Be13. This system exhibits multiple superconducting
phases, as well as magnetism, and should provide clues to understanding other
unconventional superconductors, such as the high-Tc superconductors. Columnar
defects will be created through heavy- ion irradiation, and point defects
through both irradiation and substitution. Low-temperature thermodynamic and
magnetic measurements will be used to identify the superconducting wave
function(s) of the system. The educational component involves facilitating
undergraduate research through a less technically demanding set of experiments.
These involve the study of packing arrangements of solid objects. Vibrating a
container of beads anneals them into the densest possible arrangement in two
dimensions, but not in three dimensions. This project will examine the
dimensional crossover by varying container size and shape, and will test
different annealing procedures to determine the interaction of dimensionality
and dynamical processes. %%% This a CAREER Award to a female scientist and is
composed of two subprojects. One component investigates materials known as
"heavy fermion" superconductors. These superconductors carry electric current
with no energy loss, like ordinary superconductors, but in addition exhibit
unusual magnetic behavior. Structural imperfections of the atoms in the sample
will be deliberately introduced in order to modify their electrical and magnetic
properties. The resulting changes in the onset temperature of superconductivity
and the magnetic behavior of the superconductor are expected to shed light on
the atomic origins of the superconductivity. This could lead to new
superconducting materials and a better understanding of superconductors in
practical applications. The educational component will introduce undergraduates
to research through a less technically demanding set of experiments. These
experiments involve studies of how objects arrange themselves in two and three
dimensions. Shaking solid objects, such as glass beads, causes them to pack in
the densest way possible if the objects are constrained to a single layer.
However, this does not occur if they are stacked in three dimensions, as in a
jar of coffee beans. To understand the transition from two-dimensional to three-
dimensional behavior, arrangements of objects only a few layers thick will be
studied. The general problem of packing is relevant to the fabrication of new
composite materials, where high density components often impart special
properties to the overall material. Technical abstract