* 9733425
* PECASE: Neurally Inspired Silicon Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2004
* Christopher Diorio, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 03/31/2004
* USD 500,000.00

This PI will study the physical and information-theoretic constraints that
underline computation and computing machines. For the educational component of
the CAREER award, her will develop a new course, entitled `Computation and
Computing Machines,` which will challenge students to consider the general
notion of a computing machine. First will introduce the requisite concepts in
quantum physics, biology, integrated-circuit technology, information theory, and
thermodynamics. Using these concepts, He will the attributes and the Stations of
present-day digital computers. He will conclude by considering the foundations
and promise of neurally inspired, quantum, and DNA computers. His research goal
is to build silicon integrated circuits that employ the computational principles
used in nervous tissue. he has have already developed, in a standard CMOS
process, a family of single-transistor devices called synapse transistors; these
devices, like neural synapses, implement long-term analog memory, allow bi-
directional memory updates, and learn from an input signs without interrupting
the ongoing computation. Although believe that a single device cannot model the
complex behavior of a neural synapse completely, my synapse transistors do
implement a local learning function. He will model in silicon, the adaptive and
learning behavior of living organisms, His approach is bottom-up: He will begin
by fabricating synapse-transistor arrays that mimic some of the attributes of
nervous tissue, including high device density, low power consumption, panel
computation, and local weight adaptation, and he will investigate local learning
in these arrays. He will also develop circuits that model and axonal delays, and
learn the delay values locally. He will then use these arrays and delay circuits
to investigate action-potential-based computation in silicon. His future
research will use the knowledge and devices gained under the CAREER award to
construct large scale systems that, by using the computational and adaptive
properties of nervous tissue, find good solutions to ill-posed problems.