* 9733136
* CAREER: Multinuclear Solid State NMR Studies in             Environmental Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Christopher Klug, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 03/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract - Klug -9733136 Prof. Christopher A. Klug, of Stanford University, will
use in-situ NMR techniques to study two types of catalytic systems of importance
to environmental catalysis and energy minimization issues. Supported metallocene
catalysts for alkene stereoselective polymerization, and supported vanadia for
the decomposition of NOx and chlorohydrocarbons will be studied. The PI will use
various NMR techniques: CPMAS, 1 and 2-dimensional pulse NMR, homonuclear and
heteronuclear dipolar coupling experiments. He will also develop multiply tuned
NMR probes and in situ catalysis-NMR cells. Zr metallocenes prepared jointly by
StanfordOs Waymouth group will be supported on silica or alumina with controlled
dehydroxylation level. The initial steps of the stereoselective polymerization
mechanism will be studied by characterizing in situ short chains of
polypropylene. The microstructure and morphology of the polymers produced on the
heterogeneous catalyst will be correlated with physical property determinations
by WaymouthOs group. In another application of NMR, supported vanadia over
alumina or complex K-promoted vanadia-tungsta over titania-alumina will be
prepared and characterized. 17O, 51V, 29Si and 27Al NMR will be used to study
the Mars-Van Krevelen-type oxygen insertion mechanism and oxygen and vanadium
diffusion kinetics. The SCR of NOx with ammonia and the decomposition of
CH3CH2Cl will be studied in situ with 13C, 15N, and 35Cl NMR. The modifications
induced by potassium and its interactions with chemisorbates will be studied
with 39K NMR. On the educational side, Prof. Klug will renew efforts to recruit
minority, and will develop a new course in environmental catalysis for engineers
for the multidisciplinary environmental sciences curriculum at Stanford.