* 9733040
* CAREER: Dynamic Sonar Perception and Navigation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* John Leonard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/2002
* USD 285,000.00

9733040 Leonard The objective of this career development plan is to foster the
interest of the next generation of students in the special challenges and
rewards of ocean engineering, while advancing the state of knowledge in the
critical areas of sonar perception and navigation. The realization of the full
potential of future ocean technologies will require new engineers with the
motivation to approach difficult marine problems and an understanding of the
complexities of ocean system design. Autonomous navigation using sensor
measurements of environmental features provides a compelling goal to focus
research in sonar perception and navigation. Building a map of an unknown
environment while using that map to navigate is a difficult problem at the
frontier of robotics research. Current data fusion methods are not robust or
computationally tractable for this problem. To realize this capability for
marine robotic systems using sonar, three objectives will be pursued: (1)
feature extraction methods which exploit knowledge of the underlying physics of
sonar, (2) uncertainty management techniques that incorporate noise, data
association ambiguity, and navigation error, and (3) adaptive echolocation
strategies that permit efficient detection and characterization of objects. To
investigate these topics, graduate and undergraduate students will participate
in algorithm development, data acquisition and processing, and experimentation
in controlled environments. Innovative experiments that biomimic dolphin
echolocation will be performed in a testing tank at MIT. Collaborations have
been established to provide maximum research impact. The educational plan
involves teaching and mentoring in subject areas that are closely related to the
research. The undergraduate teaching responsibilities of the principal
investigator include a sophomore-level introductory course in ocean science and
technology, a two semester capstone design sequence, and a freshman advising
seminar based on the sonar systems of bats, dolphins, and robots. Innovations in
pedagogy will promote active learning, teamwork, and communication skills. Case
studies will guide discussion of contemporary topics in oceanography, acoustics,
and design. Novel laboratory exercises will demonstrate principles from
acoustics and marine robotics. New Matlab-based tools will enable students to
manipulate ocean data. ***