* 9733048
* Career:  Multichannel Deconvolution Techniques in Multiuser Wireless Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2002
* Michail Tsatsanis, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2002
* USD 209,799.00

Future wireless systems based on Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) schemes
will impose stringent interference rejection requirements at the receiver's
front end. The development of appropriate signal processing algorithms to
suppress multiuser interference is an essential factor in the success of third
generation wireless networks. The objective of research is to explore the
connections between interference rejection problems appearing in wireless,
multiuser communications and classical signal processing concepts like array
processing and multichannel deconvolution. By developing those links and
establishing a DSP framework for multiuser communication problems, we will
facilitate the application of a large body of DSP algorithms and research
results to those problems. Similarly, the integration of communication and DSP
links in the Electrical Engineering curriculum provides the students with a
global understanding of DSP aspects of wireless communication systems. The first
research goal is to develop appropriate discrete-time models for multiuser CDMA
systems with chip rate sampling, and identify the analogies with well
established array processing models. The second objective is to develop simple,
adaptive, linear receivers based on these models, which are self-recovering, yet
attain a performance comparable to that of the trained MMSE receiver. These
blind solutions borrow ideas from standard array processing techniques like
Capon and MVDR beamforming. The educational goal of this work is to promote
linear deconvolution ideas as a significant and unifying component in the
systems thread of the EE curriculum. This component is introduced in various
courses through laboratory and design work. The approach is based on developing
an innovative lab infrastructure which allows remote experimentation and
capitalizes upon the campus networking resources. Additionally, a focus on
``signal processing for communications'' is being developed in the graduate and
under graduate curriculum through course development and restructuring.