* 9733897
* Adaptive Perceptual Coding of Visual Information
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Lina Karam, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2002
* USD 225,000.00

The ability of humans to analyze, capture, and recall visual information
significantly outperforms their ability to analyze and recall other types of
sensory information. This fact makes humans rely heavily on their visual sense
for extracting information and learning about their surrounding, and for
planning and executing purposeful acts. As a result, the need to reliably
process and transmit visual data has become central to many applications. In
particular, with the rapid development and migration of end-user applications
and services towards transmission media which place high constraints on
bandwidth, such as the Internet and wireless media, there is a growing need for
the development of new efficient image and video compression techniques, which
offer reduction in bit-rates and improvement in quality at low bit-rates.
Although the importance of exploiting human perception has long been recognized
within the signal and image processing community, the previous research efforts
in image and video compression have concentrated on developing methods to
minimize not perceptual but rather mathematically tractable, easy to measure,
distortion criteria. While non- perceptual distortion measures were found to be
reasonably reliable for higher bit-rates (high quality applications), they do
not correlate well with the perceived quality at lower bit-rates and they fail
to guarantee preservation of important perceptual qualities in the reconstructed
images despite the potential for a good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Our
research interest is in developing adaptive perceptual-based image and video
coding systems, which discriminate between signal components based on their
perceptual relevance for achieving robustness and increased performance in terms
of quality and bit-rate. Achieving this objective requires having reliable tools
for predicting the sensitivity of the human visual system to distortions. The
main objectives of this research can be summarized as follows: 1 . Investigate
the spatio-temporal masking properties of the human visual system, and develop
reliable techniques to adaptively measure the masking characteristics and
perceptual relevancy of the different components contained in the visual source
material.2. Derive a reliable tractable perceptual distortion metric for
assessing visual quality at a local or global level. 3. Investigate adaptive
quantizer designs based on the derived perceptual distortion metric.4. Develop
and investigate robust perceptually-based lossless and lossy image and video
coding techniques, with emphasis on audiovisual applications disseminated
through highly constrained-bandwith communication systems. The research program
is complemented by the education plan, in which a Signal and Image Processing
Outreach Program is being developed to stimulate the interest of middle and high
school students and undergraduates in engineering and science. Another main
component of the educational plan is to integrate the research part into the
educational process by incorporating some of the research activities in
undergraduate and graduate courses as well as in undergraduate-oriented research
projects, and by introducing new courses related to the research effort. Another
goal is to research efficient ways to make use of technology in education.