* 9733013
* Model Uncertainty, Model Selection, and Robustness with     Applications in Environmental Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Merlise Clyde, Duke University
* Standard Grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 06/30/2004
* USD 241,920.00

----------------------------------------------------------------------- Proposal
Number: DMS PI: Merlise A. Clyde Institution: Duke University Project: Mode
Uncertainty, Model Selection, and Robustness, with Applications in Environmental
Sciences Abstract: Finding models to describe data and relationships among
variables is a fundamental problem in statistics and science. Linear regression
and its generalizations are some of the most commonly used statistical methods
for data analysis. As scientists collect increasingly larger data sets, the fear
of over-fitting the data by using all measured covariates leads to the standard
approach of selecting a single ``best'' model based on a subset of the
covariates, and then proceeding with scientific inferences and predictions as if
that were the true model. This typical analysis ignores the uncertainty about
which variables should be included in the model, potentially leading to
overconfident inferences. Model uncertainty often significantly outweighs other
sources of uncertainty in problems, but is generally ignored in standard
statistical practice and teaching. This research focuses on Bayesian methods for
incorporating model uncertainty into data analysis and decision making. In
Bayesian model averaging, predictions and inferences are based on a set of
models rather than a single model; each model contributes proportionally to the
support it receives from the observed data. Novel methods of identifying
promising models for use in Bayesian model averaging are studied. These can
increase the applicability of Bayesian methods to realistic problems that
involve a large number of variables. One of the major applications of the
research is to estimate the effect of particulate matter on mortality in the
elderly population and assess the potential impact of the EPA's new National
Ambient Air Quality Standards for particulates. This and other case studies will
be used to develop a new course in modern Baye sian statistical methods for
environmental and biological science students at Duke University.