* 9733412
* CAREER: New Insights and Applications of Multiply Bonded    Phosphorus Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* John Protasiewicz, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 01/31/2003
* USD 330,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award in the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research and
education on phosphorus chemistry by Dr. John D. Protasiewicz in the Chemistry
Department, Case Western University. The focus of the project is synthesizing
multiply bonded phosphorus compounds, specifically for the purpose of utilizing
the reactivity of these species for development of catalysts and materials.
Specific targets for synthesis are diphospenes and polymers having two or more
PX(X=C,N,P) multiply-bonded sites. The mechanism of formation of these compounds
would also be investigated. Educational efforts would concentrate on development
of a project-based thematic undergraduate laboratory course. As part of the
research-based, team-oriented approach, students would be introduced to computer
uses in literature searching, data storage and analysis, and molecular modeling.
Extensive use is made of Internet capabilities. Polymeric materials have wide
utility in molecular devices and materials. This research is aimed at finding
more effective routes to polymeric materials that contain phosphorus,
potentially widening the range of properties currently available in materials.
The research is integrated with undergraduate education not only in specific
research projects but in `discovery-based` laboratory courses.