* 9733848
* CAREER:  Interplay of Disorder and Quantum Effects in Low   Dimensional Magnets and Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Kara Beauchamp, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

9733848 Beauchamp This is a CAREER award to a female scientist at a
predominantly undergraduate institution. The research will explore the static
and dynamic properties of magnetic and superconducting systems which exhibit
quantum effects and disorder. One system consists of random ferromagnetic or
antiferromagnet quantum spin chains which can be described by a one-dimensional,
S=1/2 Heisenberg Hamiltonian with quenched disorder. The second system consists
of ordered and disordered two-dimensional Ising antiferromagnets, with both
short range and long range interactions. The two- dimensional Ising system in a
transverse field is the simplest system which is expected to exhibit a quantum
phase transition. The third magnetic system is consists of magnetic vortices in
thin superconducting films containing ordered and disordered arrays of holes.
The disordered system can be described by the random site, random field Ising
model (RS/RFIM) in which particle interaction strength is controlled by simply
changing the applied magnetic field. The critical properties of the spin systems
will be probed via measurements of low temperature susceptibilities as a
function of temperature and magnetic field. The local static configurations of
the vortices in the superconductors will be examined using Bitter decoration,
while the local dynamic motion of the vortices will be measured with Hall probe
arrays. The educational component of this CAREER award will support development
of an undergraduate research course, entitled "From the Minute to the
Macroscopic: Probing the Properties of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids". The course
will focus on experimental techniques in atomic and condensed matter physics,
emphasizing the continuum in electronic and thermal properties from atoms to
solids, and drawing on the research experience of the physics faculty at
Wesleyan. %%% This is a CAREER award to a female scientist at a predominantly
undergraduate institution. Physicists have been successful in developing a
detailed understanding of electronic and magnetic properties in a wide range of
materials. However, certain materials have not yielded to such an understanding
owing to the presence of disorder and strong electronic interactions. A deeper
understanding of such materials should aid in the development of advanced
technological applications of these materials. This project will focus on the
role of disorder and interparticle interactions in three magnetic systems. Two
of these involve the magnetism produced by spins of electrons. The third is a
system of magnetic flux tubes, called vortices, occurring in superconducting
thin films with intentionally fabricated defects. The grant will also support
the development of an undergraduate research course, entitled "From the Minute
to the Macroscopic: Probing the Properties of Atoms, Molecules, and Solids". The
course will focus on experimental techniques in atomic and condensed matter
physics. It will emphasize the common physical concepts that are applicable from
relatively simple atoms to complex solids. The course will draw on the research
experience of the physics faculty at Wesleyan. The course will also be offered
to high school teachers enrolled as summer students in the Graduate Liberal
Studies Program at Wesleyan. This course will prepare both undergraduates and
high school teachers to work in the research labs either during the school year
or during a subsequent summer. ***