* 9733962
* CAREER: Semi-Active Control with Independently Variable     Stiffness and Damping Systems: Analytical and Experimental  Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1998,06/04/1999
* Satish Nagarajaiah, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/04/1999
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this Career Research Project is to develop innovative semi-
active structural sysems for earthquake protection, in which stiffness and
damping can be varied independently, using a newly developed novel semi-active
independently varible stiffness and damping device (SAIVSD). The existing semo-
active variable sstiffness and damping devices for response control is limited
because the stiffness and damping are either closely coupled or variation of
only damping or only stiffness is possible. Research will be carried out to (1)
study SAIVSD device experimentally and analytically; (2) develop control
algorithms; (3) implement the device with real time control systems in scaled
building models representing fixed base and base isolated buildings and bridges;
and (4) evaluate the performance of the new system by shake tabletesting and
numerical simulations. The comprehensive nature of this study will permit the
evaluation of the capabilities of device and the advantages and disadvantages of
using such devices in structural systems. Semi-active control systems have
significant potential for practical implementation for earthquake protection in
the near future. The research would contribute to the development of new and
innovative semi-active control systems . The research will bee performed in clos
collaboration with the industry which will accelerate the implementation of
semi-active control system and hybrid isolation systems. The integral compnents
educational compnents include (1) furher development of innovative teaching
software BEST an usage in dynamics corse; (2) introduction of new advanced
software into undergraduate and graduate course to enhance learning experience
of students; (3) promote hands-on experimets in dynamics for effective learning;
(4) development of a new earthquake engineering and structural control course ;
(5) introductio if interesting concepts in dynamics to undergraduate and school
students; and (6) coordinated out re arch activities including presentations at
area schools and laboratory tours. The educational program is aimed at enhancing
the learning experience of graduate, undergraduate, and school students.