* 9733697
* CAREER:  A Comprehensive Study of Proto--Planetary Nebulae  Dust Shells and the Development of Experimental Astronomy   Programs at the University of Illinois
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2005
* Margaret Meixner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 04/30/2005
* USD 331,900.00

9733697 Meixner Dr. Margaret Meixner, of the University of Illinois, is
investigating proto-planetary nebulae dust shells around dying stars and
developing experimental astronomy programs for graduate and undergraduate
students. The research program, which focuses on the late stages of stellar
evolution of intermediate mass stars (0.8 to 8 Solar masses), addresses two long
standing problems in stellar astrophysics: What physical mechanism drives the
asymptotic giant branch star mass loss? What is the nature of the circumstellar
dust created by the asymptotic giant branch star during mass loss? The history
of asymptotic giant branch star mass loss is imprinted in the circumstellar
dustshells of proto-planetary nebulae (objects in transition between the stellar
asymptotic giant branch and planetary nebula phases). To discern the final part
of this history, Dr. Meixner is collecting infrared data on approximately 100
proto-planetary nebulae dustshells. Ground-based, mid-infrared (0.8-2.5
micrometers wavelength), images of these proto-planetary nebulae show the
spatial distribution of the warm (about 300 degree K) dust in the inner regions.
The spatial distribution of the scattered starlight is imaged in these proto-
planetary nebulae using the Near-InfraRed IMager (NIRIM) on a laser-guided
adaptive optics system. A computer program, which models the radiative transfer
in the central star and dustshell system, will be used to quantitatively derive
the 3D geometries of these dustshells and their inner radii. The information
from the infrared data and Hubble Space Telescope images will be used in making
the computer models. The 3D models of the geometries will provide insight into
the geometry of mass loss during the star's final death throes. A preliminary
investigation of several proto-planetary nebulae by Dr. Meixner et al showed
that the geometries had an axial symmetry and this indicated that the star's
loss mass at a higher rate in the equatorial plane than in the polar region. The
data from the observations of the dustshell inner radii are used to estimate the
dynamical ages for the proto-planetary nebulae. These ages will be used to test
the theoretical timescales of stellar evolution predicted by other scientists.
These theoretical timescales are uncertain because the mass loss processes which
dominate this stage of stellar evolution are poorly understood. These data will
be used to constrain the models of the characteristics of circumstellar dust,
including the grain sizes, the composition, and the optical properties of the
dust. The circumstellar dust created during the asymptotic giant branch mass
loss process in stars is the single most important contribution to the dust
observed in our Galaxy. The next generation of stars in our Galaxy are born from
this dust enriched interstellar medium. Hence, the new understanding about this
dust composition will improve our understanding of galactic evolution.
Concurrent with this research program, two educational experimental astronomy
programs are being developed. The infrared astronomy program will be expanded by
involving graduate and undergraduate students in research on proto-planetary
nebulae. These students will learn the latest in infrared observing techniques.
A new introductory astronomy laboratory course, entitled Observing the Sky, will
be created. This will be used for the large introductory courses that are
populated by non-science majors. In this course, the students will learn about
astronomical observations by doing observations in a supervised, small-group
environment.