* 9733655
* CAREER:  Structural Basis of Bacterial Conjugation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Joel Schildbach, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2003
* USD 523,341.00

Schildbach 9733655 F factor, like all conjugative plasmids, directs its transfer
from one bacterium to another, even between species. While the genetics of F
factor have been studied extensively, little is known about the structural basis
of conjugal transfer. The investigator is mounting a long-term effort to
describe F factor conjugation in molecular detail. The initial research will
concentrate on a complex of three proteins and plasmid DNA that facilitates DNA
cleavage with strand and sequence specificity. Of these proteins, only plasmid-
encoded TraI possesses nucleolytic activity. Integration host factor (IHF) and
plasmid-encoded TraY are required for efficient TraI activity, although their
roles are unknown. To better define TraY activity, the investigator will
identify TraY amino acids involved in DNA recognition through site-directed
mutagenesis, and will characterize the F plasmid DNA sequence bound by TraY. The
binding of IHF and TraY to DNA will be assessed for cooperativity, and for its
effect on DNA conformation. Crystallization of TraY will also be attempted, in
preparation for eventual structure determination by X-ray crystallography. This
research, coupled with teaching in lecture and seminar courses, is intended to
demonstrate to graduate and undergraduate students the value of examining
biological systems using interdisciplinary studies that include structural
biology. Conjugation is an efficient mechanism for transferring DNA between even
unrelated bacterial species. Consequently, acquisition of antibiotic resistance
genes by pathogenic bacteria frequently occurs through conjugal transfer. Drugs
that inhibit conjugation, given in concert with regular antibiotic treatment,
may render antibiotics more effective and may reduce the incidence of antibiotic
resistance. Design of such inhibitors requires an understanding of the
structures and mechanisms of the proteins and DNA involved in conjugation. The
proposed activities will provide understanding of one step i n bacterial
conjugation, as well as instill in students an appreciation of the value and
design of such studies.