* 9733862
* CAREER:  Correlations Between Local Structure and Electron  Transport in Transition-Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Trevor Tyson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/2002
* USD 323,000.00

9733862 Tyson This is a CAREER award to an African-American scientist at an
urban university with a large enrollment of students from underrepresented
groups. The project will study high temperature superconducting materials such
as yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO), and its praseodymium- and terbium-doped
variants. The critical temperature and ground state resistivity of YBCO are
altered significantly by exposure to optical radiation (photodoping), by
application external of pressure, by changes in the oxygen content and by the
replacement of yttrium by praseodymium or terbium. However, the relation of
these changes in electron transport to local local atomic order is poorly
understood. The project addresses this issue by correlating transport properties
with changes in the local structure of oriented bulk materials, oriented films
and single crystals as determined by x-ray absorption spectroscopy. This should
provide fundamental information about the superconducting state in these
multinary oxide materials. The project will integrate work at NJIT laboratories
with off-site research at national synchrotron light laboratories. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will conduct the research. The
educational component of the project will expose undergraduates, high school
students and teachers to modern research techniques. The PI is developing a
research and teaching program targeted at Newark area high school students and
NJIT undergraduates. It involves an undergraduate laboratory with advanced
experimental methods and techniques, which link basic science training with
research on transition metal oxides. %%% This is a CAREER award to an African-
American scientist at an urban university with a large enrollment of students
from underrepresented groups. The research will investigate the atomic structure
in several high-temperature supercon ductor materials. Among other applications,
these materials show promise to lead to low-loss power transmission lines at
temperatures approaching room temperature. The mechanism for superconductivity
in these materials is still not understood. To shed light on this problem, the
project attempts to determine what atomic structural characteristics are
correlated with the superconductivity and other transport properties in these
materials. The research program integrates work at NJIT with off-site reserach
at national research laboratories, such as synchrotron light sources. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will conduct the research. The
educational component of the project will expose undergraduates, high school
students and teachers to modern research techniques. The PI is developing a
research and teaching program targeted at Newark area high school students and
NJIT undergraduates. It involves an undergraduate laboratory with advanced
experimental methods and techniques, which link basic science training with
research on transition metal oxides. ***