* 9733303
* CAREER: Enhancing Education Through Research Experiences,  and Investigations of Gene Functions in Archaea at Extremely High Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2005
* Dennis Grogan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2005
* USD 469,585.00

9733303 Grogan The career plan combines teaching activities and basic research
in ways designed to stimulate both scientific training and scientific discovery.
Teaching objectives. The teaching activities seek to i) enhance the role of
basic research in an existing undergraduate biology curriculum, ii) use
participation in basic reseat to enhance the education of pre-college teachers,
iii) better utilize experimental study of micro-organisms in teaching basic
concepts of biology, and iv) equip graduate students with the basic skills and
knowledge needed to pursue research in cellular, molecular, or prokaryotic
biology. Teaching methods. New courses will be developed for the Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati. The first will be a novel summer
course in which local teachers and undergraduate students will work in teams to
isolate unusual micro-organisms found in extreme environments. These micro-
organisms will be characterized biochemically to demonstrate their diversity and
biotechnological potential. The second will be a regular laboratory course in
the academic year; this course will give graduate students and advanced
undergraduates practical experience in bacterial genetics. Finally, two team-
taught, graduate-level courses (one in microbiology and one in molecular
biology) will be developed in collaboration with other faculty members in the
Department. Teaching significance. Educators recognized a need for undergraduate
students and science teachers to participate in true experimental science in
addition to prepared laboratory exercises. Summer courses offered at urban
universities could provide access to special research experiences that would
meet this need. Basic research on micro-organisms, particularly those found in
extreme environments, open up novel and interesting research opportunities in
which a wide spectrum of students can productively participate. Research
objectives. The research projects study aspects of cell division, genetic e
xchange, mutation, and DNA repair at extremely high temperatures in Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius, an archaeon from geothermal environments. Research methods.
Genetic approaches are emphasized. They include characterization of conditional-
lethal mutants with defects cell division, and measurement of the effects of DNA
damage on mutation and on a mechanism of natural genetic exchange. Longer-term
projects will seek to develop and improve molecular-cloning methods for
thermophilic archaea and isolate new mutants of S. acidocaldarius defective in
aspects of DNA repair. Research significance. The study of prokaryotes in
geothermal environments has raised many fundamental questions relating to
biodiversity and biotechnology, including the scope of evolutionary divergence
represented by the Archaea, and how the proteins and nucleic acids of
thermophilic archaea function under conditions that denature the corresponding
molecules of well studied micro-organisms. Genetic approaches that allow gene
function to be monitored in vivo have not been used to address these questions.
Progress from the applicant's prior research now makes it feasible to
investigate cell division, genetic exchange and recombination, mutation, and DNA
repair in vivo at temperatures of about 80o C. These molecular processes are
important for the genetics of micro-organisms generally, and may have special
importance for the survival and propagation of thermophilic archaea in extremely
harsh conditions. Integration. The unique micro-organisms and genetic elements
that may be isolated by summer course participants will provide researchers with
valuable new material with which to study thermophilic archaea at the molecular
level. At the same time, science teachers, biology majors and graduate students
will learn the nature of scientific knowledge, useful laboratory techniques, and
scientific problem-solving skills by conducting research on thermophilic
archaea.