* 9733535
* CAREER:  Microbial Degradation of Aromatic Hydrocarbons     Under Anaerobic Conditions
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2006
* Alfred Spormann, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 506,578.00

9733535 Spormann This project will investigate the biochemical and molecular
mechanisms of aromatic hydrocarbon degradation by anaerobic bacteria. Current
work in this research group has revealed several novel biochemical reactions
involved in the initial steps of anaerobic degradation of toluene, xylenes, and
ethylbenzene. Catabolic pathways for these compounds will be established and key
enzymes of the novel pathways will be characterized. A genetic analysis of the
pathways will be initiated to understand how these catabolic genes are regulated
and which environmental factors control their expression. Further, it is
proposed to isolate novel prokaryotes that degrade aromatic hydrocarbons under
sulfidogenic and methanogenic conditions. BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene,
xylenes) compounds are among the most water-soluble components of gasoline and
are frequently released in the environment by spills and improper handling.
Contaminated sites often become anaerobic. Investigating anaerobic BTEX
degradation in terms of the biochemistry involved, the molecular mechanisms that
regulate expression of catabolic genes, and the microbial ecology of the
hydrocarbon-degrading organisms will advance our fundamental knowledge of
microbial metabolism, and will also be of practical use for evaluating and
enhancing intrinsic bioremediation. The teaching activities are integrated with
the research activities and have related focus. An Environmental Microbiology
curriculum is currently being established to convey a comprehensive
understanding of microbial activities in nature. An emphasis will be the mutual
interactions between microorganisms and their environment, how microbial
activities control the physical-chemical properties of an environment, and in
turn, how this affects microbial activities, ranging from the elemental cycles
of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, oxygen and iron to microbial metabolism of
compounds of geochemical and of anthropogenic origin.