* 9733064
* CAREER: Modeling 3D Flow and Soil Structure Interaction     Using Optical Tomography
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Magued Iskander, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2003
* USD 320,000.00

This CAREER award supports research on measurement of three-dimensional
deformation patterns and flow characteristics within a soil continuum. Such
measurements are usually limited by the fact that soil sensors do not provide a
continuous image of the measured continuum. Additionally, soil sensors exhibit
static and dynamic characteristics that are different form those of the
surrounding soils, and therefore can change the response of the measured
continuum. Tests conducted with a transparent material which has properties that
closely model the geotechnical properties of natural soils can potentially
circumvent these experimental problems if the response of a model transparent
continuum can be measured using non-intrusive optical visualization techniques.
The Principal Investigator has established methods for production and
customization of a transparent synthetic soil that will meet model test
requirements in terms of strength, deformation, and permeability. This project
will develop the technology (equipment and methodology) for performing optical
tomography within soil continua. Cross sections of the transparent soil mass
will be illuminated using laser light and line scan cameras will be used to
capture the reflected light. Computer based digital image processing will be
used to analyze the reflected light and construct continuous images of the
spatial deformation patterns and flow paths within the transparent model soil
mass. This new technology will result in: better analyses and improved
reliability of three-dimensional soil structure interaction and multiphase flow;
and test results that can be used for the difficult validation of three-
dimensional numerical analysis codes. The project will also include development
of advanced educational experiments to visualize the performance of
infrastructure and environmental projects. These low cost experiments can also
be used to vitalize recruitment efforts of high school students into civil
engineering programs.