* 9733308
* CAREER: Statistical modeling and real-time correction of    nonuniformity in array sensors
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Majeed Hayat, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2002
* USD 209,955.00

The research component of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
Award is addressing the problem of real-time correction of image degradation in
infrared and laser imaging systems used in satellite imaging, aerial
surveillance and reconnaissance, astronomical imaging, and target recognition.
The types of degradation considered are due to the non-ideal characteristics of
array sensors and atmospheric turbulence. The most limiting degradation in the
performance of array sensors arises from the spatial and temporal
nonuniformities in the sensors' responses. This research employs a statistical
real-time-correction approach that avoids the need for costly calibration-based
correction techniques that require the camera to steer away from the target for
the duration of the calibration. The model-based statistical approach undertaken
for nonuniformity correction is adapted to restore images degraded by
atmospheric turbulence. The fundamental question of determining the optimal
exposure time (or number of frames) needed for a given system in the presence of
quantum noise is also being addressed. The algorithms developed in this research
will be implemented in real systems through the investigator's collaborative
efforts with the government and industry. The educational component of this
research includes activities designed to motivate and excite undergraduate
engineering students and strengthen the structure of the Dayton Area Graduate
Studies Institute (DAGSI) Program that is a vital component of the Dayton-Area
higher education system. These educational activities include: (1) demonstrating
the practical research findings to undergraduate and graduate students by
improving certain existing engineering courses; (2) offering periodical seminars
available to nine local higher- education institutions and the DAGSI program
through an interactive video network; (3) enhancing the practical training of
students through collaboration with the local industry an d government
laboratory; and, (4) actively involving the research assistants in this research
in undergraduate education.