* 9733688
* Career:  Geochemical Approaches to Oceanography and         Climatology: A Plan for Research and Education
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2003
* Daniel Schrag, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 11/30/2003
* USD 455,814.00

9733688 Schrag This award supports a program of research, teaching and
curriculum development focused on questions regarding the history of oceans and
climate over a range of timescales. In one project, we will examine the last
several decades of ocean circulation in the tropical Pacific. Using corals as
stationary monitors of surface ocean radiocarbon content, we will examine how
bomb-produced radiocarbon has penetrated into the surface ocean, and then has
been redistributed by upwelling and the movement of surface currents,
essentially adding a time dimension to the information gained from surface water
sampling by the GEOSECS program. The second project is concerned with
reconstructing interannual variability in the position of the Indonesian Low
Pressure System for windows of time several thousand years ago, with the
objective of better understanding how ENSO responds to changes in the mean
climate state. We will collect fossil corals from uplifted coral reefs in
Indonesia from locations where oxygen isotope records from modern corals show
strong correlation with ENSO. The Holocene timeseries we produce will be
compared with predictions from ocean circulation models. For the teaching
component, the award will support a new initiative which provides students in
government and public policy exposure to research in climatology as a
participant in Schrag's research group.