* 9733188
* CAREER: In Situ NMR Techniques for the Study of             Environmental Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Michael Raftery, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/28/2002
* USD 335,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on developing nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) methodologies for the study of environmental catalysis. In
particular, the surface chemistry involved in the thermal and photocatalytic
decomposition of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) will be investigated using
new NMR probes which permit study of these reactions in situ. Professor Raftery
and his students will use NMR methods to study the structure of various adsorbed
species, their proximity to active sites on the solid catalyst surfaces, and
monitor dynamic surface processes. This CAREER project includes the use of
group-based, interactive and Web-based learning tools as a means to better
connect classroom and laboratory experiences and provide a contextual framework
to introducing emerging technologies in undergraduate and graduate curricula.
The study of catalytic reactions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) at the
surface of a wide range of materials is important to a number of energy and
environmentally-related technologies. New spectroscopic tools are required to
gain intimate knowledge of the dynamics of the gas-solid interactions to better
tailor processes to the reduction of air polution, for example. Professor
Raftery and his students at Purdue University are developing such methodologies
for the study of the thermal and photocatalytic degradation of VOCs, which could
have implications in reducing ozone-depleting emissions. The use of of group-
based, interactive, and Web-based teaching methods will be used at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels to enhance students' connectivity between
their experiences and fundamental science.