* 9733541
* CAREER: Stabilizing Containment for Networks and Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Ted Herman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 06/30/2004
* USD 205,000.00

The basic research component of this project is concerned with transient faults
and unexpected environmental changes that occur in distributed systems and
networks. Transient faults include spontaneous data corruption and any temporary
deviation from software specification. The project explores how effects of
transient faults can be contained within desired boundaries of time or
application-specific objectives. Using methods of stabilizing algorithms, which
automatically recover from transient state disruptions, issues of containment
will be studied. Basic research investigations will yield new algorithms for
tolerating transient faults and will demonstrate the inherent resource conflicts
between stabilization and containment objectives. Another goal is to alleviate
compute-intensive and complexity disadvantages often associated with stabilizing
algorithms, using methods of encapsulation and probabilistic approaches. The
potential significance of the new stabilizing containment techniques will be
demonstrated by case studies: interfaces between software layers that contain
effects of faults are simplified; optimistic treatment of faults improves
efficiency of recovery; distributed programs can manipulate objects while
limiting contamination due to temporary object corruption. The impact of the
basic research and its case studies will be to bring stabilization and
containment techniques closer to widespread application in new generations of
distributed systems. The plan's applied research and educational components
emphasize student projects implementing recent distributed computing algorithms.