* 9733959
* CAREER: Performance-Based Design of Earthquake Resisting    Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Joseph Bracci, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 229,269.00

9733959 &lt;br/&gt;Bracci&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed 1997 NEHRP (National
Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program) Provisions for seismic regulations of new
buildings and other structures (BSSSC-1997), show marked improvement in trying
to define, in the design process, the performance levels of structures during
earthquakes. Performance levels are expressed in terms of allowable damage to
structural and non-structural components, with the intention of providing
definite margins of safety. Three performance levels are considered, including
Immediate Occupancy, Life Safety, and Collapse Prevention. Although the
guidelines represent a significant advance in the practice of seismic
engineering, calibration of the analysis procedures and acceptance criteria for
actual building performance is clearly needed. The objectives of this CAREER
Development Program are to: (a) Evaluate and compare the design of various
lateral force resisting structural systems according to the proposed 1997 NEHRP
Recommend Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings &amp; Other
Structures; (b) Evaluate and compare their performance-based response during
various levels of seismic excitation using nonlinear time history dynamic
analyses; and (c) enhance an existing graduate course in Civil Engineering at
Texas A&amp;M and develop a short-course for students, researchers, and
practicing engineers from the United States and Mexico which will emphasize
performance- based design of seismic force resisting structural systems. The
impact of the project will be recognized by providing probabilities of
occurrence for various performance levels of several types of structural systems
due to earthquakes of varying intensities. Therefore, given performance based-
design objectives for a structural systems during earthquakes of varying
intensities, the lateral load resisting mechanism can be selected for optimal
performance. In addition, given an existing structural system designed according
to previous building codes, the ex pected performance level under various
earthquake intensities can be identified and the need for seismic retrofit can
be determined.