* 9733293
* CAREER: Modeling and Control of IC Engines with Variable    Valve Motion
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1998,10/31/2000
* Anna Stefanopoulou, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2000
* USD 250,000.00

9733293 Stefanopoulou Over the last two decades there has been a significant
evolution in powertrain control systems, largely driven by government
regulations aimed at improving fuel economy and reducing emissions. One way to
potentially meet these performance requirements is to optimize the exhaust and
intake valve motion in a spark ignited engine. The additional actuation can be
realized with a camless valvetrain and results in a nonlinear and highly
multivariable engine.

The proposed project is a combination of research in the area of engine modeling
and multivariable control. We will develop a phenomenological model for the
nonlinear and multivariable engine by characterizing the essential modifications
that variable valve motion introduces in the structure of the conventional
engine model. The developed model is intended to fill the gap between the
analytical thermodynamic engine models and the steady-state engine models that
are currently used for studying camless engines. We will identify the inherent
system limitations as they arise from fundamentallly discrete plant properties,
subsystem interactions and contstraints imposed by sensor/actuator
fidelity/authority. A rigorous methodology of translating the system limitations
to performance tradeoffs and their implication to the control design parameters
will be developed. Finally, we will study the impact of controller architecture
on the engine dynamie response. Our intent is to improve the understanding of
the possible detrimental consequences of subsysem interaction, and the potential
of coordinated, multivariable feedback for alleviating these limitations.

This project will allow students to integrate various aspects of fluid,
thermodynamic and systems theory for the development and the control design of
the variable valve motion engine. Our pedagogical objective is to expose
students to the highly interdisciplinary area of powertrain control. Students
can play an important role in developing potential solutions to cleaner
automobiles. Meanwhile, they will enhance their understanding in the area of
multivariable feedback control theory by their active participation in the
forefront of advanced engine technologies. The proposed research project and its
pedagogical aspects stress cross-disciplinary involvement and combine system
theoretical concepts and engineering design criteria in the analysis and
synthesis of technologies important to our national competitiveness. ***