* 9733546
* CAREER: New Families of Photo-and Redox-Active Molecular    Rods and Squares with Rigid sp Carbon Chain Spacers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Bo Hong, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 06/30/2003
* USD 352,000.00

This CAREER award to Dr. Bo Hong at the University of California-Irvine is
supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The focus
of the research is the synthesis and photo- and redox-active behavior of novel
types of molecular rods and macrocyclic molecular squares with rigid sp carbon
chain spacers. Systematic synthetic approaches will be applied to a series of
rigid rod spacers with cumulenic and acetylenic carbon chains which will be used
in the construction of molecular rods and squares which contain photostable
organometallic moieties with donor and acceptor properties. These rigid rods and
squares will have defined structures with controllable distances between donor
and acceptor sites and controllable cavity sizes. These features are important
to molecular electronic and photonic devices, light to energy conversion,
molecular recognition and host-guest chemistry. The redox properties and
photophysics of the novel constructs will be investigated, particularly
electronic communication between multiple redox centers and directional
photoinduced electron/energy transfer across sp-carbon spacers. The teaching
aspect of the CAREER award will emphasize the training and retention of women
students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels and the integration of
teaching and research at the undergraduate level. A `Women in Science`
discussion group, organized by Dr. Hong, will be expanded to include outside
speakers addressing issues such as dual careers, interviewing, coping
strategies, childcare, outreach programs and history of women in science. The
goal of this activity is to provide practical solutions to real world problems
and concerns of women students.