* 9733929
* CAREER: Online Optimization and Control of Real-Time        Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2003
* Athanasios Ziliaskopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2003
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract Proposal: 97-33929 Northwestern University PI: Athanasius
Ziliaskopoulos "CAREER: On-line Optimization and Control of Real-Time
Transportation Systems" This CAREER award supports research concerned with the
problem of on-line control and optimization of the operations of a real-time
dynamic and stochastic transportation system. The motivation for this research
is two-fold: to use to use new technological advances to improve the control and
management of transportation operations; and to fill the gap created by the lack
of algorithms that can use these technologies to improve the efficiency of
transportation operations. In addition to the research problems initiated by the
technological advances, several fundamental educational issues are raised: In
general, students and practicing transportation engineers do not have sufficient
technical background to fully appreciate the complex behavior of stochastic and
dynamic systems and the knowledge to exploit the potential of real-time data.
This is partly due to training that has traditionally been limited to the
concepts of equilibrium, steady state average system behavior and determinism.
Educators are faced with the challenge of developing innovative pedagogical
material and methodologies that convey the fundamental principles of dynamic and
stochastic systems, given the limited background of typical engineering
students. The main research and educational objectives are: to analyze the
operations of real-time transportation systems and identify their properties; to
develop closed form analytical formulations by exploiting their special
properties and to explore various exact and heuristic solution approached,
optimality conditions for exact algorithms and performance bounds for heuristic
approaches; and to develop new pedagogical tools that will enable students to
understand the fundamental principles of dynamic and stochastic systems. To
achieve these objectives, concepts from four major areas will be utilized:
stochastic programming, stochastic optimal control, process control, and
Markovian decision processes.