* 9733783
* Career: User/OS Transparent Fault Recovery Using Caches
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,08/26/1998
* Neeraj Suri, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/26/1998
* USD 105,000.00

The increasing reliance on computers for virtually all applications drives the
need for provision of fault- tolerance to prevent disruptions in the delivery of
desired services. However, approaches to fault-tolerance are acceptable only if
high costs and degradation in the system performance is avoided. The checkpoint
based fault recovery schemes currently used are effective, but they necessitate
customized solutions and a high cost penalty, both monetarily and in long
recovery times. A novel cache based approach that provides for high-performance
and low-cost checkpointing based recovery in distributed systems will be
investigated. The principles of using caches for providing stable checkpoints
will be established, and the architectural concepts will be developed. The
research focuses on developing techniques to analyze and control the cache
attributes of stability and frequency of checkpoints, and establishing
response/overhead characteristics. Protocols for cache based recovery (roll-
backward and roll-forward) over varied fault instances will be developed and
analyzed. This research will utilize existing system caches in order to provide
for automatic checkpoint establishment and for a low-overhead fault recovery
approach which is explicitly transparent in use to the user/OS; thus a viable
and effective fault tolerance scheme for general computing systems will be
developed.