* 9733566
* PECASE:  A Difference Infrared Spectroscopic Study of a     Nucleotide Binding Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,06/30/2005
* Gina MacDonald, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2005
* USD 500,000.00

9733566 MacDonald This CAREER plan integrates research and educational
components and involves undergraduate chemistry and biology majors as well as
high school teachers in all aspects of the project. The goal of the research is
to gain further insight into the regulations and mechanism of a protein involved
in DNA repair and recombination. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) difference
spectroscopy will be used to investigate the relationship between protein
structure and function in the Escherichia coli protein, RecA. These studies
should result in a greater understanding of all allosteric changes in RecA that
are responsible for regulating DNA strand exchange, a process crucial to DNA
recombination and repair. RecA function is regulated by nucleotide binding.
Initial studies will focus on the binding of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to RecA. Vibrational spectroscopy will be used to
identify specific changes in protein structure induced by the binding of ADP
(RecA conformation with decreased affinity for DNA), and ATP (RecA conformation
with a higher affinity for DNA). These studies will be performed under a variety
of conditions in order to investigate how nucleotide binding affects protein
structure in both the active and inactive RecA nucleoprotein filaments. These
studies will provide the groundwork for future RecA studies such as (1) how the
previously studied changes in RecA structure are affected by other proteins
known to interact with RecA in vitro and (2) time-resolved studies that follow
nucleotide binding and strand exchange in real time. High school teachers, as
well as James Madison University undergraduates in chemistry and biology ,and
secondary education minors, will play instrumental roles in both the educational
and research aspects of this CAREER grant. A larger number of participants can
be involved in research efforts by providing two types of projects (1)
biochemical and difference infrared studies of RecA (2) research effor ts that
utilize departmental equipment and can be incorporated into the new project
oriented biochemistry laboratory. Students involved will gain valuable research
experience, learn current biochemical and spectroscopic techniques, and have a
greater understanding of the scientific method. The undergraduate participants
will contribute to a greater understanding of structure-function relationships
in RecA and an exciting new biochemical laboratory. Including current and future
high school teachers in this project will ultimately help to attract the next
generation of scientists.