* 9733165
* CAREER: The Chemistry of Etching: Understanding Kinetic     Surface Morphologies on an Atomic Scale
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2003
* USD 305,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the detailed microscopic,
macroscopic, and computational characterization of etched silicon surfaces. In
particular, the use of a new class of aqueous, fluorine-based etchants will be
investigated. Professor Hines and her students at Cornell University will employ
scanning tunneling microscopy to study the physical structure (quality) of the
resultant etch patterns while etch rate measurements will give evidence of the
kinetics of the process. Monte Carlo calculations will be incorporated to help
simulate the observed chemistry. This CAREER project will improve the
computational skills of undergraduates and graduates through the implementation
of a `Numerical Analysis for Chemists` course. Professor Hines will also improve
students' readiness for the workforce through seminars in writing and public
speaking skills. The study and development of new chemistries which can be
applied to semiconductor processing systems continues to be a very vibrant area
of research. Professor Hines and her students at Cornell University are
combining physical measurement techniques and computational simulations to
evaluate the use of a new family of aqueous, fluorine-based etchants. Previous
studies have suggested that atomically flat silicon surfaces could be produced
by these methods. This CAREER project holds the promise of producing results of
substantial technological importance. Professor Hines will enhance the
development of scientists with skills in the important area of computational
chemistry through the introduction of a new undergraduate/graduate student
course in that area. Technical writing and public speaking skills will be
developed through topical seminars and coursework.