* 9733416
* PECASE: Mechanisms of Surfactant Mediated Thin Film Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2003
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2003
* USD 508,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9733416 Eric I. Altman/Yale U. Microelectronics, optoelectronics,
and magnetic recording technologies all rely on the ability to grow low defect
density, continuous, ultra-thin films. The objective of this project is to
determine how the growth of ultra-thin continuous films can be promoted by
addition of surfactants. The effect of surfactants on nucleation and growth
kinetics and mechanisms will be studied using in situ variable-temperature
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The observed mechanisms and kinetics will
be used to develop kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of surfactant mediated
growth. The simulations will be used to investigate the sensitivity of the
growth mode to the different kinetic parameters and thus will reveal the key
features required to successfully use surfactants to form stable, ultra-thin
continuous films. For almost all applications Frank-van der Merwe (F-vdM) or
layer-by-layer growth is the preferred growth mode because it results in the
thinnest, most uniform, continuous films possible. Frank-van der Merwe growth is
favored when the surface tension of the substrate is greater than the sum of the
interfacial tension and the surface tension of the film. Even when F-vdM growth
is favored, kinetic limitations can lead to nucleation of new layers before the
previous layers are completed. Addition of a surfactant can promote F-vdM growth
by altering both surface and interfacial tensions and nucleation and growth
kinetics. Recent studies suggest the latter is more important, although
nucleation and growth mechanisms and kinetics in the presence of a surfactant
remain largely a matter of speculation. Therefore, we will investigate the
kinetics of the key elementary processes that govern surfactant mediated
nucleation and growth: surface diffusion, diffusion across steps, attachment to
steps, adatom-surfactant exchange barrier, nucleation. Comparison of two very
different systems, Ag and Ge growth on Si(100) with group V surfactants, will
reve al the key features required to successfully use surfactants to promote
F-vdM growth, and how the kinetic parameters are affected by the nature of the
interactions between the film, the substrate and the surfactant. Continued
advances in a wide range of applications including microelectronics,
optoelectronics and magnetic recording depend on the ability to form ultra-thin,
low-defect density films on industry standard Si(100) substrates. Specifically,
the development of methods to grow smooth Ge films on Si(100) is seen as a key
to developing high-speed integrated circuits based on Ge-Si alloy and
superlattice structures, and the Ag-Si system is of interest as a base for thin
film magnetic structures.