* 9733958
* CAREER:  Interaction Between Cell Division Proteins during  the Caulobacter Cell Cycle.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2004
* Yves Brun, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 04/30/2004
* USD 377,294.00

Brun Cell division is a complex process that involves many proteins whose action
must be coordinated with the DNA replication cycle. It is clear that an
understanding of the timing of assembly of the different components of the
division machinery and how and when the different components interact will be
required to explain how division is controlled and how it is coordinated with
the DNA replication cycle. This research will specifically examine the function
of FtsA and its interaction with FtsZ. FtsZ is a tubulin-like GTPase that
regulates the decision of when and where to divide. FtsZ is a highly conserved
protein that polymerizes into a ring structure associated with the cytoplasmic
membrane at the site of cell division. FtsZ recruits other cell division
proteins to the site of cell division and may constrict, providing mechanical
force for division. FtsA is localized to the division site in a FtsZ-dependent
manner. FtsA is not required for the initiation of cytokinesis but is required
for completion of cytokinesis. The long-term goal of this project is to
understand the function of cell division proteins and to build a picture of
protein-protein interactions in the cell division machinery as they occur during
the cell cycle. This work will be performed in Caulobacter crescentus where each
cell division gives rise to two morphologically and functionally different
progeny cells: a motile swarmer cell and a sessile stalked cell. Caulobacter
cells can be easily synchronized and specific morphological changes during the
differentiation pathway provide a convenient indication of the stage of the cell
cycle. Because there is only one DNA replication cycle per developmental cycle,
events can be unambiguously assigned to a specific stage of the cell cycle. FtsZ
and FtsA have been identified in Caulobacter and genetic interaction between the
two proteins has already been established using the yeast two-hybrid system. The
effect of mutations in different regions of FtsA will be analyzed to gain a bet
ter understanding of its function and the domains that contribute to it. The
domains of interaction between FtsZ and FtsA will be defined using the yeast
two-hybrid system and fusions to glutathlone S-transferase. The localization of
FtsA and FtsZ and their interaction will be analyzed during the cell cycle using
immunofluorescence and in vivo cross-linking. This will allow a determination of
the timing of the localization and the interaction of these two important cell
division proteins within one cell cycle and its correlation with the stage of
chromosome replication and the timing of nucleoid segregation. The mechanisms of
cell division constitute one of the most fundamental problems in microbiology.
This investigation will lead to a better understanding of cell division and will
allow a picture of protein-protein interactions in the cell division machinery
as they occur during the cell cycle to be established. A better understanding of
the mechanisms of cell division will help the development of novel drug targets.
The research will be done both in a research laboratory by senior investigators
and in a new Independent Research in Molecular and Genetics course that will
provide much needed independent research opportunities for a large number of
undergraduate students. Students will learn about the different stages and
aspects of scientific investigation by performing research on cell division and
cell differentiation in Caulobacter and in sessions on critical analysis of the
literature, scientific writing, oral presentation, and research ethics.