* 9733148
* CAREER: Development of an  Intelligent Information          Processor for Electric Power Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,10/31/2001
* Noel Schulz, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Gwendolyn Owens
* 10/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

ECS-9733148 Schulz Meeting the engineering challenges of power system operations
of the twenty-first century will require the advancement of modern technological
techniques and systems as well as an adequate supply of well trained power
engineers. Proposed objectives of the project will impact two areas of power
engineering: restoration of distribution systems during major storm outages and
the 21st century power engineer. A key concern of power engineers today is
increasing the reliability of the supply of electric energy by decreasing the
time it takes to restore power after an outage. New integrated computer systems
including distribution management and automated metering systems are providing
more detailed information about the status of the distribution system. The
proposed project involves the development of heuristics using data from
integrated computer systems. These heuristics will be the foundation for an
intelligent information processing algorithm for effective outage management
during storms. Utilities will benefit with improved reliability and lower
restoration costs. Customers will benefit by shorter outage times. Such research
will also provide an increased awareness of the contrasts between normal
operations and storm operations. The deregulation of the electric utility
industry has created a need for industrially relevant problems appropriate for
introductory engineering courses which incorporate public policy, environmental
concerns, business and the global marketplace. A set of four case studies of
current power engineering problems will be developed to stimulate the students'
interest in the many issues relating to the generation, transmission and
distribution of electrical energy. Each case study will have two versions: one
geared toward sophomore and junior Electrical Engineers students and one geared
toward high school students. These case studies will be tested at Michigan
Technological University, Milwaukee School of Engineering, University of Minne
sota, University of Missouri-Rolla and University of Washington.