* 9733230
* CAREER:  Cavity QED of Semiconductors with High-Q           Dielectric Microspheres
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2003
* USD 300,000.00

9733230 Wang This is a CAREER Award which combines research and education in
semiconductor quantum optics. The research program will extend cavity quantum
electrodynamics (QED) studies into the domain of semiconductors by developing a
novel approach based on composite semiconductor-microsphere systems that can
take advantage of extreme three dimensional photonic confinement in a dielectric
microsphere. Dynamics and radiative processes in the systems will also be
investigated by using various techniques of time-resolved photoluminescence. The
objective is to understand how radical modifications in vacuum fluctuations can
change fundamental spontaneous emission processed in semiconductors. The
education program includes developing a university-wide photonics curriculum and
initiating an industrial internship program affiliated with the Oregon Center
for Optics to better prepare students for growing job markets in photonics-
related industries. The education program also includes creating a new graduate
course on semiconductor quantum optics to bring down barriers between quantum
optics and condensed matter physics. %%% This CAREER Award combines research and
education in a technologically important area of optics and semiconductor
physics. The research program centers on fundamental optical processes in a
novel semiconductor optical devices where the size of the optical resonator
approaches the optical wavelength. These studies should improve our
understanding of physical behaviors and limit of devices such as micro-lasers
and may also lead to new concepts for devices such as ultralow threshold lasers.
The education program includes developing an undergraduate photonics curriculum
to make photonics education accessible to students in other disciplines and
initiating an industrial internship program to better prepare students for
growing job markets in photonics- related ind ustries. ***