* 9733786
* CAREER: The Synthesis of New Polymers and Materials using   Living Polymerizations:  Well-Defined Hybrid Organic/       Inorganic Nanoparticles
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Timothy Patten, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2003
* USD 342,769.00

9733786 Patten Nanoclusters have garnered much interest due to their unique
size- dependent properties and, consequently, their potential for technological
applications. The next important step in exploiting the properties of
nanoclusters is their incorporation into and ordering within film-forming
materials. The principal investigator will study methods to prepare well-defined
hybrid inorganic / organic nanoparticles in which the cores are (semi)metal
oxide nanoclusters and the exterior layers are vinyl polymers, such as
polystyrene, poly(methyl methacrylate) and poly(methyl acry ate). In particular,
silica, will be studied for the purposes of methods development, and then these
methods will be applied to other (semi)metal oxide nanoclusters exhibiting
magnetic and optical properties. This project will initially investigate methods
to attach initiators for living radical polymerizations to the surfaces of the
nanoclusters and then use these surface-modified nanoclusters as initiators for
such polymerizations. The anticipated product material will be a nanocluster
core with well-defined polymer chains grafted from the surface. Because living
polymerizations will be used to graft the polymer chains, the structure and
composition of the polymer arms become a tool to investigate methods for
ordering the nanoclusters within the polymer film. The principal investigator
will therefore develop methods for the end- functionalization of polymers
prepared using living radical polymerizations. One proposed method involves the
block copolymerization of vinyl monomers with cyclic ketene acetals followed by
hydrolysis to yield carboxylic acid-terminated polymers. These end-
functionalization methods will be used to place a variety of functional groups
at the surface chain ends of the nanocluster star polymers. The grafting of
block copolymers from the surfaces of nanoclusters will also be studied. The
microphase separation behavior of the resulting starblock c opolymers will be
exarnined to determine whether nanoclusters can be ordered within polymer films
using this strategy. %%% The principal investigator will integrate these
research efforts with the educational goal of incorporating polymer science into
the chemistry curriculum at UC Davis. Because most of the major US chemical
producers have significant business efforts in polymers and polymeric materials,
chemistry students have a high probability of moving into careers in polymer
research, development and manufacturing. Thus, the addition of this subject to
the curriculum will provide students with valuable training and skills that will
enhance their employment prospects in an increasingly competitive chemistry job
market. ***