* 9733895
* CAREER:  Atomic Mechanisms at Interfaces and Defects in     Semiconducting Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Nigel Browning, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2002
* USD 368,761.00

9733895 Browning The objective of this CAREER project is to develop a
comprehensive research and education program linked to the next generation of
semiconducting materials and devices. The project strives for an atomic level
understanding of structure-property relationships in semiconducting materials,
and a parallel materials science education program. The research will utilize
recently developed correlated atomic resolution Z-contrast imaging and electron
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) techniques in a scanning transmission electron
microscope (STEM) to probe internal interfaces and defects in semiconductors
with the goal of determining atomic structure, composition and electronic
structure at individual atomic sites. Electronic and optical properties of
individual interfaces or defects will be modeled and the overall material
properties constructed from fundamental atomic properties. Unlike traditional
high-resolution imaging techniques, where images and simulations must be
matched, this approach allows real materials defects and interfaces to be
investigated. Research will include GaN and SiC, ITO/n-GaAs, ZnSe/Fe magnetic
multilayers, and the effect of nitrogen on the oxidation of Si and SiGe for
VLSI. The project involves established collaborations with university materials
growth groups and with industry, incorporating feedback between growth and
characterization related to advanced device concepts and developments. Atomic
scale research studies of semiconductors are ideal for the integration of
research and education. Links between the operation of an everyday object such
as a CD-player or computer, and the atomic structure of its components, will be
used to emphasize basic features of materials science, and the excitement of
discovery. Similar project based learning ideas will also be incorporated into
the undergraduate curriculum. The PI will be teaching a new course in
experimental materials physics, where the focus will be on fundamental character
ization and applications of materials. Running parallel to this will be a
graduate course, where experiments will be carried out at higher levels of
sophistication, and related to real world applications. %%% The project
addresses leading edge research and education issues in a topical area of
materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
electronic materials and advanced device concepts. An important feature of the
program is the emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and
education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant research area. ***