* 9733569
* CAREER:  Toward a Design Environment for Recovering and     Maintaining the Structure of Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Spiros Mancoridis, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2003
* USD 269,000.00

9733569 More than ever, society relies on software systems that operate
correctly. Modifying software systems to insure their reliability poses major
technical and economic challenges. The difficulties that face software engineers
include absent or incorrect documentation, poorly structured code, and the
effort required to understand handed-down systems. To maintain software, one
must recover, understand, correct, and maintain the design-level structure of
the software. The goal of this research is to develop techniques and implement
tools to simplify software maintenance. The proposed tools support three
activities: first, design recovery to extract structural information from
systems; second, design visualization to facilitate the viewing of recovered
software structures; third, design maintenance to determine the quality of
designs, identify problematic areas, measure the impact of software
modifications, and so on. Central to our design maintenance approach is a
formalism for specifying constraints on software structures. From these
specifications, the design maintenance tools are automatically generated to
detect violations of such constraints. Currently, in the absense of such tools,
designers have difficulty preserving the structural integrity of systems that
undergo continuous modification. The outcome of this work should benefit
software practitioners and inspire educators to integrate software maintenance
techniques and tools into their curricula.***