* 9733253
* Practical, Iterative, Synthetic Methodology from Novel      Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Richard Taylor, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2003
* USD 351,369.00

The focus of this research is the investigation of the chemistry of homo-allylic
type carbonium ions as precursors to vinylcyclopropanes, alkenylidene
cyclopropanes and oligcyclopropanes. An iterative application of the methodology
will be used to prepare biologically active natural products such as FR-900848
and U-106305, both of which contain oligocyclopropane structural units.
Extensions of the methodology to solid phase synthesis and combinatorial library
generation will also be carried out. The focus of the educational activities
will be the development of laboratory experiments involving combinatorial
chemistry. With this Faculty Early Development (CAREER) award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
activities of Dr. Richard E. Taylor of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Notre Dame. Professor Taylor will focus his research efforts on
developing methods for the synthesis of cyclopropane containing structural
units. The methodology, applied in an iterative fashion, will give access to
structurally novel oligocyclopropanes. This class of compounds has been shown to
have interesting biological properties. In addition, application of the
chemistry to solid-phase synthesis and combinatorial library generation of
diversely functionalized oligocyclopropane structural units will be
investigated. The educational activities will center around the introduction of
combinatorial chemistry into undergraduate courses