* 9733597
* CAREER: Teaching through Research: Plume-Ridge Interactions in the Galapagos as Focus of an Integrated InterdisciplinaryChemistry Curricular Initiative
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,02/05/1999
* Karen Harpp, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Continuing Grant
* Re-Entered for CGI Processing
* 02/05/1999
* USD 82,800.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award by the Divisions of
Chemistry and Earth Sciences supports interdisciplinary research and education
on mantle dynamics and plume-ridge interactions by Dr. Karen S. Harpp,
Department of Chemistry, Lawrence University. The investigation will focus on
the Galapagos hotspot, located south of the Galapagos Spreading Center (GSC),
off the west coast of South America. The magmas produced here are controlled by
both hotspots and mid-ocean ridges, thus serving as tracers of mantle flow
patterns, extent of mixing between the two sources, and detailed lithospheric
structure and dynamics. The relationship of regional volcanic features,
specifically the Wolf-Darwin Lineament (WDL) as well as Pinta, Marchena, and
Genovesa islands, to the ridge and hotspot are not well understood. Three
mechanisms for understanding the region have been proposed: WDL pipes plume
material to the ridge; lithospheric weakness at the lineament; ridge upwelling,
with increased melt production because of the adjacent hotspot. Each mechanism
results in different predictions for geochemical variation. Sample lavas will be
collected from Wolf, Darwin, and Genovesa and their chemical compositions
determined. The data will be fit to models to determine which mechanism best
describes geologic activity in the area. The project will be carried out by
undergraduates. In addition, inquiry-based methods and team approaches will be
introduced into chemistry laboratories, including a new environmental laboratory
course, at Lawrence University and undergraduate students will be involved in
outreach with local school and community groups. The origin of volcanic islands
in the Galapagos archipelago is not well understood because of the complex
interaction between ocean ridges and local hotspots or plumes. The geological
mechanism will be determined by studying the chemical composition of the lava
flows at various islands. The research is integrated with education of
undergraduate students who will be prepared in discovery-based laboratories
prior to experience in field work in the Galapagos.