* 9733658
* CAREER:  of Computational and Data Access                   Scheduling in NOWs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2003
* Scott Leutenegger, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Haesun Park
* 06/30/2003
* USD 224,863.00

Networks of workstations (NOWs) have been emerged as a primary infrastructure
for scientific computing. NOWS are currently used to provide desktop sequential
computing and visualization, high throughput opportunistic computing of batched
sequential jobs, and dedicated parallel computing. In addition, we envision NOWs
being used to store and retrieve data sets using scientific database management
systems (DBMSs), provide opportunistic computation of parallel programs, allow
interactive visualization of large disk resident data sets. The current state of
knowledge provides most of the tools to enable this envisioned NOW usage, but
lacks the needed scheduling policies. To remedy this, this project will: *
Devise new scheduling algorithms to handle mixed workloads of workstations jobs,
batched opportunistic sequential jobs, and batched opportunistic parallel jobs.
* Characterize scientific DBMS workloads and develop designs on how best to
integrate scientific DBMSs into the NOW. * Determine how best to integrate
indexing techniques to provide support for interactive visualization of large
disk resident data sets. * Develop system wide scheduling policies that are
cognizant of all aspects of NOW usage. The goal of such policies is to provide
good aggregate performance of all concurrently running applications including
computation, visualization, and data access. The proposed work will develop
comprehensive analytical and simulation models of NOW performance, including all
of the above factors, to determine how to optimize overall performance and will
develop a working prototype of the system.