* 9733724
* CAREER:  Determination of Glass Structure using Laser       Induced Time of Flight Mass Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,12/31/2003
* Mario Affatigato, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 500,000.00

9733724 Affatigato The Faculty Early Career Development project will use laser
induced time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (LITOF-MS) to determine the short- and
intermediate-range order of boron oxide-based glass systems. It is known that
the network of pure boron oxide glass contains hexagonal rings of three-
coordinated boron. Disagreement exists, however, regarding what fraction of the
boron present in the glass is tied up in these rings. The straightforward
deconvolution of time-of-flight mass spectra will yield valuable information
regarding the presence of larger structural units in this glass, as well as
quantitative data on the abundance of the ring groupings. Alkali borate glasses
can be made up of a variety of larger groups, including chains and hexagonal
rings linked by four-coordinated borons. The presence and relative abundance of
these larger units in alkali borate glasses of varying compositions will be
measured using the mass spectrometer. Crystals of the same stoichiometry will be
investigated and used as starting points for calibration and analysis. During
this stage of the project, the effect of dopants (chromophores introduced into
the glass at concentrations below 1 molar percent) on the yield of network
groupings upon laser irradiation will be examined. In the last stage of the
project, the LITOF-MS will be used to study alkali borosilicate glasses. It is
generally agreed that these glasses are made up mostly of silicate and borate
sub-networks, but questions remain about the effect of dopants and if there is
interaction between the two networks. NMR data yields contradictory evidence on
these matters, but the LITOF-MS should provide data that can answer these
questions. As Coe College is a primarily undergraduate institution, the work
will be carried out with undergraduate students, providing them a rare long-term
researc h exposure to cutting-edge work in materials science. The students will
carry out the sample manufacture and characterization, as well as the time of
flight measurements. In addition, outreach programs will bridge the gap between
the College and the local high schools. The upper-level physics and chemistry
classes of two nearby high schools will be brought on campus for yearly visits
and seminars on careers in science and engineering, and will have several
opportunities to interact with the undergraduate researchers. %%% This CAREER
project will seek to answer several fundamental questions about boron oxide-
based glasses using laser induced time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (LITOF-MS) to
examine the short- and intermediate-range atomic arrangements. The project will
help us understand the structure of these technologically important materials.
The involvement of undergraduate students in the performance of the research
will provide them with experience in materials research. ***