* 9733730
* CAREER:  Consistent and Robust Retrieval, Transmission and  Presentation of Multimedia Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Aidong Zhang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2003
* USD 216,250.00

This project aims at the effective integration of databases, multimedia and the
Internet for digital library applications. The research establishes an
underlying framework and develops techniques for ensuring consistent and robust
retrieval, transmission and presentation of multimedia data. The research plan
involves: (1) customized presentation: develop principles to support consistent
multimedia presentations based on quality of service specifications; (2)
transmission: develop adaptive end-to-end control techniques to support
transmission of multimedia data over networks; (3) retrieval: formulate a
resource allocation model for a database server to allocate its resources for
data retrieval; and (4) implementation and experimentation of a distributed
multimedia database prototype for educational digital libraries. The educational
component of the project focuses on two objectives: (1) development of new
courses in the area of multimedia databases and digital libraries, and (2)
application of the research to the establishment of a computer-assisted learning
environment for asynchronous distance learning. The new courses and accompanying
curriculum standards are designed to reflect the changing needs of computer
professionals. Through the above research and educational activities, the
fundamental understanding and novel techniques can be provided to support system
development. The developed framework can be readily used to facilitate student
tutoring, medical training, human resource development, and asynchronous
distance learning. On a broader level, the methods and experimental results
arising from this research will also guide the development of distributed
multimedia database systems in industrial applications.