* 9733638
* CAREER: Isotopic Studies of the Sources and Sinks of Atmospheric Carbon Monoxide
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* John Mak, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/2003
* USD 334,979.00

9733638&lt;br/&gt;Mak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project was submitted in
response to the CAREER Program solicitation. It is a four-year career
development plan that integrates research and teaching goals. The major science
objectives focus on the importance of atmospheric CO in tropospheric chemical
processes for the background marine atmosphere. Specifically, the PI will use
isotopic chemical information (i.e., 14CO, 13CO, C18O): 1) to quantify the rate
of CO loss in the tropics (where OH concentrations are high); and 2) to
characterize the relative temporal trend in source strengths for atmospheric CO.
The loss rate of CO through reaction with OH will be determined by measuring
14CO. The stable isotope composition (13CO and C18O) will be used to help
constrain temporal trends in the relative source strengths of atmospheric CO.
Weekly air samples will be collected over a three-year period at the Mauna Loa
Observatory and will be analyzed for the three CO isotopomers and for CO
atmospheric abundance. Over the same sampling period the 14CO annual production
rate in the lower troposphere will be measured and these data will be compared
to model simulations obtained from the NASA Goddard 3-D Global Chemistry
Transport Model. These proposed activities will shed new information on the
source strengths of atmospheric CO, particularly over the tropical Pacific
Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The education plan uses the proposed atmospheric
CO studies as a mechanism for involving undergraduate students in research. The
PI's philosophy is to provide undergraduates with problem-solving opportunities
that include equipment building and instrument operation as part of the research
plan. Specifically, the PI will establish an undergraduate consortium of 5-10
students to work with him each semester on a directed project. Projects will
require laboratory work, field work, and data interpretation and analysis. Also,
the PI will establish partnerships with private industry to generate informal
internships for students to assist them in obtaining employment within these
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;