* 9733830
* CAREER: Disruption and Vaporization of Superheated          Droplets in Compressible Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,09/30/2002
* James Hermanson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Richard N. Smith
* 09/30/2002
* USD 245,000.00

Abstract - CTS-9733830 Hermanson, James C. The breakup and vaporization of
liquid droplets in a high-speed gas stream occurs in two-phase flows, spray
drying, rocket nozzle flow, liquid fuel injection, and steam turbine blade
erosion. Considerable practical advantages in many applications could be
realized if high levels of dispersion and rapid mixing were achieved. One
technique is that of flash vaporization which involves violent disruption and
vaporization of superheated liquids. Most of the extant literature is focussed
on incompressible flows and is not applicable to compressible flows, which are
found in supersonic combustors. The physics of superheated liquid droplet
disruption, vaporization, and fuel/air mixing are not well established. The
proposed research program is a comprehensive, experimental investigation of the
fundamental physics of superheated liquid fuel disruption and vaporization in
supersonic flow, where the entire volume of the droplet is brought to a high
level of superheat to promote flash vaporization. This work will be a first step
towards achieving a fundamental understanding of the behavior of superheated
liquid fuel sprays in compressible flow, with particular attention paid t the
different instability mechanism which affect the droplet history. Droplets will
be injected into a supersonic stream and their acceleration and subsequent
vaporization will be examined primarily by planar laser-induced fluorescence and
laser-spark schlieren/shadowgraphs.