* 9733796
* CAREER: Femtosecond Infrared Spectroscopic Study of         Interfacial Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Semiconductor     Nanoparticle Colloids
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 03/31/2002
* USD 382,000.00

Tianquan Lian of Emory University is supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to investigate the dynamics of chemical reactions occurring at
the semiconductor-liquid interface of nanoparticle colloids using femtosecond
infrared laser spectroscopy. He will focus on two fundamental processes in these
systems: photo-induced interfacial charge transfer dynamics and the subsequent
interfacial bimolecular chemical reaction dynamics of radicals. The education
plan of this CAREER award emphasizes the incorporation of laser spectroscopy
into the undergraduate curricula, as well as the implementation of Problem Based
Learning techniques in undergraduate science classes. Semiconductor
nanoparticles are an important class of new materials. They offer unique
opportunities to study fundamental problems in the interdisciplinary areas of
chemistry, physics and materials science, as well as many potential applications
such as solar energy conversion, waste degradation, and nanoelectronics. The
detailed understanding resulting from these studies will have an important
impact on the application of semiconductor nanoparticles, since the processes to
be studied determine the efficiency and the chemical stability of any devices
made from such nanoparticles. Results from this study will also add to the
general understanding of the dynamics in the solid-liquid interface, which is
essential for the design and application of many important devices and processes
such as the solar cell, electrochemistry and heterogeneous catalysis.