* 9733388
* CAREER: The Study of Turbulence and Compressible Flows Using Molecular Filter Based Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Gregory Elliott, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 12/31/2002
* USD 270,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9733388 Principal Investigator: Elliott The Study
of Turbulence and Compressible Flows Using Molecular Filter Based Diagnostics
The primary goal of this CAREER Award is to support the development of a non-
intrusive flow diagnostic technique termed Filtered Angularly Resolved Rayleigh
Scattering (FARRS), which will simultaneously measure instantaneous velocity,
density, temperature, and pressure. This technique measures the scattering from
a point measurement volume from a focused beam of a ND:YAG pulsed laser which
interrogates the flow. An anamorphic optical system is used to separately record
rays which view the Rayleigh scattered signal at different angles. The image
recorded onto an intensified CCD camera results in an intensity verses viewing
angle profile. By placing an iodine filter in front of the camera and tuning the
laser to an absorption line of iodine, the scattered intensity verses viewing
angle profile recorded on the CCD changes shape depending on the velocity,
density, temperature, and pressure of the flow. The profile for each
instantaneous (10 ns) laser pulse can then be used to compute the fluid
properties. Experiments will be made in subsonic and supersonic axisymmetric
jets to quantify the accuracy of the measurements, explore improvements to the
system to reduce sources of error, and extend the technique to measure multiple
points simultaneously. These measurements will be used to verify computational
turbulence models of the axisymmetric 'et and improvements will 'II be made to
the models when possible. Also during the funding period, improvements will be
made to a technique termed Planar Doppler Velocimetry (PDV) which allows the
measurement of multiple velocity components in a two dimensional field.
Following success of the development of FARRS and PDV, measurements will be made
in more complex flows to study compressible turbulence (i.e. boundary layers,
and shock boundary layer interactions) and flowfields which are currently being
funded at Rutgers by other agencies (a transverse jet in a supersonic cross
flow, weakly ionized supersonic flows, and the gas dynamics associated with
thermal spray processes). Collaborations have been set up with industry
(Innovative Scientific Solutions Inc. and Spectra Physics) and government
laboratories (i.e. Wright Laboratory) for this research plan.