* 9733275
* CAREER:  Building a Bridge Between Research and Education in Materials Chemistry: A Career Development Plan
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1998,06/04/1999
* Songping Huang, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/04/1999
* USD 140,000.00

9733275 Huang This proposal aims to develop solid-state synthetic routes to a
new generation of borophosphate-based second-order nonlinear optical (NLO)
materials with superior optical properties (large NLO coefficients, high optical
damage thresholds, lower absorption cutoffs, and phase matching at shorter
wavelengths). Crystal engineering strategies will be used to produce novel
supramolecular NLO host-guest assemblies derived from metal- organic
coordination polymers and NLO-active organic chromophores. Because of the
robust, infinite structures provided by polymeric inorganic host matrices, such
materials may have enhanced mechanical, thermal and temporal stability, critical
properties that have hampered commercial application of many otherwise promising
organic molecule-based NLO materials. The education plan is centered on
developing a coherent program for offering education and technical training in
materials chemistry at both undergraduate and graduate levels, and on increasing
Hispanic minority participation in chemistry. A materials chemistry laboratory
course for upper-level undergraduate students will focus on strengthening the
teaching of solid-state and materials chemistry for chemistry majors, thus
better preparing the them for tomorrow's job market. Talented Hispanic students
at the undergraduate level will be provided research experience and encouraged
to pursue research careers in materials chemistry. This plan is anticipated to
have a direct impact on the nation by increasing the number of highly trained
and well-qualified Hispanic scientists. %%% The proposed research is aimed at
synthesizing novel nonlinear optical (NLO) materials for applications such as
optical switching, information storage, and laser frequency conversion related
to technology areas that include telecommunications and computing. Furthermore,
the design and synthesis of new classes of optical materials may lead not only
to further technological innovations in these areas, but also to totally new
technologies. This integrated research and education program will educate and
train students to better compete for job opportunities in these fast-breaking
areas. ***