* 9733100
* CAREER:  Turning Automation into a Team Player:  The        Development of Multisensory and Graded Feedback for Highly  Automated (Flight Deck) Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1998,09/29/1999
* Nadine Sarter, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/29/1999
* USD 161,416.00

The introduction of modern technology to a variety of complex dynamic domains
has led to benefits such as an increased precision and efficiency of operations.
These benefits appear to accrue primarily in situations where automated systems
perform tasks on their own, i.e., without operator involvement. In other
situations, where humans and machines need to cooperate and coordinate their
activities, unexpected difficulties with human- automation communication are
being encountered. The short-term goal of this combined research and education
program is to improve the communicative skills of modern (flight deck)
technology through the development of new forms of multimodal and graded
automation feedback. Its long-term objective is to prevent the (re)creation of
similar or new problems with human-machine collaboration by training students at
the University of Illinois in a practice-oriented approach to system design
where the constraints of the human, the machine agent, and the task environment
are identified and integrated early on. This project serves to advance our
understanding of mechanisms and strategies mediating successful and poor human-
automation coordination. It emphasizes the importance of combining a reactive
and a proactive approach to reducing difficulties with human-machine
communication. And it contributes to the important goal of promoting the
transfer of basic research results to applied system design.