* 9733276
* CAREER:  Environmental Heterogeneity, Population Structure, and Larval Life History Evolution of Rana sylvatica
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Robert Newman, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2003
* USD 320,000.00

Newman 9733276 This project is based on two premises: 1) that unique insights
into fundamental ecological and evolutionary processes can be gained by
integrating molecular genetic techniques and ecological field studies; and 2)
that science and environmental education and training at all levels (grade
school through graduate school) can be integrated synergistically with high
quality basic research. The focus of the research is the impact of environmental
variation on adaptive evolution and population growth. The range of variation
experienced by a population depends on geographic and temporal patterns of
variation, relative to movement patterns of individuals. Over an extended period
of time, many factors determine whether populations adapt to a wide range of
conditions or to a narrower range of local conditions. These factors include the
distribution of populations, relative survival and reproductive success in
different locations, and interbreeding among these locations. These factors also
help determine the extent to which local abundance of populations is affected by
environmental variation over a wide area, or is more a function of local habitat
quality. These questions are fundamental to our understanding of basic
population processes, and are critical to more applied concerns such as
conservation of species in fragmented habitats or altered landscapes. The
research will focus on wood frogs of the northern Great Plains. This region
contains numerous, diverse wetlands, or prairie potholes, that support a variety
of wildlife. Prairie pothole wetlands vary in several environmental factors,
such as pond duration and water chemistry, that affect survival and
reproduction. The surrounding landscape is equally diverse, including fragments
of relatively undisturbed grassland, more disturbed grazing land, and large
tracts of intensively managed agricultural land. The research will quantify
environmental variation in the wetlands used for breeding, variation in tadpole
growth and dev elopment as a function of habitat characteristics, and dispersal
of frogs between wetlands. In order to determine long-term patterns of
interbreeding, DNA "markers" will be used to quantify patterns of genetic
similarity of frogs from different wetlands. The project also offers an
excellent opportunity to integrate research with scientific training and
environmental education at all educational levels. The integration of research
and education is a natural one; the best way to learn ecology and to gain an
appreciation for the process of knowledge generation and application is to be
involved in research. Students with exposure to research will be better prepared
for higher education and potential careers in science, and just as importantly,
they will become more insightful citizens. Each year during the spring semester,
two graduate students, two undergraduates and two students from a local high
school will participate in a course in wetland ecology. The course will be
followed by a summer of research activities. During the fall semester students
will prepare written reports and develop presentations on wetland ecology that
they will deliver to K-12 science classes in their school district. The
University of North Dakota Biology Department curriculum--as well as science
education in rural North Dakota--will both be enhanced, thus benefiting the next
generation of farmers and rural landowners.