* 9733343
* CAREER: Studies in Hadronic Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Jose Goity, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 05/31/2004
* USD 249,968.00

The proposed research and education projects will be carried out under the
support of a CAREER award for a period of five years. The research component is
aimed at the theoretical study of hadronic structure and dynamics at low and
intermediate energies. In these domains of energy the fundamental theory of the
strong interactions Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is in a non-perturbative regime
making the use of effective theories necessary. Among the effective theories to
be utilized are Chiral Perturbation Theory (ChPT), the 1/N expansion in QCD, and
in some cases dispersion relations. The topics of research include: a) low and
intermediate energy spin structure of the nucleon, in particular the study of
the generalized Gerasimov-Drell- Hearn sum rule that will be tested
experimentally at TJNAF; b) tests of chiral symmetry and applications of ChPT to
mesons and baryons (K-meson decays, Goldberger-Treiman discrepancy, weak decays
of baryons, decays of heavy mesons involving emission of low energy pions or K
mesons, etc.); c) studies involving the expansion in the inverse of the number
of colors in QCD (1/N expansion), in particular applications to (excited)
baryons with the aim at understanding more clearly the pattern of masses,
mixings and decay widths; d) further study possible improvements to the
mentioned effective theory methods. The research component addresses topics of
high current experimental significance at facilities such as TJNAF, and close
contact and collaboration with experimentalists at TJNAF will be pursued. The
education component is aimed at improving the teaching of graduate courses in
Physics. In particular, the improvement of material presentation in the class
through the use of computers. Computers will be used to present graphical
demonstrations in class with the aim at enhancing the intuitive understanding of
the subject discussed. Material for use in such demonstrations will be developed
first in a Quantum Theory course and later in others, and efforts will be made
to make such material widely available to other teachers. Students will be
encouraged to actively participate in this initiative. The impact of this
education component is expected to be very significant in the further
development of the young Ph.D. program in Physics at Hampton University.