* 9733400
* CAREER: Development of Nanofabrication Techniques for       Self-assembled Monolayer Based Biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Gang-Yu Liu, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2002
* USD 275,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the use of new technology
developed by Professor Liu and her students at Wayne State University to very
precisely modify surfaces incorporating self-assembled monolayers. Modification
methods are being developed to allow the study of biorecognition processes and
to use their specificity to develop new types of chemical sensors on very small
(sub-micrometer) scales. This CAREER research project also involves the
introduction of new surface chemistry courses and laboratories into the graduate
and undergraduate curricula. Participation in a novel `Smart Sensor and
Intelligent Devices`course by Professor Liu and her students will enhance the
possible outcomes of this sort of interdisciplinary research. The integration of
advanced materials processing methods and the expanding field of molecular
biology has broadranging implications. Professor Liu and her students at Wayne
State University have developed microfabrication methodologies which hold great
promise for the assembly of devices which allow for the study of biorecognition
processes which can be further utilized for the creation of sensor devices of
extremely high specificity. The outcome of such research can be envisioned to
extend to a new generation of environmental and biological monitors. Professor
Liu extends the interdisciplinary nature of sensor development program to the
graduate and undergraduate curricula to introduce her students to new ways of
thinking about chemical research.