* 9733441
* Energetic Consequences of Feeding in a Patchy Environment:  Possible Limitations to Jellyfish Production in Coastal     Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* William Graham, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Elthon
* 06/30/2004
* USD 390,028.00

9733441 Graham The research component of this CAREER award focuses on large
jellyfish as voracious predators of zooplankton, larval fish and fish eggs in
the northern Gulf of Mexico. Physiological limitations of jellyfish production
rates are set by energetic balance as individual medusae encounter, and move
between, patches of concentrated food. The aim of this research is to understand
possible limitations to jellyfish production in coastal ecosystems in the
context of prey productivity, prey patch distribution, and medusa behavior. To
accomplish this, an individual-based energetics model will be constructed for
key jellyfish species of the northern Gulf of Mexico (primarliy Aurelia aurita).
The model will incorporate in situ-determined behavior as an adaptation for
enhanced foraging, and laboratory and field-based characterization of the
jellyfish energetics. A series of planned research cruises in the northern Gulf
of Mexico will be used to refine the energetic parameters under natural feeding
conditions and to test the model's predictive capacity. Educational and outreach
components of this CAREER program are broadly targeted at all ages. These
include a `K-12 Discovery' component focussing on high-school teacher training
in the scientific process, a minority undergraduate summer mentoring program,
and a public outreach display at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab's new educational
`Estuarium' illustrating the role of gelatinous zooplankton in structuring
marine food webs.