* 9733234
* CAREER: Aerosol Droplet Combustion Synthesis of             Nonequilibrium Nanoscale Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Joseph Helble, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/2002
* USD 225,313.00

Abstract - Helble This is a fundamental exploration of combustion aerosol
synthesis to generate chemically complex nanoscale ceramic materials. In
combustion aerosol synthesis, ceramic precursors are dissolved or dispersed in a
combustible carrier; when this carrier is atomized into a high-temperature
flame, each droplet can become a "microreactor" for nanoscale ceramic particle
synthesis. The high temperature, exothermic droplet combustion reactions enable
the generation of chemically complex, crystalline materials without need for
further heat treatment. The first material to be examined is yttria-stabilized
zirconia because of its applicability as a thermal barrier, coating, catalyst,
and catalyst support. A range of yttria compositions is considered to determine
whether the nanoscale material, with its high concentration of surface atoms,
shows the same transitions in phase behavior as does conventional stabilized
zirconia. Synthesis issues explored include the control of reacting aerosol
droplet size, particle formation through the condensed-phase reaction and
nucleation within the reacting droplet, and particle formation through the
vaporization and subsequent condensation of ceramic compound vapors. Key issues
are the ability to minimize agglomeration of nanoscale particles and the ability
to control their chemical composition. Advanced ceramic materials consolidated
from nanometer-scale ceramics have the potential to provide improved mechanical,
optical, and electronic behavior over their larger-grained counterparts.
Potential applications include barrier coatings, catalysts, structural
materials, and cores of superconducting wires. Educational efforts include
development of an aerosol science course using interactive learning and, in
conjunction with the Boston Museum of Science, development of a hands-on
interpretive module addressing the nanoscale world as a realm between atomic and
macroscopic regimes.