* 9733272
* PECASE: Seismic Hazard Mitigation: Innovative Directions in Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2005
* Shirley Dyke, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 11/30/2005
* USD 565,000.00

9733272 S. Dyke The focus of this CAREER research project is to develop
innovative and implementable techniques for mitigating the devasting
consequences of severe seismic events. In particular, the work will concentrate
on the implementation of supplemental damping devices. Semi-active devices are
considered here because they address most of the concerns brought forth about
structural control, and are expected to advance the near-term acceptance of this
technology. Specifically, magnetorheological (MR) dampers are new semi- active
devices that are particularly suitable for civil engineering applications. They
offer mechanical simplicity, low power requirements, environmental robustness,
and demonstrated potential for developing forces sufficient for full-scale
applications at a reasonable cost, and can be viewed as fail-safe in that they
become passive dampers should control hardware malfunction. A number of
important issues pertinent to practical implementation will be examined.
Ultimately, guidelines which can be used by design engineers to employ these
devices in new construction and retrofit applications will be developed. The
control of both linear and nonlinear structures, and the use of single and
multiple control devices will be considered, The performance of the MR damper
will be compared to the active and passive systems for a wide array of
excitation types and amplitudes. Analytical and experimental investigations will
be carried out in parallel, using the facilities available in the earthquake
engineering laboratory at Washington University which has recently funded the
construction of this experimental facility. The primary objective of the
educational program to provide students the Department of Civil Engineering with
an understanding that structures are dynamic systems, and for the implications
of this in their analysis and design, At the undergraduate level, an
experimental facility will be provided in which students can study the response
of structures to dynamic loads, incorporating, "hands-on" experiments into the
cirrocumuli to introduce basic concepts in structural dynamics and providing
opportunities will be created for students to participate in research projects
in the laboratory. At the graduate level, a new course in experimental methods
for dynamic testing will be developed to enable providing students to
participate in state-of-the- art research and integrating experiments into the
advanced structural dynamics course. Throughout the program, n-line exercises
will be developed to assist students innprparing for the laboratories. The
educational and research components of the project are designed to complement
and enhance each other. The laboratory facilities, and experiments developed
therein will provide the necessary tools to facilitate the cirrocumuli
development. This integrated approach will provide students with an
understanding of the dynamic nature of structures through illustrative
experiments and state-of- the-art research projects. Furthermore, students at
all levels will be introduced to this emerging technology.