* 9733218
* CAREER: Charge-Transfer-to-Solvent Transitions: Experimentaland Theoretical Studies of the Simplest Charge Transfer     Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2004
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 02/29/2004
* USD 417,240.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Benjamin J. Schwartz of the
University of California in Los Angeles in his transient absorption studies of
solvent effects on chemical reaction dynamics. Prof. Schwartz will carry out
femtosecond experiments in order to examine the dynamics following excitation of
the charge-transfer-to-solvent states (CTTS) of solvated halide anions. These
experiments will test the predictions of quantum non-adiabatic molecular
dynamics simulations, thus providing detailed information about the role of the
solvent in this simplest of charge transfer reactions. Parallel experiments and
simulations studying the CTTS transitions of novel solvated alkali metal anions
will provide further insight into the role of the solute electronic structure in
controlling charge transfer reactions. The goal of these studies is to identify
the solvent motions responsible for both the solvation and non-radiative
relaxation of solute electronic excited states in solution. The results will
help to provide a complete molecular picture of how the interplay between
solvation dynamics and non-adiabatic relaxation controls chemical reactivity in
solution. The education plan of this CAREER award emphasizes the strengthening
of critical thinking skills in students. In addition, a new curriculum focusing
on condensed-phase physical chemistry will be introduced. The science targeted
in these studies, electron transfer and solvent reactions, is fundamental in the
area of chemical dynamics, and the novel combined theoretical and experimental
tools that will be brought to bear will provide unprecedented detail and
scrutiny. Given the ubiquity of these processes in nature and in all condensed
phase processes, these studies will have far reaching implications.