* 9733028
* CAREER:  Structure-Topology-Property Correlations in Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2002
* Pulickel Ajayan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2002
* USD 348,539.00

9733028 Ajayan The goals defined in this Faculty Early Career Development
project are aimed at developing the knowledge base that is needed to predict
physical properties of carbon nanotubes as a function of dimensions, structure,
defects, and dopants. In-depth systematic experiments are planned to study in
the following: 1) the effect of topological defects on structural symmetry,
electronic structure and reactivity of nanotubes, 2) the effects of defect
mobility in nanotubes during high temperature annealing and electron
irradiation, 3) the effect of substitutional boron doping on the structure,
topology and properties of nanotubes, 4) the effect of structure and topology of
nanotubes on wetting and the formation of interfaces in nanotube-based
nanocomposites, and 5) correlation of the information obtained on the structure
and topology of carbon nanotubes to transport measurements. The studies will be
carried out by spatially resolved characterization and measurement techniques on
pure single-shell nanotubes, pure multi-shell nanotubes, doped nanotubes and
nanotube-oxide layer composites. State of the art microscopy, spectroscopy, and
four probe conductivity measurements will be done on isolated nanotubes for
correlating structure, topology and properties. Some of the measurements will be
pursued through industrial and international collaborations. The main thrust of
the educational plan is to use innovative teaching methods to prepare students
for a modern and technologically advanced society. Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute is at the forefront of undergraduate educational reform and in its
commitment to introduce flexibility and innovation into the curriculum, most of
the courses are being recast into interactive formats. The proposed educational
activities reflect the synergy between the long term educational goals of the PI
and the institutional a pproach to improving educational methods. A wide range
of activities are planned achieve the educational goals: some of these include
developing computer based structural models, demonstrations, short simulations
and effective team problems for interactive courses, use of multi-media
facilities in the classroom, developing modules for the nanomaterials course,
involving undergraduates in key research projects, arranging formal and informal
seminars to increase science awareness, encouraging industrial stays and
international exchanges for students and promoting materials science and
engineering as a viable career opportunity among secondary school students in
the area. %%% The basic aim of this proposal is to study structure-topology-
property correlation in carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes represent the most
striking example of how carbon structures can be tailored to exhibit a variety
of useful properties by changing local symmetries and topology. Only six years
after their discovery, the new knowledge available in the field indicates that
nanotubes can be used in a range of applications, for example as nanoprobes and
nanoscale electronic devices. It is expected that the comprehensive study
proposed here will lead to better utilization of nanotube properties leading to
the development of unique functional nanostructures. In addition, the PI will
use innovative teaching methods to prepare students for a modern and
technologically advanced society. ***