* 9733949
* CAREER: Topological Excitations in Two Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Sheena Murphy, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 325,000.00

Murphy 9733949 This is a CAREER Award to a female scientist. The research deals
with special types of electronic excitations which occur as spatially extended
quasiparticles in two-dimensional electron systems. It is often advantageous to
sort such excitations according to whether or not they have a non-zero winding
number or twist. Excitations possessing a twist are known as "topological
excitations" and include solitons, vortices, domain walls and dislocations. They
cannot decay for the same reason you cannot untwist a phone cord without picking
up the receiver: the excitation or winding can only be removed by a large scale
reorientation of the entire system. This translates to long term stability as
evidenced by the use of a topological excitation known as a soliton as a signal
carrier in transcontinental fiber links. The concept of a topological excitation
has proven exceptionally useful in physics: Rather than attempt to describe the
behavior of the entire system, a more manageable approach focuses on just the
stable configuration of these excitations. Thus the tornadoes in a storm, the
dislocations in a crystal or the domain walls in a ferromagnet are studied to
obtain a great deal about the system at hand. This proposal details an extensive
study of the topological excitations occurring on two-dimensional electronic
systems in a magnetic field. %%% This is CAREER Award to a female scientist. The
research deals with special types of electronic excitations known as topological
excitations. These excited electron states possess a kind of twist, like a
screw. Previously studied as mathematical oddities, they have recently been
found in nature in two-dimensional semiconductor structures, known as Quantum
Hall systems. These stable excitations are more than a new language for many
body electron interactions, they are real spatially extended quasiparticles. The
experimental goal of this proposal is a greater understanding of the role of
topological excitations in two dimensional electronic systems. The second focus
of this CAREER proposal is the adaptation of novel instructional approaches,
commonly used at the introductory level, to upper level physics courses. While
introductory physics education has benefited from these new techniques, there
has been little application to more advanced undergraduate material. The plan is
to introduce concept based questions in conjunction with group learning
techniques into the more advanced curricula and to facilitate this introduction
by the development of a concept question website.