* 9733746
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigation of Nucleoside             Hypermodification in tRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Dirk Iwata-Reuyl, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2003
* USD 422,750.00

9733746 Iwata-Reuyl TECHNICAL Modification of transfer RNA (tRNA) is fundamental
to expression of the genetic code, its apparent importance is implied by both
the phylogenetic conservation and the rich structural diversity. This study is
designed to understand the biosynthesis of queuosine, a modified nucleoside
ubiquitous throughout the Bacteria and Eukarya. Queuosine possesses an unusual
7-deazaguanosine core structure, occurs specifically at the wobble position of
tRNAıs coding for asparagine, aspartic acid, histidine, and tyrosine, which
suggests a role in modulating translational fidelity and/or efficiency. More
specifically, the molecular mechanism involving the enzyme
S-adenosylmethionine:tRNA ribosyltransferase-isomerase (QueA), which catalyzes
the penultimate step of queuosine biosynthesis and the transfer of ribosyl from
the co-factor S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) to a queuosine-tRNA precursor is
studied. The experiments include studies of purified recombinant enzymes for
their regio- and stereochemistry and reaction kinetics with the natural
substrates and analogs, and do structural studies. The biosynthesis and function
of the 7-deazaguanosine class of hypermodified tRNA nucleosides, such as
glycosylated derivatives of queuosine and the hypermodified nucleoside
archaeosine is also studied. The educational focus is placed on encouraging the
participation of undergraduates in biochemical research through an honors
research thesis program, which is a pilot program with an attempt to replace and
to revitalize the current departmental honors degree requirements. 2. NON-
TECHNICAL. Molecular interactions involving transfer RNA (tRNA) are fundamental
to expression of the genetic code. It is in the correct attachment of amino
acids to tRNA, and subsequent protein synthesis through codon-anticodon pairing
of the messenger RNA (mRNA) with the tRNA, that the physical manifestation of
genetic information as protein is realized. A characteristic structural feature
of tRNA is the presen ce of an astonishing diversity of modified nucleosides,
many of which are highly conserved among disparate organisms. Modification can
range from relatively minor changes to complex hypermodification, which results
in radical structural changes to the nucleoside and requires multiple steps to
complete. This study constitutes a broad set of experimental approaches designed
to develop a detailed understanding of a critical step in the biosynthesis of
the hypermodified nucleoside queuosine, which occurs exclusively at the first
position (wobble position) of the anticodon in tRNAıs coding for the amino acids
asparagine, aspartic acid, histidine, and tyrosine. Its specific location in the
anticodon suggests a role in modulating the fidelity and/or efficiency of
protein synthesis, for which further experimental support is needed. The
educational component focuses on increasing the participation of undergraduates
in biochemical research through the design and implementation of an honors
research thesis program, which serves to test the feasibility of instituting a
general requirement, in lieu of the current departmental honors degree, for the
Chemistry and Biochemistry degrees offered by the department.