* 9733552
* CAREER: Comparative Structural Enzymology: Catalytic        Mechanisms of Thiamin Diphosphate-Dependent Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/29/2004
* Miriam Hasson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/29/2004
* USD 475,000.00

9733552 Hasson This project focuses on the study of the structure and mechanism
of benzoylformate decarboxylase (BFD), in the context of the homologous thiamin
diphosphate (TDP)-dependent enzyme family. This family has salient features that
predispose it to become a paradigm for comparative structural enzymology. The
overall architecture of BFD closely resembles that of other family members, and
cofactor and metal-binding residues are extremely well conserved. Surprisingly,
none of the active-site residues that are not directly bound to cofactor are
conserved, even between BFD and pyruvate decarboxylase. The results of this
comparison represents a challenge to the usual expectations and understanding of
enzyme evolution, and suggests that cofactor chemistry and the nature of the
reaction intermediates have been dominant forces in the evolution of TDP-
dependent enzymes. To appreciate the full implications of these preliminary
studies, the mechanisms of BFD and related enzymes must be understood in detail.
The goals of this project will be attained through a combination of X-ray
crystallographic structure determination, site-directed mutagenesis, kinetic
analysis, and protein chemistry. The objectives are (i) to determine the roles
of various active-site residues of BFD; (ii) to probe the catalytic mechanism
through the characterization of inhibitors; (iii) to understand the assembly of
the mandelate pathway in a multienzyme complex; and (iv) to develop a hands-on
computer laboratory course for undergraduates that can be implemented widely at
other institutions, so that a generation of students can be given an
appreciation of the fascination of structural enzymology and the tools to use
publicly available structural information to inform their future careers. The
beauty and power of an enzyme lies in the ability of the structure of its
polypeptide chain to perform a particular function. Appreciation of these
qualities in an enzyme must be accompanied by an understanding of how struct ure
and function relate. Such an understanding can often be augmented by study of
how enzymes have varied during evolution. This proposal aims to cultivate a
basic understanding of enzyme structure in undergraduates, and to perform a
study of a specific enzyme (benzoylformate decarboxylase) in the context of the
family of enzymes to which it belongs, in order to increase understanding of
cofactor-dependent catalysis and evolution of catalytic activity.