* 9733595
* CAREER: Imaging and Visualization Technologies for          Geotechnical/Geoenvironmental Site Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Scott Raschke, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2002
* USD 210,000.00

This CAREER award supports research leading to the development of a new
methodology and modeling techniques for performing geotechnical and geo-
environmental site characterizations. The Principal Investigator will build on
the previously developed Vision Cone Penetrometer (VisCPT) system capable of
capturing and recording continuous video images of the subsurface materials in
real time. This research will develop a suite of image processing and analysis
programs for both qualitative visualization (including virtual specimens shown
at low and high magnification) and quantitative characterization (including
development of a Soil Image Classification system that can identify subsurface
stratigraphic units difficult to detect using existing methods). Sophisticated
image processing and analysis algorithms, such as texture classification and
segmentation using wavelets, co-occurrence approaches, etc., will be applied for
soil characterization. A three-dimensional `Geoscience Modeling Environment`
will be created for visualizing site data obtained from various measurements.
The educational objective for this project is to develop a curriculum that
emphasizes the importance of site investigation and characterization for
engineering problems. A new, flexible course module, including integrated
computer methods, on site characterization will be developed that can be adapted
for training students at various educational levels. Development of novel,
stimulating, educational experiences, which are targeted to students at
different stages of intellectual development, is essential to attracting
underrepresented groups into science and engineering. The theory and application
of the computer programs will be examined through analysis of several real or
simulated case histories. The impact of uncertainty on design and analysis will
be stressed.