* 9733876
* CAREER: Mixing and Segregation in Single and Multi-         Component Assemblies of Granular Material Subject to        Vibration
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1999,10/31/1998
* Carl Wassgren, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 10/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

CTS-9733876 Wassgren, Carl Clemson University Abstract The objective is to
investigate mixing and segregation of deep beds of single- and multi-component
particulate mixtures in response to vertical and horizontal vibrations with
sinusoidal and random oscillation profiles. The work will consist of experiments
utilizing high speed video and digital image processing for determining particle
velocity fields and mixing concentrations, three dimensional discrete element
computer simulations for investigating the effects of various parameters and
environments, and analytical methods based on geometric arguments and kinetic
theory for modeling the material response. The proposed educational program will
include the development of a course concerning particle science and technology.
Involvement of local industries and other universities will be a key aspect of
the course. Additionally, local companies concerned with particulate engineering
issues will be encouraged to participate in the existing senior level "capstone"
design course. Java-based computer visualization tools for presenting
fundamental engineering concepts will also be developed as part of the
educational program. These tools will result in more efficient class room
instruction and better student comprehension of critical concepts. World Wide
Web pages will also be developed to supplement in-class topics. If successful,
the results of the proposed research will provide a better understanding and
education of the fundamental mechanisms involved in mixing and segregation
processes and may lead to improved designs for transporting, blending, and
separating materials in industries handling particulates. ***