* 9733121
* CAREER: Development of Emitter-Controlled Thyristors for    Power Electronics Building Block (PEBB)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Alex Huang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 04/30/2003
* USD 285,000.00

9733121&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor power devices form the heart of
power electronics and are very important to the U.S. economy. More specifically,
they form the heart of the Power Electronics Building Block (PEBB). The
objective of the proposed research is to develop a new class of power
semiconductor devices, the emitter-controlled thyristors (ECTs) for the
PEBB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken in developing the ECTs will
include rigorous numerical modeling and analysis, as well as experimental
verification through layout design and clean room fabrication. Optimization of
the ECT will also be done to assess its potential as a commercially viable power
industry (Harris Semiconductor) and other universities
(Stanford).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of an education plan
are : 1) to teach students the fundamental principles of semiconductor devices
and their applications; 2) to develop a novel and innovative Web-based Virtual
Technology CAD (VTCAD) system for semiconductor device education and research;
3) to renovate and enhance existing courses with new materials directly from
research covering advanced power semiconductor devices and power integrated
circuits; 4) to continuously improve teaching skills by attending advanced
teaching short courses or seminars, and by consulting students and peers on a
regular basis; 5) to supervise graduate students and reach out to society. The
significance of planned educational activities is to provide graduates who are
not limited to a specific job function, but who are equipped to learn new
intellectual skills and knowledge and to make technological innovations that
will serve our societal and national goals. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;