* 9733627
* CAREER: Data Rectification, Process Monitoring, Fault       Diagnosis, and their Integration by Multiscale Empirical    Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2004
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract - Bakshi - 9733627 Efficient operation of chemical processes rely on
the extraction of information about the process from measured data, the
integration of various operations tasks, and engineers trained in advanced
techniques for process operation. Efficient operation also requires engineers
trained in topics such as advanced process operation, statistical and stochastic
modeling methods, communications and teamwork skills, and the capability to view
a chemical process as an integrated system. This CAREER award project strives to
improve the efficiency of chemical process operations by integrated research and
educational activities directed towards achieving these goals. A new and general
multiscale method will be developed for extracting empirical models from
measured data. This method will transform any linear or nonlinear empirical
modeling method to a multiscale modeling method. The multiscale modeling will be
used to develop multiscale data rectification, process monitoring, and fault
diagnosis techniques that perform better than existing methods. The multiscale
approach will allow efficient integration of these operations tasks, leading to
better utilization of measured data, more efficient operation, and efficient
computation for large-scale operation. These methods will be applied to several
practical examples in collaboration with various industries and federal
laboratories. This research represents an effort to develop a general approach
for multiscale empirical modeling, most existing uses of wavelets are for
multiscale analysis or stochastic modeling. The results of the research will be
disseminated via existing and new courses in the Chemical Engineering Department
at Ohio State University, in industrial short courses, and may be included in a
textbook on process operation. New in-class and laboratory experiments and web-
based resources will be developed for improved education in process operation.
Ways of improving students' communication and teamwork sk ills will also be
studied. Modules will be developed to integrate the principles of process design
and simulation across the curriculum, and to train chemical engineers to take a
systems view of a process, as opposed to a unit operations view. Abstract -
Watkins - 9734177 The demands of present and future microelectronic and
optoelectronic device fabrication place stringent requirements on metal
deposition schemes. These include high film purity, low temperatures and rapid,
controllable deposition rates. The PI postulates that these objectives can be
met via Chemical Fluid Deposition (CFD), a new approach to metal deposition that
involves the chemical or thermal reduction of soluble organometallic compounds
in supercritical carbon dioxide at low temperatures (40-80oC) to yield
continuous films on inorganic or organic substrates. CFD exploits the unique,
and adjustable, physicochemical properties of SCF solvents, which lie
intermediate to those of liquids and gases, to circumvent the limitations of
both vapor and liquid phase techniques. In CFD, precursor transport and
reduction occurs in solution at significantly lower temperatures and higher
reagent concentrations than those of vapor phase techniques such as chemical
vapor deposition (CVD). While CFD is a solution-based process, the "gas-like"
transport properties of the SCF and its miscibility with gaseous reducing agents
such as hydrogen, render the process unencumbered by issues of poor mass
transfer and poor deposition rates associated with liquid phase reductions.
Preliminary experiments demonstrate that high-purity, continuous platinum and
palladium films can be deposited from SCF solution onto silicon wafers and other
inorganic substrates at temperatures up to 170oC below those employed in CVD.
The research program will focus on the deposition of thin films from carbon
dioxide solution by the hydrogenolysis of dimethylcyclooctadine platinum (II)
and the deposition of copper films by reduction of copper(II)bis
(hexafluoroacetylacetone) and
copper(II)bis(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate). The precursors were
chosen to facilitate a direct comparison of film quality and reduction kinetics
in CFD to those of existing techniques and the potential utility of the metal
deposits in microelectronics copper and catalytic platinum devices. The
educational portion of the work are to: (1) train graduate students who will
work at the interface of engineering and materials chemistry, (2) provide
undergraduates with opportunities for research experience, (3) develop a two-
course series in materials processing that addresses the interests of students
and is reinforced by the expanding materials research efforts in the Department
of Chemical Engineering, and (4) incorporate research problems and active
learning principles into the classroom and assist in the implementation of
interactive teaching tools across the curriculum.