* 9733068
* CAREER: X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy of Thermal Behavior   in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Brian Grady, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2003
* USD 351,000.00

9733068 Grady This EPSCoR co-funded CAREER award will use primarily X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) to examine responses in dynamics and structure at
the glass transition. The glass transition is one of the most important
phenomena in polymeric materials. The fundamental microscopic structural changes
that occur with the glass transition are not well understood, and perhaps even
more importantly, the fundamental reason that Tg occurs at the specific
temperature it does for each polymer is not understood. Other techniques,
including NMR spectroscopy and neutron scattering, show that local structural
and dynamic changes occur at the glass transition. XAS will be used to obtain
quantitative and precise structural information. Preliminary data show that XAS
can be used to examine local changes at the glass transition. This proposal
describes a broad range of experimentation which will examine the important
changes occurring at the local level as a polymer progresses through its glass
transition. These experiments will enable an evaluation of a Lindemann-type
approach to the glass transition, an approach suggested by others and explored
in this proposal. %%% The educational component of this project will involve the
Minority Engineering Program (MEP). Almost 500 undergraduates at the University
of Oklahoma are members of the MEP, which is limited to the historically
underrepresented Black, Hispanic and American Indian ethnic minorities. One-on-
one interactions between faculty and students are one of the keys to recruiting
and retaining these students. The PI's association with the MEP program includes
all facets of the undergraduate experience, from the recruiting process to
graduation. It will involve travel to primarily minority high schools and talks
designed to help with the recruiting process. ***