* 9733086
* CAREER:  Adsorption and Transport in Heterogeneous Porous  Media
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,10/31/2001
* Christian Lastoskie, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9733086 Lastoskie/Michigan State U. Physical and chemical
heterogeneities in porous media strongly impact the thermodynamic and transport
properties of fluids confined within porous materials. To fully exploit
engineering processes which involve porous materials, the effects of
heterogeneity on the properties of fluids in porous media must be more
completely understood. In this CAREER plan, a set of research activities will be
undertaken to develop statistical thermodynamic methods for characterizing fluid
properties in heterogeneous porous media. Three thematic areas will be
investigated: (1) sorption and diffusion of fluids in porous solids; (2)
chemical dilution in heterogeneous media; and (3) enhancement of cellular
transport in porous media via chemotaxis. Adsorbed-fluid phase equilibria and
diffusive transport in microporous solids will be investigated using density
functional theory and molecular dynamics simulation, respectively. These models
will be used to interpret sorptometer measurements of gas uptake on microporous
adsorbents and soils. A statistical thermodynamic model of mixing, the spatial
variability index, will be used to model the dilution of solutes transported
through disordered porous media. The predictions of the mixing model will be
compared with the results of tracer experiments in packed columns and with field
tests at aquifer injection wells. Cellular transport through porous media will
be examined using cellular dynamics computer simulation. Validation of the
cellular dynamics transport models will be obtained from diffusion gradient
chamber visualizations of cell migration through porous media. The three
research thrust areas have a strong relevance to environmental concerns
regarding the fate, transport and bioremediation of contaminants in soils and
groundwater. The educational component of the CAREER plan will thus be directed
toward application of chemical engineering thermodynamics to environmental
engineering issues, through the d evelopment of an air pollution course and
environmental design problems in undergraduate chemical engineering courses.
Research experiences for undergraduates will also be provided. The thermodynamic
and transport properties of fluids and cells confined within porous media
originate from fundamental interactions between fluid-phase species and porous
solid surfaces. As such, they are strongly impacted by the heterogeneity of the
porous material. Traditional empirical thermodynamic correlations do not provide
detailed insight into the relationship between the structure of the porous solid
and the properties of the adsorbed fluid. Statistical thermodynamics and
molecular simulation, by contrast, are well suited to examining fluid phase
equilibria and transport coefficients in confined porous media. Similarly, the
migration of bacterial species in the aqueous phase has been studied extensively
by both theoretical and experimental means, whereas bacterial migration in
disordered porous media is poorly understood. Cellular dynamics simulation
provides a direct means of predicting cell transport coefficients in highly
heterogeneous environments that are otherwise difficult to analyze
experimentally. Molecular modeling methods have gained widespread acceptance in
research applications in the core areas of chemical engineering, such as gas
separations, supercritical reactions and polymer processing. The benefits of
molecular simulation can soon be brought to bear upon environmental process
modeling of contaminant transport in natural systems, once the additional
heterogeneity present in "natural" porous materials (e.g. soils) is properly
accounted for. There is much controversy currently surrounding the fate of
groundwater and soil contaminants in natural systems and the processes by which
pollutants are retained in the subsurface. The knowledge gained from molecular
simulations of contaminant transport in porous media will address these
uncertainties. Insufficient mass transfer of inject ed nutrients and inadequate
distribution of microbial agents are two of the principal causes of failure in
attempts to restore contaminated aquifers via in situ bioremediation. Studies of
chemical dilution in porous media will suggest improved design strategies for
delivery of injected nutrients at bioremediation sites. Bacterial motility is a
major, often the dominant, component of overall cellular transport in porous
aquifer media, and there is evidence that this motility can be strongly
attenuated by chemotactic response to chemical gradients in acetate and other
substances. Cellular dynamics simulations of bacterial transport in porous media
will guide the engineering of chemotaxis into bioremediation systems.