* 9733018
* CAREER:  RUI: Temporal/Multi-dimensional Reasoning with     Imprecision and Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/1998,11/30/2001
* Debasis Mitra, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Lesk
* 11/30/2001
* USD 150,068.00

The goal of this project is to develop algorithms for the purpose of reasoning
with time and other higher dimensional space. Reasoning with time and three-
dimensional space is ubiquitous in our daily life as well as in computer
systems. For example, a detective would often check the temporal consistency of
an alibi of some suspects. A system for packing boxes in a container would
reason with space. For about the last two decades some researchers within the
artificial intelligence community have been engaged in studying this area. The
PI has been involved in critically analyzing some of the existing algorithms and
developing new efficient algorithms for temporal reasoning. A particular area of
interest in this project is on studying temporal reasoning under uncertainty. If
the input information is not completely known and is ringed with uncertainty,
then how does it affect the reasoning process? How is it possible to determine
possible causes for events from the available temporal information? These are
the types of questions, which are being investigated in this work. Viewing
temporal (or higher dimensional) information as constraints, an algorithmic
approach for constraint propagation is being employed in the research. A deeper
understanding of dimension related reasoning and more efficient mechanisms for
doing it computationally will emerge from this project.
http://stallion.jsums.edu/~dmitra/str.html