* 9733204
* PECASE: New Techniques for Optimizing the Quality and       Capacity of Wireless Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1998,10/31/2000
* Venugopal Veeravalli, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 10/31/2000
* USD 257,796.00

Due to the exponential growth in the demand for wireless communication services,
new techniques for optimizing system quality and capacity are imperative. Our
proposed research program strives to meet these challenges in the following
areas: (i) Accurate channel modeling. New statistical models for multipath and
shadow fading will be developed that are both accurate in describing the
propagation environment and also useful in analysis. These models will provide a
foundation for proposed optimization techniques. (ii) Information theory for
wireless links. The goal here is to develop useful information theoretic limits
for wireless multiuser systems. An approach based on throughput analysis is
proposed that will yield new insights into the optimization of wireless systems,
particularly for multirate applications. (iii) Optimization of Wireless Code
Division Multiple Access (CDMA) systems. Hybrid systems that combine the
advantages of using long spreading sequences (R-CDMA) with those of short
sequences (D-CDMA) will be explored. Techniques will also be developed for the
accurate analysis of CDMA capacity and coverage for both single-user and
multiuser detection systems. (iv) Dynamic resource allocation. The three primary
resources for wireless access -bandwidth, space and power - need to be allocated
efficiently and dynamically in a mobile wireless environment. A major goal of
the proposed research program is to develop a mathematical foundation for
dynamic resource allocation. The proposed decentralized dynamic decision making
(DDDM) framework will be essential to this development. The educational
objectives of the proposed program are: (i) to promote meaningful learning in
the classroom; (ii) to promote ties with industry so students are exposed to
real-world needs; (iii) to exploit new technologies to expand classroom
boundaries; (iv) to design classes that will better prepare students for new
opportunities in telecommunications; and (v) to incorporate research in all
educational activ ities.