* 9733969
* CAREER: Impact of Physiological State nd Macro-Nutrient     Ratio on Microbial Surface Thermodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2002
* Keith Strevett, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 07/31/2002
* USD 209,996.00

Strevett 9733969 A quantitative understanding of microbial migration in
geological formations is critical to predict the dissemination of microbes in
the environment and to evaluate the efficacy of microbially mediated in situ
pollutant degradation. The key event that retards the movement of micoorganisms
in the saturated zone is their interaction with the matrix surfaces, which may
result in adhesion. This interaction is determined by the surface thermodynamics
of the microorganism and the matrix. This research is designed to measure
thermodynamic properties of cell surfaces for selected subsurface bacterial
genera at different physiological states, electron donor/acceptor ratios and
carbon/nitrogen ratios. The bacteria selected for this study include Escherichia
coli, Pseudomonas fluorescens, Bacillus subtilis, Lactobacillus casei and
Staphylococcus aureus. It is the goal of this research to provide a
comprehensive and accurate quantification of the dependence of surface
thermodynamics on bacterial physiological state, electron donor/acceptor ratio
and carbon/nitrogen ratio. A mechanistically-based model will be developed for
microbial transport; the model will account for micro scale hydrodynamics,
individual surface thermodynamic interactions between cell surface and the
grains, including their dependence on physiological state of the microorganism,
and Brownian diffusion. The resulting model will provide a tool for evaluating
and predicting microbial transport in porous geological formations with greater
certainty than is currently possible. The objectives of the educational plan are
to: 1) increase opportunities for physically impaired students in engineering
and science and 2) provide a forum to bring research into the classroom and
teaching into the laboratory. Targeted recruitment and retention strategies at
the undergraduate and graduate levels will create visibility for engineering and
science disciplines to physically impaired students throu gh guest lectures and
summer research scholarships. A support system for these students will include
mentoring programs, financial support and appropriate laboratory facilities. The
second objective will be met through multidisciplinary laboratory oriented
courses to provide an opportunity for cooperative learning through the
incorporation of fundamental principles, applied science and real-world problem-
solving. ***