* 9733853
* CAREER: Dendritic Approach to Career-Development:           Dendrimers, Multidisciplinary Courses, and Girl Scouts
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* Sheryl Tucker, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2003
* USD 275,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the spectrofluorometric
study of chemistry involving novel macromolecular media, dendrimers. Dendrimers
are highly-branched, three-dimensional polymers whose structures include cavity
microvolumes which are being investigated for use in areas such as chemical
separations and drug delivery. Professor Tucker and her students will use a
variety of optical probes to study structure-function relationships in a
systematically varying family of dendrimers proposed for use in separations
applications. This CAREER project includes the development of a course entitled
`Interviewing and Job Skills for Success in the Sciences`. Professor Tucker will
also conduct weekend workshops for Girl Scouts entitled `The Magic of
Chemistry`. There is a great deal of interest in the development of novel
chemical compounds which effectively act to encapsulate other ions or molecules
to transport them into and out of target systems. One such group of compounds is
the dendrimers. Dendrimers are three-dimensional polymers which are being
evaluated intensely for use in chemical separations and in drug delivery
applications. Professor Tucker and her students will study the chemistry of
dendrimers using optical spectroscopy to probe structure-function relationships.
Graduate and undergraduate students will gain insights through a course devoted
to interviewing and job skills in the scientific workplace. Girl Scouts will be
exposed to the `The Magic of Chemistry` in an effort to bridge the science
gender gap.