* 9733765
* A Bioorganic Investigation of Protein Glycosylation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Randall Halcomb, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 368,667.00

As a focus of this research, conformationally constrained glycopeptides will be
used as probes of the recognition of glycoproteins by the glycotransferases that
construct core structures of O-linked oligosaccharides. The tranferase chosen
for detailed study is that responsible for biosynthesizing Core 1 disaccharide
(Core 1 GalTase). Core 1 GalTase is known to selectivity glycosylate GalNAc
motifs in particular protein backbone sequences and secondary structures.
Compounds which correspond to conformationally locked, low energy rotamers
around the torsional angle x2 of the parent GalNAc, will be synthesized and
incorporated into peptides. These glycopeptides will then be evaluated as
substrates or inhibitors of Core 1 GalTase. The findings will be used to
elucidate the three dimensional array of peptide and carbohydrate determinants
in the substrate that constitute the binding epitome for Core 1 GalTase and to
develop a model for how this equates with information transfer from protein to
carbohydrate domains. The primary focus of the educational will be the
development of a bachelors/masters degree program with offerings in synthetic
chemistry, analytical chemistry, environmental chemistry and biotechnology. With
this Faculty Early Development (CAREER) award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational activities of Dr.
Randall L. Halcomb of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Colorado,
Boulder. Professor Halcomb will focus his research efforts on combining the
tools of organic chemistry with biochemistry and structural biology to design
and synthesize conformationally constrained glycopeptides as probes of the
recognition of glycoproteins by the glycotransferases that construct core
structures of O-linked oligosaccharides. Glycoylation is a ubiquitous
modification of proteins and is associated with a number of processes within the
cell and at the cell surface, such as protein transport, cell adhesion and
signal transduction. The education plan will center on the development of a
bachelors/masters degree program in chemistry.