* 9733540
* Career:  Bilinear Shape-Constrained Regression in Blind     Source Separation/Equalization, and Signal Processing for   Chromatographic Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Nikolaos Sidiropoulos, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/29/2000
* USD 200,000.00

The explosive growth of wireless communications has generated competitive
pressure to fulfill the promise of seamlessly integrated personal communication
services. Meeting quality-of-service constraints for advanced multimedia
services over wireless is an important challenge. Wireless channels are rapidly-
varying, rate-limited, and subject to severe degradation due to propagation and
multiuser interference. This has sparked considerable interest in blind signal
separation techniques, capable of separating and estimating the users' signals
without assuming knowledge of the channel. Interestingly, mathematically similar
problems appear in chromatographic analysis (CA) and flow injection analysis
(FIA) in chemometrics, with applications in quality control for manufacturing, a
Federal Strategic Area. The research component of this program involves the
study of blind signal separation problems, posed as a (system of) bilinear
regression(s) subject to: (i) factorization constraints; (ii) uni- or oligo-
modality, convexity, or support constraints on the columns of certain factors
(these exploit direction-of-arrival (DOA) diversity afforded by antenna arrays,
without requiring DOA estimation; unimodality is well-motivated in the context
of CA/FIA, and so is smoothness of factor profiles); and (iii) modulation-
induced (e.g., finite-alphabet) constraints. The emphasis is on the development
and performance analysis of associated optimization algorithms, and applications
thereof in communications and chemometrics. Cross-fertilization between the two
application domains is an integral goal of this program. The educational
component of this program includes: (i) the development of introductory and
advanced courses on optimization theory and algorithms for signal
processing/communications -oriented undergraduate and graduate students; (ii)
the development of a suite of MATLAB routines for laboratory/Web instruction;
(iii) the creation of undergraduate signal processing research and education
opportunities; and (iv) greater emphasis on innovative instruction through
proper utilization of multimedia tools to complement traditional modes of
instruction.