* 9733035
* CAREER: Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of   Elastin and its Related Polypeptides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2005
* Kristin Kumashiro, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 450,000.00

9733035 Kumashiro The PI will conduct modern high-resolution solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments to characterize the molecular structure of
insoluble elastin. Initially, secondary structural elements and the crosslinking
moeities will be identified by 13C and 15N chemical shift measurements,
respectively. Solid-state NMR experiments will then be used to ascertain the
effect of different sample conditions, to probe the intramolecular interactions
at work. In addition, elastin from normal and transgenic mice will be studied.
The differences in NMR spectra will be indicative of the relationships between
molecular structure and normal physiological function. Finally, model peptide
systems related to elastin will be studied. Insoluble elastin is responsible for
the elasticity in physiological structures in mammals, like blood vessels,
ligaments, and skin. However, a fundamental understanding of the molecular basis
of elasticity is weak, due to the lack of high-resolution structural data that
is presently available. This work will focus on the elucidation of structural
information on normal and defective elastin, as well as the peptides thought to
be model systems for this protein. The data gathered on these systems will then
be used to gain insight into the structure-property relationships of elastin.
This research is highly interdisciplinary, drawing on topics as diverse as
solid-state NMR to molecular biology; with this philosophy in mind, a modern
learning environment for graduate and undergraduate students, both in the
classroom and in the laboratory, will be provided.