* 9733111
* CAREER:  A Survey for High Redshift Galaxy Clusters:        A Research and Education Resource
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Dennis Zaritsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 12/31/2000
* USD 201,425.00

9733111 ZARITSKY The largest existing sample of high redshift (0.4 .&lt; z &lt;.
1.1) galaxy clusters will be compiled and analyzed to provide information to
address issues in cosmology, large-scale structure, cluster evolution, and
galaxy evolution. The number density, luminosity function, richness
distribution, and structural properties of clusters are excellent discriminators
among cosmological models, particularly so at high redshifts where many of the
standard models predict rapid evolution of galaxy clusters. The sample of
hundreds of clusters that will be compiled will also provide the best available
measure of the high-redshift cluster correlation function and possibly outline
distant analogs of the local "Great Wall" of galaxies. The information gained
from analyzing the magnitudes and colors of thousands, and spectra of hundreds,
of distant cluster galaxies will constrain models of galaxy evolution at a
redshift where there are currently very few constraints. The information will
also help to place limits on the formation epoch of cluster galaxies. The
identification of a large sample of high-z brightest cluster galaxies (BCGs),
and the data from observations of these clusters, will allow us to study BCG
evolution and the connection between BCGs and the cluster environment. A novel
search technique for high-z clusters will enable the compilation of data from a
unique sample of hundreds of clusters and use the results of the analysis of the
data to address these issues. Recent results from spectroscopic and photometric
observations have demonstrated the success of the technique. The educational
efforts are divided into four areas: (1) enhancing the education of
undergraduates through course development that utilizes current technology and
research-grade data, (2) establishing a central clearinghouse for web-related
instructional materials that publicizes the efforts of those who are attempting
to develop the Internet into an effective teaching tool for astronomy, (3)
gradua te student mentoring, and (4) public outreach. The public outreach will
be both to adults through public lectures and to elementary school children
through the continuation of a two-year partnership with a local teacher through
Project ASTRO. The first project will be the creation and implementation of
Internet-based laboratory projects that allow undergraduate students to directly
manipulate research-quality data drawn from many sources, including the survey
of clusters of galaxies. There are several laboratory projects already written
and available on the Web and which have been used in courses. The second project
is to establish and maintain a central location on the Internet where
instructors can share material they develop. There will be an informal
discussion group organized for mentoring of graduate students. There will also
be involvement in the summer public visitor lectures at Lick Observatory and in
the Astronomical Society of the Pacific's Project ASTRO for grades 4-9. ***