* 9733706
* PECASE:  Accuracy of Thin Slice Judgements
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Nalini Ambady, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 06/30/2004
* USD 500,000.00

The research in this CAREER proposal is directed towards improving our
fundamental understanding of the accuracy of perceptual judgments based on very
minimal information - brief `thin slices` or glimpses of behavior (such as
2-second silent video clips). Recent research suggests that people can make
surprisingly accurate judgments from such slices. For example, judgments of thin
slices of behavior have been found to predict important outcome variables in
social and clinical psychology as accurately as judgments of thicker slices. The
goal of the proposed research is to advance the field by elucidating some of the
mechanisms that affect the real-life accuracy of perceptual appraisals,
evaluations, and personality judgments from minimal information. The proposed
work will integrate theoretical and empirical approaches from the areas of
perception, cognitive science, education, communication, social cognition,
ecological, cultural, and personality psychology. Specifically, the research
program will explore (a) potential cognitive mechanisms that might be related to
the accuracy of thin slice judgments; (b) potential affective mechanisms that
might be related to the accuracy of thin slice judgments; (c) the automaticity
of such judgments, (d) the efficacy and accuracy of such judgments in relation
to judgments based on thick slices with considerably more information; (e) the
stability of such judgments over time and across situations; and (f) the
stability and generalizability of such judgments across cultures. Accuracy will
be evaluated in relation to criteria that have considerable importance and
ecological validity, such as indices of teacher effectiveness. The methods used
to examine these mechanisms are diverse and include experimental, correlational,
and meta-analytic techniques. The educational objectives of this CAREER proposal
are (a) to develop courses to actively engage graduate and undergraduate
students in research on interpersonal perception and communication using thin
slices; (b) to design and conduct workshops to train educational and healthcare
professionals in communication and interpersonal skills, and (c) to develop new
assessment tools using multimedia technology.