* 9733662
* CAREER: Transport Phenomena in Solidification Processing    of Functionally Graded Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Chao-Yang Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 06/30/2003
* USD 365,000.00

Abstract - CTS-9733662 Wang, Chao-Yang The proposed work is to study the
solidification processing of materials that feature a continuous compositional
variation from ceramic to metal within a part. Such materials, called
Fuctionally Graded Materials, offer unique combinations of thermal resistance
and mechanical strength, reduce thermal stresses due to the thermal mismatch
between metal and ceramic, and near-net shapes. Functionally Graded Materials
offer a new dimension for satisfying the needs for high performance materials in
aerospace, energy, and electronic industries. The objectives of the study are to
visualize particle migration, melt convection, and microstructural development
during solidification, to understand the interactions between the particles and
the growth front in the presence of convection, and to characterize the particle
distributin and grain structure in the graded material. The work will involve a
combined experimental and modeling effort. Transparent analog systems will be
used to observe and measure particle motion and redistribution in a solidifying
liquid. Metal experiments and post-processing characterization will provide
quantitative data on the graded microstructure. A process model will be
developed to predict graded ceramic-metal structures and to permit tailoring the
material to specific functional requirements. The results from this
investigation will improve the commercial viability of Functionally Graded
Materials.