* 9733333
* CAREER: The Role of Ecosystem Rooting Depth in Predicting   Global Carbon and Water Fluxes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Robert Jackson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/2003
* USD 500,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JACKSON&lt;br/&gt;9733333&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;This project will execute a five-year research, teaching, and outreach
plan that combines long-&lt;br/&gt;term interests in ecology, global change, and
science education. The research examines the&lt;br/&gt;importance of root
distributions, particularly deep roots, for carbon and water cycling in
terrestrial&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems. A subset of the hypotheses to be tested
are:&lt;br/&gt; 1) The introduction of deep-rooted shrubs into grasslands lends
to carbon storage in the vegetation&lt;br/&gt; and in soil layers beyond the
maximum rooting depth of grasslands.&lt;br/&gt; 2) Shrub encroachment results in
the movement of soil fauna to deeper layers, enhancing carbon&lt;br/&gt; cycling
at depth and transferring nutrients and carbon deeper in the profile.&lt;br/&gt;
3) Water uptake in shrublands will come from deeper soil layers than in
grasslands, resulting in&lt;br/&gt; increased productivity and decreased
seasonality of evapotranspiration.&lt;br/&gt;The three research activities in
the proposal are deep-soil coring in the field, controlled&lt;br/&gt;experiments
in 3-m-deep tubes, and integration through modeling. The field work compares
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;properties of adjacent deep- and shallow-rooted systems
along a precipitation gradient in the central&lt;br/&gt;United States (including
four Long Term Ecological Research sites (LTERs)). Fenceline
comparisons&lt;br/&gt;are used to examine the effects of altered rooting depth
in the absence of initial differences in soil&lt;br/&gt;properties. A series of
10-m-deep soil cores have been successfully sampled at the CPER LTER and
at&lt;br/&gt;Vernon, TX. The studies in 3-m-deep tubes provide a controlled
counterpart to the field experiments;&lt;br/&gt;water and nutrients will be
applied at precise depths so that the importance of deep roots can
be&lt;br/&gt;examined mechanistically. The modeling integration builds on the
experiments to examine the&lt;br/&gt;consequences of root distributions and soil
depth for C and water cycling. It also fits well with other&lt;br/&gt;research
projects in my lab, including Task 1.3.1 of Global Change in Terrestrial
Ecosystems ("Root&lt;br/&gt;distributions and carbon and water fluxes") and an
accompanying activity at the National Center for&lt;br/&gt;Ecological Analysis
and Synthesis to improve the representation of belowground processes in
global&lt;br/&gt;models.&lt;br/&gt; Teaching and outreach activities take
advantage of a large demand for ecology and science&lt;br/&gt;education at the
University of Texas at Austin. In 1994 the university created a new
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;major - Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation (EEC) -
providing an excellent opportunity for teaching&lt;br/&gt;and mentoring among
the 400 undergraduates now enrolled. The courses that are taught (Plant Ecology,
Field Ecology, Plant Physiological Ecology, and Global Environmental Change)
integrate well with the needs of those students and lead to numerous benefits
for the research program. Foremost is the synergy of being able to involve
talented undergraduates in research, while supplementing
their&lt;br/&gt;traditional classroom education. Ten undergraduates have done
such research projects in my lab since&lt;br/&gt;1995, with seven additional
work-study students. It is in this mentoring that the dual roles of scientist
and teacher truly blend - students learn science by the professor's example, and
research progresses in the process.&lt;br/&gt;