* 9733701
* CAREER: Laser Spectroscopic Studies of the Dynamics         of Recombinative Desorption and Bimolecular Surface         Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Frank Zimmermann, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2003
* USD 260,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the elucidation of the
mechanisms and dynamics of a number of molecular processes at solid surfaces:
diffusion, recombinative desorption, and bimolecular reactions. Professor
Zimmerman and his students at Rutgers University will utilize state-resolved
optical spectroscopy of desorbed species to probe the dynamics of a number of
gas-solid systems including hydrogen on silicon and metal surfaces and the
catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide at transition metal and metal oxide
surfaces. This CAREER research project will also seek to further exploit the use
of `Peer Instruction` in the undergraduate physics curriculum as a means of
overcoming negative preconceptions that students have about physics. Professor
Zimmerman will also develop laser-based laboratory experiments for physics
undergraduates. The elucidation of chemical reaction mechanisms of small
molecules adsorbed onto solid surfaces is a key element in improving the
performance of a number technologically important processes. Professor Zimmerman
and his students at Rutgers University will use optical spectroscopy to study
the dynamics of surface chemistry relevant to the catalyst and microelectronics
industries. This CAREER project will provide students with a fundamental
knowledge of chemistry with broadranging implications. Undergraduate students
will benefit greatly by both the pedagogical and laboratory innovations that
Professor Zimmerman will instill in the physics curriculum.