* 9733956
* CAREER:  Pressure-Induced Amorphization and Materials       Synthesis Under High Pressure Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Michael Kruger, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/2003
* USD 300,000.00

9733956 Kruger This is a CAREER Award project involving high pressure techniques
in two separate areas of research. An objective of the work is to synthesize and
study, novel and potentially technologically relevant materials. The research
employs pressure-induced amorphization, the pressure-induced destruction of long
range crystalline order to produce an amorphous materials. X-ray diffraction
study of pressure-amorphized samples will yield the pair correlation function,
G(r). The pressure variation of this function will be correlate structures of
the pressure-amorphized glasses with the starting crystals, as well as with
conventionally synthesized, melt quenched glasses. Raman scattering will be used
to study the boson peak of these glasses which will result in a deeper
understanding of the glasses as well as the boson peak itself. Numerous
theoretical studies have predicted the stability of various phases of carbon
nitride, some theoretical studies indicating that certain phases should have
bulk moduli rivaling that of diamond. There is significant interest, both
theoretical, and practical, in realizing such materials. The PI will apply high
pressures and high temperatures to carbon-nitrogen mixtures in order to
synthesize some of the theoretically predicted superhard phases of carbon
nitride. Study of the equation of state of the materials will help determine
which phases are most likely to be superhard, and hence should be made in larger
quantities for more detailed study. The education component of this project
involves extensive undergraduate research activity, lectures at local high-
schools, and mentoring activity associated with the local student Chapter of the
American Physical Society. %%% This is a CAREER Award project involves high
pressure (up to 100 million atmospheres) techniques to synthesize and study,
novel and potentially technologically relevant materials. One relatively
recently observed technique employs compression alone to turn a cry stal into a
glass. In this way a variety of glasses will be prepared. X-ray and optical
scattering techniques will be used to characterize the structural transition
from the crystalline to the glassy state. Relationships are sought between the
new glasses, the starting crystals, and traditional model glasses. A second
project involves the use of high pressures to try to synthesis new, superhard
materials. By analogy with the graphite to diamond conversion, high pressures
and temperatures will be applied to graphite-nitrogen mixtures in an attempt to
synthesize some of the theoretically predicted superhard phases of carbon
nitride. The education component of this project involves extensive
undergraduate research activity, lectures at local high-schools, and mentoring
activity associated with the local student Chapter of the American Physical
Society. ***