* 9733821
* CAREER: In Situ Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Dynamic      Behavior on Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2003
* Jochen Lauterbach, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 03/31/2003
* USD 300,500.00

Abstract - Lauterbach - 9733821 Prof. Jochen Lauterbach or Purdue University
will follow mesoscopic spatio-temporal dynamics of catalytic surfaces with in-
situ high-resolution methods based on imaging ellipsometry, IR vibrational, and
second-order non-linear optical spectroscopy. The main objective is to identify
periodic phenomena that occur because of nonlinear coupling of effects due to
mesoscopic features such as surface heterogeneity or site diversity. The
potentially synergistic effects will be exploited to conceive new catalysts
based on tailored surface heterogeneity. CO and hydrocarbon oxidation
simultaneously with NOx reduction will be studied on Rh-BaO-Pt catalyst surfaces
microfabricated with spatially resolved compositional difference, or CeO2 on Pt
and Cu foils, under reaction conditions resembling automobile exhaust catalysis.
External forcing of reaction-diffusion systems will be effected by pulsed IR
laser heating, leading to better understanding of resonant forcing effects on CO
oxidation, and to unsteady state reactor operation in general. Modeling and
simulation of reaction, diffusion, and pattern formation will also be carried
out. A second reaction system to be investigated is spatially resolved
photoinduced polymerization, which may lead to new compositionally modulated
thin polymeric films. UV-initiated, mask-shadowed, gas-phase polymerization of
acrolein, methacrolein, and styrene on various transition metal surfaces (Ag,
Cu, Pt), will be followed up to a micron thickness by SSHG, which is sensitive
to interfacial structure. Likewise, the bonding, electronic, and structural
details during the initial polymerization steps will be studied under high
vacuum conditions with IR absorption or SFG simultaneously with EMSI or SSHG.
This research links electronic, molecular, mesoscopic and macroscopic parameters
for reaction-diffusion phenomena that are important in various areas: catalysis,
semiconductor manufacturing, biological and polymeric coating deposition. At the
educa tional level, Prof. Lauterbach will renew the chemical engineering
laboratory courses with experiments in surface chemistry, catalysis, nanoscale
mechanics, polymer engineering, holography, and optical engineering, coupled
with newer evaluation and teaching methods based on interactive electronic
media.