* 9733938
* CAREER:  Polyketide Synthase and Peptide Synthetase:        Mechanistic Studies and Engineered Biosynthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1998,11/30/2001
* Ben Shen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 11/30/2001
* USD 404,953.00

9733938 Ben Shen This CAREER project integrates research and education on a
central theme to bridge chemistry and biology in the current undergraduate and
graduate programs. The research aspect of the project aims at investigating
nonactin biosynthesis in Streptomyces griseus DSM 40695 to provide mechanistic
insight on how type I polyketide synthase (PKS) controls the stereospecificity
during polyketide biosynthesis. It is based on the hypothesis that nonactin is
derived from tetramerization in a stereospecific (+)(-)(+)(-) fashion of (+)-
and (-)-nonactic acid whose biosynthesis from acetate, propionate, and succinate
is catalyzed by the nonactin synthase, a type I PKS catalyzing the complementary
assembly of two enantiomeric polyketides. The specific goals of the project are
first to characterize at the genetic and biochemical level how the nonactin
synthase controls the stereospecificity during polyketide assembly and then to
explore ways to make novel polyketide metabolites with predicted stereochemical
centers by genetic manipulation of the nonactin synthase as well as other type I
PKS genes. The outcome of these studies will reveal new insight about polyketide
biosynthesis and shed light for rational engineering of PKS enzyme complexes to
generate chemical structural diversity, leading to the discovery of new drugs.
The educational aspect of the project aims at providing the undergraduate and
graduate students a multi-disciplinary training in chemistry, biochemistry, and
molecular biology. This will be accomplished by providing on the webpage modules
consisting of biological examples of the chemistry covered in the current
organic chemistry lecture and by developing plans for the establishment of
"Biological Chemistry" as the fifth field of interests for the departmental
graduate program. These efforts shall better prepare students who desire to
pursue a career working at the interface of chemistry and biology. It is in
programs that effectively combine chemistry and biology that new che mists with
a broad range of skills and sound understanding of biology for solving important
bioorganic chemistry problems will be produced.