* 9733160
* CAREER: Magnetic-Nanocrystal Self-Assembled Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2007
* Zhong Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2007
* USD 340,175.00

9733160 Wang This grant explores synthesis and characterization of magnetic
nanocrystal superlattice materials. To utilize the technological advantages
offered by the size specificity and selectivity of nanoclusters, it is
imperative to understand the fundamental methodologies for preparation of
cluster assembled materials in macroscopic quantities and with high standards of
size, structural morphological and shape uniformity. These are vitally important
steps toward a systematic exploration of the nature of patterned superstructures
assembled from such building units, as well as the formulation of methods for
designing and controlling such novel assembled materials. The major research
objectives are: to synthesize, characterize, and determine the properties of
self-assembly passivated magnetic nanocrystal superlattices of Co, y-Fe2O3 and
Fe3O4; to determine the bulk and surface microstructures of the nanoparticles
and the superlattices for understanding the magnetic coupling/decoupling among
nanocrystals as a function of the interparticle distance; to examine the in-
situ structure evolution and phase transformation of the nanoparticles, the
surfactant and the superlattices for predicting the stability, reliability and
durability of the system for device applications, and to model the structure and
behavior of nanocrystals and their assemblies. Education efforts are
concentrated in the areas of development of collaborative graduate student
thesis projects, expansion of outreach programs, development of interactive
microscopy displays for high school students and the public, and development of
interdisciplinary teaching experiments related to materials science. %%%
Nanocusters, and the physical and chemical functional specificity and
selectivity they possess, suggest that they are ideal building blocks for two-
and three-dimensional cluster self-assembled superlattice structures. Self-
assembled arrays can involve self-organization into monolayers, thi n films, and
superlattices of size-selected nanoclusters with encapsulated in protective
compact organic coatings. Patterned magnetic nanocrystals are of vital interest
both scientifically and technologically because of their potential applications
in information storage, color imaging, bioprocessing, magnetic refrigeration,
and ferrofluids. ***