* 9733101
* Career: Theory and Applications of Reversible Cellular      Automata
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Jarkko Kari, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 05/31/2004
* USD 227,065.00

Reversible Cellular Automata (RCA) are locally computed parallel one-to-one
mappings of cellular space onto itself. They provide a solid theoretical model
for massively parallel non-dissipative computation. This project investigates
the theory of RCA and closely related Quantum Cellular Automata (QCA), and
introduces new applications in image compression and cryptography. The main
theoretical goal is to understand the structure of RCA and find new
representations of RCA in terms of simple local operations. The representations
should allow easy generation of new RCA rules that can be used in the
applications. Most useful representations are ones that allow desired properties
to be programmed directly into the RCA. Quantum CA are generalizations of RCA.
The first goal is to find a correct definition of QCA in the sense that it is
realizable in the actual physical world with quantum interactions. The
definition should be also general enough to allow implementations of arbitrary
quantum algorithms. Then the relation between QCA and homogeneous arrays of
finite quantum gates will be determined. Image compression applications arise
from analogy to subband coding. Reversible Cellular Automata are interpreted as
non-linear versions of perfect reconstruction filter banks. Energy compaction by
linear transforms is replaced by the idea of information compaction by RCA. The
new compression techniques will be most suitable for efficient lossless
compression but also lossy image compression applications are considered. In
addition, analogy to RCA theory provides new insight into the theory of higher
dimensional filter banks. In cryptography the project continues investigating
the feasibility and security of RCA based cryptosystems. Applications to image
compression and cryptography, together with related results on finite automata
in fractal image generation and compression will be introduced to the computer
science curriculum through standard computation theory cou rses. They provide
practical examples of how automata theory can be useful in seemingly unrelated
fields, and increase student motivation to study challenging theoretical
concepts. A new graduate course and seminar on image compression will be
developed with emphasis on algorithmic aspects of compression in addition to the
traditional signal processing approach.