* 9733925
* CAREER:  Space-Time Patterns in Snowmelt:  Research and     Education for Hydrologic Forecasting
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Kaye Brubaker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 02/28/2003
* USD 249,967.00

Author: Clifford Astill &lt;castill@nsf.gov&gt; at NOTE Date: 3/22/98 7:53 PM
Priority: Normal TO: acoles at nsf18 Subject: Abstract: CMS-9733925, Kaye
Brubaker, U. Maryland ------------------------------- Message Contents
----------------- -------------- Abstract: CMS-9733925, Kaye Brubaker, U.
Maryland In regions with significant seasonal snowpacks, some of the most
devastating floods are caused by sudden snowmelt or rain-on-snow events. At the
other hydrologic extreme, a below-average winter snowpack is likely to translate
into severe warm-season water shortages. In the United States, operational
hydrology has made great strides in short-term and extended forecasting of these
disastrous events, aided by sophisticated observations and models. Modern
hydrologic techniques can incorporate information on uncertainty in the snow
pack, precipitation and other weather factors to produce probabilistic
forecasts. The aim of this CAREER project is to develop tools to determine
mathematical expressions for physical variability and measurement uncertainty,
for a variety of topographic climatic situations, and for different resolutions
of measurement. The research objectives are: * Characterize patterns in
snowpack/snow-cover depletion during the melt season using remote-sensing
products at different spatial resolutions, and a Geographic Information System;
* Relate these spatio-temporal patterns to topography, land cover, and climate;
* Investigate the scaling properties of these patterns and their dependence on
the resolution of the observed data; and * Test the use and value of these
findings in short-term and extended streamflow forecasting models, both
deterministic and probabilistic. It is expected that this research will result
in: * Physically-based mathematical expressions for uncertainty in snow-water
equivalent estimates used to update streamflow forecast models. * Model
validation data sets of spatially-distributed time-series of multi-se nsor snow-
cover and weather observations, and weather forecasts for testing and developing
forecast models. The educational objectives are: * Develop a new hands-on
seminar in hydrologic prediction, design and forecasting, incorporating the
research results. * Incorporate the research findings into a modest number of
new modules for an existing graduate hydrology class and an existing
undergraduate probability and statistics class. The new modules will incorporate
innovative classroom technology and pedagogy. * Perform objective and subjective
assessments of the value of these innovations in aiding students' learning. It
is expected that this educational objective for water-resource engineers will
result in training in the use of sophisticated observational and analytical
technology, including remotely-sensed Earth systems data, and Geographic
Information Systems and spatial data manipulation; a solid understanding of
natural variability in hydrologic variables, measurement uncertainty,
mathematical expressions for that variability and uncertainty, and the
implications for resource prediction and forecasting; and exposure to techniques
and perspectives from related disciplines.
+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+=+= + Clifford J.
Astill Ph:703-306-1362 Fax:703-306-0291 castill@nsf.gov Nat'l Science Fdn 4201
Wilson Blvd., Rm545 Arlington, VA 22230 &lt;www.eng.nsf.gov/cms/castill.htm&gt;