* 9733582
* CAREER:  Mesoscopic Scale Phase Separation in Alloys under  Sustained External Forcing
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 04/30/2003
* USD 311,000.00

9733582 Bellon This CAREER grant addresses research and educational programs
which are centered on non-equilibrium processing of materials. The research
component examines the new idea that in alloys under sustained external forcing
phase separation may take place on a mesoscopic scale, i.e. a scale which is
neither atomic, nor macroscopic, and these meso-structures can be stable at
steady-state. The objectives of the proposed research are: (a) to perform a
detailed characterization of the composition field in alloys with positive heat
of mixing at steady-state during by ball milling under controlled conditions;
(b) to elucidate the origin of the stabilization of mesoscopic phase separation
in alloys under sustained shearing; and (c) to test whether the available
experimental results on these mesostructures can be rationalized by a kinetic
model with competing dynamics, where dislocation glide would be the dynamics
forcing the mixing of immiscible elements. The approach chosen involves the
milling of Fe-Cu and Cu-Ag powders under controlled conditions and the use of
analytical techniques that can resolve nanometric composition heterogeneity,
including for the first time for ball milled materials the use of atom probe and
three-dimensional atom probe techniques. Atomistic computer simulations and
modeling should assist in understanding of these forced systems. The educational
component of the proposal consists in developing a computer-assisted material
for a graduate course on materials under irradiation using CyberProf, a human-
computer interface developed at the Beckman Institute in Urbana; and in
reorganizing an undergraduate materials science laboratory to stimulate
initiatives from the students. %%% Mesoscopic phase separations have been
recently identified in metal alloys with positive heats of mixing under
sustained shearing by atomistic computer simulations. These findings are
consistent with the latest published experiments showing complex dy namical
phase equilibria and strong chemical heterogeneity in alloys with positive heat
of mixing when submitted to ball milling. This research is motivated by the fact
that the field of nonequilibrium systems is in rapid development and has
received much attention in the last two decades. Indeed in many applications,
materials are driven away from equilibrium by some external forcing, either
during their preparation (e.g., by ball milling) or during their use (e.g., by
irradiation). ***