* 9733004
* CAREER:  Coordination: Intergrating Organizational Style    with Environmental Characteristics
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Keith Decker, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 05/31/2004
* USD 451,169.00

This award supports the development of a theory of coordination by means of
examining the interactions of various organizational styles with the
environmental characteristics of different problem domains. Organizational
styles can be operationalized as sets of coordination mechanisms that enforce
certain behaviors as part of the style. However, not all coordination behavior
arises from abstract organizational styles; much arises from standard responses
to specific environmental (problem domain) characteristics. This research aims
to extend environment and organization models, represent standard responses to
common environmental problems, and develop operational specifications for
organizational styles. This allows the interactions between environmental
constraints and organizational styles to be reasoned about analytically.
Designers are not doomed to create coordinated systems with only a few simple
organizational behaviors and large numbers of brittle domain-specific
coordination heuristics. Instead, given good environment models and certain
other constraints (often dictated by existing human organizations), desiginers
can make principled choices of computational organizations and standard
environment-influenced coordination behaviors. This project will result in a
much richer set of tools for building and analyzing both multi-agent computer
systems and integrating such systems with existing human organizations in
applications such as distributed information gathering, distributed scheduling,
and concurrent engineering.
http://www.cis.udel.edu/~decker/research/organizations.html