* 9733237
* CAREER:  Funtional and Structural Evolution of              Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Pei-San Tsai, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Annabell Segarra
* 08/31/1999
* USD 157,047.00

9733237 Tsai Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is central to the initiation
and maintenance of reproduction in vertebrates. It stimulates the release of two
hormones from the pituitary that directly regulate the growth of ovaries and
testes and the production of sex steroid hormones, such as estrogen and
testosterone. Defects in GnRH production and/or release will invariably lead to
sterility. Despite this hormone's importance in the reproduction of vertebrates,
very little is known about when GnRH originally arose in evolution and when it
began to assume the role of a central reproductive regulator. Dr. Tsai has shown
that GnRH-like molecules exist in a protostome, Aplysia californica. The
evolutionary implication of these results is extremely exciting since it suggest
that GnRH may have already been present in a primitive invertebrate ancestor
that gave rise to diverse group of vertebrates and invertebrates. Such
extraordinary conservation over the course of evolution opens up the door to
many possibilities regarding the functional roles that GnRH had assumed over the
course of evolution. Dr. Tsai will integrative molecular, physiological and
evolutionary approaches to examine structural and functional conservation of
GnRH. As part of this CAREER award, she will use the same multidisciplinary
approach to design a new laboratory course on comparative reproductive biology.
Moreover, Dr. Tsai will actively recruit students interested in addressing
evolutionary questions with molecular techniques from regional campuses to
initiate research projects. The information gained from her research program
will have profound implications concerning how the system of reproductive
regulation presently seen in humans and other vertebrates has evolved over many
millions of years.