* 9733367
* CAREER:  Investigations of the Formation and Evolution of   Stars in Young Embedded Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Elizabeth Lada, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 05/31/2004
* USD 500,000.00

9733367 Lada The recent results from near-infrared wavelength imaging surveys
have of stars have suggested that most stars in our Galaxy form in the
environments of dense, embedded stellar clusters. The extent to which these new
results should alter our current understanding of star formation physics is
unclear. However, one would expect to find fundamental differences in the
formation and early evolution of young stars in such dense regions as compared
to more isolated regions. Therefore, establishing the properties of young stars
in embedded clusters is essential to understanding the process of star formation
and early stellar evolution and to estimate the overall likelihood of the
existence of planetary systems in our Galaxy. An extensive and systematic broad-
band infrared and millimeter wavelength study of 11 young embedded, or partially
embedded, stellar clusters will be conducted. The stellar clusters range in age
from 1 to 70 million years, and span a range of environment from gaseous
hydrogen regions to reflection nebulae. The main goals of the research are: 1)
to construct and compare the near-infrared wavelength luminosity functions and
Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams for each cluster and to investigate the shape and
universality of the stellar initial mass function (IMF) and 2) to determine and
compare the frequency and mass distributions of circumstellar disks in each
cluster. In addition to providing a rich data base for investigations of the
star forming histories of young clusters, the observations will provide, for the
first time, a complete and statistically significant census of
circumstellar/proto-planetary disk sources in cluster environments. The
comparison of the results of the analysis of the data for the stellar clusters
with different ages will allow one to estimate the relative timescale for the
disk phase of evolution within dense stellar environments. The duration of the
disk phase is of particular importance, for it sets the time scale for planet
format ion. The results can be compared to existing studies of young stars
forming in relative isolation This will be done in order to determine the
differences in the formation and evolution of stars and their disks in differing
astrophysical environments. An integral part of this project is to carry out an
educational and outreach plan that encourages, teaches, and mentors high school,
college undergraduate and graduate students towards careers in the physical
sciences. The plan also emphasizes a science outreach program directed toward
college level undergraduates, the general public and young children.
Specifically, it is planned to: 1) Develop non-traditional teaching methods via
the use of computers for the introductory level astronomy undergraduate course
at the University of Florida; 2) Develop a new course on the origins of the
solar system, stars, and life. This course will integrate the results from
recent research projects into the course material. The course will be developed
for both an undergraduate and graduate level. 3) A journal club on star
formation and related topics will be organized; 4) Students will be involved at
all levels in the research activities; 5) A women's career day symposium will be
organized for the purpose of encouraging women high school students to consider
careers in the physical sciences. 6) Two regular public lecture series will be
organized, one for adults and one for children, on astronomical topics to
encourage an interest and appreciation of astronomy and science in general among
the public at all age levels. ***