* 9733398
* CAREER: Structural Studies of Metal Interfaces on           High-Index Silicon Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Alison Baski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2002
* USD 290,707.00

9733398 Baski This CAREER project addresses fundamental surface science aspects
of metal-semiconductor interfaces. The growth behavior of noble metals will be
examined on unique templates provided by high-index ("tilted") silicon surfaces.
The structural and electronic properties of these interfaces will be studied
using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in conjunction with first-principles,
electronic-structure calculations. This approach is expected to enable the
development of atomic structural models and a deeper understanding of the
formation and properties of these interfaces. The research is motivated by
recent STM investigations of clean high-index surfaces oriented between (001)
and (111) that have revealed unique row-like structures which do not exist on
the more well-known low-index surfaces. It is anticipated that the underlying Si
structure will cause metal overlayers to form novel structures on the nanometer
scale (e.g. nanowires). A complementary teaching component of this project
focuses on course development in an introductory calculus-based physics
sequence. Labs for this three-semester sequence will introduce computer-
interfaced experiments and more effective integration of lecture components. The
aim is to provide a firm foundation in materials physics, and especially to
develop studentsO experimental and analytical skills. %%% The project addresses
forefront research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic materials
and devices, in general. An important feature of the program is the emphasis on
education, and on the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant research area.
***