* 9733734
* Career: Protein Engineering of a Recombinant Diiron         Hydroxylase via Mutagenesis and in vivo Selection to Target the Creation of New Catalytic Properties
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2004
* Brian Fox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/29/2004
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract - Molecular Biochemistry Brian G. Fox (University of Wisconsin) MCB
97-33734 CAREER: Protein Engineering of a Recombinant Diiron Hydroxylase via
Mutagenesis and in vivo Selection to Target the Creation of New Catalytic
Properties. 1. Technical This study examines a recombinant form of bacterial
toluene 4-monooxygenase (T4MO), which is a four protein complex consisting of an
FAD and 2Fe-2S containing NADH oxidoreductase (tmoF, 36 kDa); a Rieske
ferredoxin (tmoC, 12.3 kDa); a catalytic effector (tmoD, 11.6 kDa); and a diiron
hydroxylase (T4MOH, 212 kDa, dimeric quaternary structure composed of the tmoA,
tmoB, and tmoE gene products). The objectives are to create, select, and
characterize new isoforms of the T4MO complex by bioengineering the diiron
active site, which is contained entirely within the tmoA gene. A combination of
targeted and random mutagenesis coupled with selection through in vivo
complementation is used to alter the regiospecificity of aromatic oxidation in a
targeted manner, to oxidize entirely new classes of hydrocarbon substrates, to
produce new variations of catalytic reactivity, or to enhance catalyst
stability. The T4MO complex offers many unique opportunities to study diiron
enzyme catalysis, to investigate the role of protein-protein interactions in
catalysis, and to study the energetics of electron transfer between the Rieske
ferredoxin and diiron redox centers. It oxidizes many aromatic, aliphatic,
heteronuclear, polynuclear, and halogenated hydrocarbons. Because hydrocarbons
are the preeminent chemical feedstocks and about 60% of all industrial
transformations involve some form of oxidation or reduction, this study is
relevant to environment and biotechnology. This research is integrated into
discovery-based undergraduate teaching, involving state-of-the-art molecular
biology/biochemistry techniques. 2. Non-technical Bacterial toluene
4-monooxygenase (T4MO) is a four protein complex containing two iron atoms in
the catalytic active site. Many key biochemical principles are inherent in the
function of this multiprotein complex, including the role of metal ions in
catalysis, protein interactions, electron transfer processes, substrate
specificity, and others. This enzyme oxidizes many aromatic, aliphatic, and
halogenated hydrocarbons. Hydrocarbon oxidation is an important topic because
hydrocarbons are the preeminent chemical feedstocks and about 60% of all
industrial transformations involve some form of oxidation or reduction. This
study is aimed to create, select, and characterize new and improved isoforms of
T4MO through bioengineering, using a variety of biochemical, catalytic, and
physical approaches. This study is integrated also into discovery-based
undergraduate teaching, involving state-of-the-art techniques such as DNA
isolation and sequencing, expression vector construction, protein expression,
protein purification, and structure/ function characterizations. The objective
is to contribute to the utility of T4MO complexes as biocatalysts, gaining
significant knowledge of their function, and providing a stimulating focus for
teaching the theory and practical application of modern biochemical techniques.