* 9733685
* CAREER:  Tagged Transposon-Mediated Mutagenesis in C.elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2005
* Erik Jorgensen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/28/2005
* USD 504,120.00

Jorgensen 9733685 Abstract Exocytosis in neurons has become specialized in order
to allow for the rapid secretion of neurotransmitter. A number of proteins
involved in synaptic vesicle trafficking have been identified by biochemical
purification from synaptosomes. Nevertheless, current models for neurosecretion
are greatly limited because there is only an incomplete list of the proteins
that are required for these processes. Genetic studies in the nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans, could potentially identify the complete complement of
genes required for synaptic function. C. elegans is particularly advantageous
for such studies because it is possible to select for mutants defective in
secretion. Using such screens, over 38 genes have been identified which are
required for normal neurotransmission. The efficiency of these screens has
generated more mutants than can be easily characterized using standard genetic
techniques. Techniques to rapidly map and clone these genes lags far behind the
ability to obtain mutants. Mutagenesis strategies using transposons modified to
contain foreign plasmid sequences could allow the immediate cloning of mutant
genes without the need to map the mutations. The aims of this proposal are to:
1) Develop methods to mobilize recombinant Tc3 transposons in the germ line, 2)
Develop techniques to mobilize a heterologous mariner element in C. elegans, 3)
Train undergraduates to screen for neurotransmission mutants in C. elegans using
a recombinant mariner element and to directly sequence the mutant genes in a
single semester course. The tools developed by this work will benefit the larger
scientific community and accelerate experiments designed to analyze
neurotransmission. The techniques developed will greatly increase the efficiency
of forward genetic methods. Additionally, the development of these tools and
reagents will provide students with a more complete laboratory experience.