* 9733143
* CAREER: Traffic Characterization and Resource Allocation for Transporting Video Streams Over Broadband Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/1998,08/31/2002
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 204,998.00

Broadband networks are being designed to transport diverse traffic streams with
various quality-of-service (QoS) requirements. Accurate characterization of
these streams is essential to devising efficient resource allocation strategies
that guarantee acceptable QoS without underutilizing network capacity. This
project is focused on characterizing compressed video traffic and investigating
resource allocation schemes for transporting video traffic over computer
networks. New traffic models for VBR video streams will be developed under three
strongly related compression algorithms: JPEG, MPEG-1, and MPEG-2. The modeling
methodology will be based on the class of M/G/infinity processes, whose
versatility will be exploited to capture various forms of traffic correlations.
Video sources (single and aggregated) will be characterized at both an entry
node and after being multiplexed with other streams (i.e., the departure traffic
from a multiplexer). Models for the various layers in hierarchically encoded
MPEG-2 video will be developed. The multiplexing performance under video models
will be investigated. Corresponding resource allocation strategies for
transporting video traffic over broadband networks will be developed. The impact
of correlations persistence on the queueing performance under video traffic will
be investigated. Several priority scheduling strategies at a multiplexer that is
fed by several MPEG-2 input streams will be studied. In connection with the
proposed research program, several educational goals will be pursued. New
courses on broadband multimedia networks which integrate in their curricula
several aspects of the PI's research agenda will be developed. The pedagogical
approach in these courses will be a balanced mix of theory and practice and will
combine classroom instruction with research-oriented semester projects, hence
exposing students (graduate and senior undergraduate) to the intriguing realm of
research. Team work will be strongly encouraged in course projects, as it
prepares students to future work environments in industry. In an effort to
outreach to industry, networking courses taught by the PI will be broadcast over
the VideoCampus facility to several industrial sites in the area, allowing many
interested engineers and managers to take these courses on their premises. The
PI plans to organize a weekly seminar on various topics in networks research,
which will feature presentations given by students, faculty, and invited
speakers from industry and academia.