* 9733267
* CAREER: Developing the Infrastructure for the Widespread Use of Simulation in the Analysis of Construction Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Julio Martinez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2003
* USD 302,664.00

Abstract Proposal: 97-33267 Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
PI - Julio C. Martinez "CAREER: Developing the Infrastructure for the Widespread
Use of Simulation in the Analysis of Construction Operations" This CAREER award
supports research leading to the development of a new infrastructure needed for
the widespread adoption, acceptance, and use of simulation as an analysis and
design tool for construction operations. The project addresses a national
priority for Federal research and development for industries that produce
constructed facilities. It will allow for significant improvements in planning
with substantial reductions in the cost and time spent building them.
Consequently, it will enhance the international competitiveness of U.S. industry
and reduce total life cycle costs. The Principal Investigator will build on the
previously developed advanced programmable tool and simulation programming
language for construction operations, to create a comprehensive and exemplary
special-purpose simulator for earthwork operations. The language will also be
used to create an advanced general-purpose simulation tool that does not require
programming. These tools will complement existing ones to cover the entire
spectrum of tool complexity and modeling power needed to simulate construction
operations at all levels. The common representation vehicle across all tools
will solidify the use of Activity Cycle Diagrams as the universal means of
describing construction operations. The educational aspect of the project is
intricately related to and dependent on the research. It includes the
development of multimedia tutorials, active learning games, workshops for
educators, and an undergraduate construction simulation course. Its aim is to
educate future construction practitioners at various levels, from educated users
of special-purpose simulators to builders of models for complex operations, to
builders of special-purpose simulato rs. With adequate numbers of suitable
educated personnel at each level of proficiency, it will be possible to
construct all facilities in a computer without expending any resources.
Construction operations will be planned so well that they will flow smoothly and
with no surprises. The ever scarcer resources needed for construction will be
used as efficiently as possible.