* 9733447
* CAREER: Secure and Flexible Transmission Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,11/30/2003
* Shelli Starrett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2003
* USD 240,000.00

9733447 Starrett Objectives The goal of this project is to begin a research and
educational career that provides: high quality undergraduate, graduate, and
continuing education; maintains working relationships with industry; and
performs nationally competitive research. The research proposal defines a plan
for building a foundation for research in the analysis and control of stressed
power systems. The focus is to ensure system security and reliability in the
rapidly changing utility environment by innovatively using new and existing
controllers. The plan is to develop coordinated system-wide schemes to improve
system flexibility and to allow for more control of system security from the
transmission system. The goal is to encourage industry involvement to make
research more applicable, and broaden the power education program. Courses will
be made more interesting and efficient using computer and video technology. This
plan strives to supply power system engineering students with: strong
fundamental backgrounds, industry contacts, knowledge of practical power systems
operation and control, and a knowledge of the big picture. Methods to be
Employed Methods based on eigenvector analysis, controllability and
observability, participation's, and sensitivities will be applied to the control
design problem. The uniqueness of this plan is the consideration of any system
variables for control input, instead of limiting control variables to locally
measured values. FACTS controllers will also be included in this analysis. The
focus will be on system-wide analysis, and models will be developed and tested
on the full nonlinear system. Computer presentation software and hardware and
active learning techniques will be utilized in the classroom and for course
assignments. The development of a seminar series and industry advisory board
will help to integrate the research and teaching components of this project. The
communication, computer, and video technology will be utilized to enhance the
existing off-campus graduate program. Significance of Plan Open access, system
mergers, and the growth in wheeling will magnify stress on the system. As a
result, each part of the system will become more vulnerable to problems in any
other part of the system. System-wide oscillations and energy transfers will
become even more likely. Control strategies and systems must be developed to
keep the system secure as well as accommodate the host of new demands placed on
it. The results of this project will improve power system control strategies to
allow the system to withstand increased stress. The improvement of security
using the transmission-based control will be necessary and valuable as
generator-control is separated from the transmission system. The plan will take
advantage of new communication and control equipment and to coordinate its use
for system security purposes. Research, planning, and development now can mean
more secure, flexible, and thus more profitable systems for the future. More
coordinated planning of new purchases can also reduce costs by avoiding
redundant or ineffective controls. Cooperative university-utility relationships
and the training of high-quality engineers are critical to the success of a
power program. The activities in this plan are aimed at building and
strengthening these relationships. The creative use of teaching techniques and
tools, collaborative efforts with other universities, involvement of industry in
teaching plans, and the expansion of the curriculum will improve the quality of
Kansas State University's power engineering graduates. The industry will need
well-trained engineers to succeed in the changing utility environment.