* 9734008
* CAREER/RUI:  Genetic Basis of Sperm Precedence and          Sex-Specific Fitness in Fruit Flies
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Kimberly Hughes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/2002
* USD 295,000.00

9734008 Hughes This project builds upon previous research indicating that
genetic variation for male fertility in Drosophila melanogaster is due to one or
a few major-effect genes on the third chromosome. Other fitness traits in fruit
flies (female fecundity, male mating success, larval viability) seem to be
affected by variation at many genes of small or moderate effect, so male
fertility is unusual in its genetic determination. An experiment will be
conducted to map genes affecting male fertility to specific locations on the
chromosome. It is expected that this mapping will eventually lead to the
identification of genes causing variation in the trait. Measurement of specific
properties of these genes (e.g., average effect, dominance and epistasis) will
provide explicit tests of models of the causes of variation. Another experiment
involves measuring genetic and environmental contributions to variation for sex-
specific fitness. One of the goals of this experiment is to determine whether
genes that have beneficial effects on one sex, but deleterious effects on the
other (sexually-antagonistic effects) are involved in the maintenance of genetic
variation within populations. The second primary emphasis of this project is
educational. Undergraduate students will be involved in every phase of the
research effort. In addition, new courses and course modules that exploit
molecular genetic techniques will be introduced into the undergraduate
curriculum. Populations of organisms, including humans, are genetically diverse
for traits related to reproduction, developmental rate, lifespan, and disease
resistance. Because they largely determine the lifetime reproductive output of
an organism, these life-history traits should be subject to very strong forces
that eliminate variation. Yet most populations retain substantial variation for
these traits. One of the main goals of population genetics is to gain an
understanding of the forces responsible for maintaining this variat ion. Genetic
diversity can have a direct impact on human health and longevity (when it occurs
in humans or in human pathogens), on the productivity of agricultural systems
(when it occurs in agriculturally important species), and on the risks of
extinction for threatened and endangered species (when it occurs in these
species, their pathogens, or their competitors). This proposal describes two
related projects designed to investigate the genetic basis of life-history
traits, and to test specific theoretical models of the maintenance of genetic
diversity. The educational emphasis of this project is focused on undergraduate
researchers, and the introduction of new molecular techniques into the
classroom.