* 9734442
* CAREER:  Algorithmic Issues in Collaborative Filtering
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Joseph Konstan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2003
* USD 346,260.00

The promise of the information age is the delivery of more information than has
ever been available before. Unfortunately, human ability to manage and process
information remains mostly unchanged. The result of this mismatch is information
overload. This project extends one approach to alleviating information overload
--collaborative filtering--to provide a new way to assist individuals in
personal information selection. Collaborative filtering uses the opinions of
member of a community about information objects to recommend a subset of those
objects to each individual in the community. The technique works well for small
communities in which each user has evaluated many of the information objects.
This project uses sophisticated statistical and computation techniques to extend
collaborative filtering to communities with millions of users who may have
evaluated only a fraction of a percent of the available items. As part of this
work, the researchers are developing measures of confidence to help users
determine how much faith to place in a particular recommendation. This research
project will allow an already booming personalization industry to move from
niche markets into mainstream communities and markets; at the same time, it will
provide the measures needed for other researchers to evaluate new filtering
algorithms and techniques. http://www.cs.umn.edu/Research/GroupLens