* 9734515
* CAREER: Multicast for the Masses: Scaling the Internet      Multicast Service
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* Steven McCanne, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2002
* USD 200,000.00

Over the past few years, the principal investigator has designed, implemented,
and deployed a number of applications and application-level protocols that
utilize IP Multicast for large-scale, multiparty remote-conferencing over the
Internet Multicast Backbone or Mbone. In the current incarnation of the MBone
tools, a separate application handles each media (e.g.,for audio,for video, and
for whiteboard) and together these tools comprise a flexible multi-party
communication system that scales to roughly 1000 participants. This NSF CAREER
proposal builds upon this previous work on the MBone tools with a new emphasis
on massive scalability. A principal goal is to design new end-to-end protocols
complemented by new network services that will facilitate multi-party
communication systems that scale to millions of hosts. At this extreme,
``multicast for the masses''becomes a reality. If successful,the traditional
infrastructures for mainstream mass media ---e.g., analog cable networks and
over the air radio broadcasts ---can be replaced by integrated packet-switched
networks running highly scalable multicast protocols. The proposed approach for
achieving this thousand-fold improvement in scalability is multifaceted.
Initially, the investigator will design minimal but powerful extensions to the
IP Multicast service model that will provide end hosts with more flexible
mechanisms for exploiting the underlying network topology. In the current
Internet architecture, network topology is deliberately hidden. While this has
led to robust protocols and robust networks, it places fundamental scaling
restrictions on end-to-end multicast protocols. Instead, the proposed work will
investigate whether a properly modified IP Multicast service model can enable
new end-to-end protocols that scale to the extreme degree proposed herein. One
particularly promising extension to IP Multicast is a new forwarding service
called subtree multicast or subcast. Subcasts provide the topol ogically-aware
network localization that end-to-end protocols require in order to scale
gracefully. Whereas a normal multicast packet is sent to every receiver in a
target multicast group, a subcast packet is sent only to a well-defined,
localized subset of the group. Leveraging subtree multicast, the proposed work
aims to overcome many of the scaling limitations in current end-to-end multicast
protocols, and in particular, seeks a new, subcast-based design for the local
recovery component of modern reliable multicast transport protocols. But, more
generally, subcasts hold the promise to have far-reaching impact on a number of
end-to-end multicast protocols (e.g., announce/listen protocols like RTCP,
session directory protocols, multicast address allocation schemes, congestion
control probes as RLM, and distributed voting algorithms like SCUBA),and the
proposed work will investigate the integration of subcasts into these existing
protocols as well as new ones. Research prototypes based on subcast technology
will be fielded in real, ``production'' environments and integrated to the
extent possible into the proposed educational activities. To this end, the
investigator will develop on-line curricula that utilizes an experimental
webcast system to deliver course content over the network, for example, to
students in their dormitories, homes, or offices. The resulting applications and
tools will also be deployed in a ``distance-learning classroom'', currenty under
development at U.C. Berkeley, which houses classes, seminars, and research group
meetings. To realize this ambitious goal, the proposed project will integrate
artifacts and infrastructure from the MASH multimedia networking project at U.C.
Berkeley and other similar efforts in the network research community that are
investigating and building new multicast applications and protocols.