* 9734172
* CAREER:  Efficient Solution of Discrete Optimization        Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Sebastian Ceria, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 06/30/2002
* USD 209,998.00

9734172 Ceria This research will develop and implement new efficient algorithms
for the solution of a wide variety of practical business and engineering
decision problems. Examples include routing trucks, trains and buses in
transportation and distribution networks, designing fiber-optic
telecommunication networks for the transmission of voice, data, audio and video,
planning and scheduling industrial machines in factories and scheduling crews in
airlines. Each of these problems can be formulated mathematically as mixed-
integer programs, namely, an optimization problem with a linear objective
function in decision variables that are required to be either continuous or
integer and which must satisfy a finite set of linear constraints. This
particular class of problems is of enormous relevance in the area of Management
Science and Operations Research, not only because of its wide applicability to
real industrial problems, but also because their efficient solution has
challenged researchers for the past fifty years. In spite of important
breakthroughs in the design of efficient algorithms and computer technology,
practitioners continue to formulate mixed-integer programming problems that
cannot be solved adequately with existing algorithms. This research will focus
on two general methodologies: approximate solution procedures and exact
algorithms. The approximate procedures are designed to obtain near-optimal
solutions with a measure of the amount the solution deviates from optimality for
very-large scale problems. The exact algorithm is a robust mixed-integer
programming solver based on a branch-and-cut algorithm that uses disjunctive
cutting planes. The results of this research will be implemented into a software
package that will be made available to the large community of users. The
software development will be performed in a flexible computer environment,
allowing for runs on networks of computers. Consequently, implemented algorithms
will efficiently solve large-scale mixed-integer probl ems without any
particular mathematical structure. Moreover, the new theoretical developments
will provide a foundation for determining general mathematical properties of
these problems. The new theory should allow for further development of
increasingly efficient algorithms. ***