* 9734102
* CAREER:  Representations, Tools, and Services for the       Complete Integration of Software Development Documents
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/1998,06/30/2003
* Ethan Munson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2003
* USD 205,943.00

9734102 Large software projects produce many documents of many different types
that, together, describe the plans for, implementation of, and experience with
the program. Ensuring that these documents do not have serious conflicts with
each other is a critical task in any real software system, but requires a level
of integration among the different types of software documents that is not
possible with current development tools. This research project is working to
identify the document representations, software tools, and user interface
services that are required to integrate program source code and all other
software documents into a seamless, interconnected whole. The project is
producing a prototype development environment that allows arbitrary multimedia
documentation and hyperlinks inside program source files and additional tools
for managing and understanding the relationships between software documents.
This research is significant because it is breaking down the barriers that
currently exist between program source code and the natural language documents
that motivate, evaluate, and explain it. The educational component of this
CAREER project seeks to attract students from underrepresented groups to the
study of computer science through outreach and a summer program curriculum and
is also enhancing the department's software curriculum through new graduate
course offerings. ***