* 9734054
* CAREER: Integration of Economic and Environmental Assessment of Advanced Materials Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Jacqueline Isaacs, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 285,000.00

9734054 Isaacs With the increasing importance of commercialization and
liabilities of materials, attributes other than technical performance are
becoming significant for characterizing the success and performance of
materials: the manufacturing cost and the environmental consequences of using
the material. The objectives of this interdisciplinary research project are to
develop modeling tools that (1) aid in assessing the commercial potential and
process economics of existing and developmental technologies, and (2) identify
environmental life cycle effects. Working with industrial partners, the initial
phase of the research concentrates on development of process-based technical
cost models in the powder metallurgy industry, simulation of manufacturing costs
and development of environmental metrics. Analyses will be performed to identify
economic and technical parameters that are necessary for successful
implementation of advanced materials. In later phases of the project, analyses
will be extended to more advanced powder processing of materials, such as
magnetic, ceramic and composite materials. Results from this work are expected
to provide critical information about performance, economic and environmental
tradeoffs that influence the implementation and competitive positions of
alternative manufacturing technologies. Students working on this collaborative
project will synthesize a relevant, meaningful manufacturing experience by
participation in the graduate cooperative education program with the industrial
partners. Research results will also be used to develop case-based interactive
courses that raise the environmental literacy of undergraduate and graduate
engineering students. The ultimate goal of this research plan is to develop a
sustainable and balanced effort among interdisciplinary education, case-based
research and industrial co-op experience. The nature of this research encourages
technology transfer, strengthens the knowledge-base of all participants in the
partnership, and im pacts societal needs by aiding in assessment of economically
viable, environmentally beneficial solutions to technological problems.