* 9734484
* CAREER: Identifying Binding Sites on Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Brian Shoichet, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2003
* USD 460,000.00

Shoichet 9734484 CAREER: Identifying Binding Sites on Proteins 1. Technical tip1
The fundamental goal of this study is to understand how protein structure
determines function through identification of ligand binding sites on protein
surfaces, using beta-lactamase AmpC as a model system. The experiments are
designed to characterize mutant enzymes with substitutions made in known binding
sites, measuring the changes in their thermodynamic stability. Residues
positioned to interact with substrates or inhibitors are also examined for the
stability effect. The aim is to test a "stability-function" hypothesis which may
provide the basis of a new tool to dissect and predict the structures of
proteins. The didactic program is built around this research as it integrates
into the requirements of graduate and professional education. Through the design
of a new biochemistry and a new pharmacology course, graduate students will be
introduced to current questions in protein structure-function, and trained in
the biophysical and biochemical techniques necessary to investigate these
questions. 2. Non-technical A key question in Biology is how the structures of
proteins determine their functions. A simple constraint on the structure and
organization of protein binding sites may suggest just such a general method for
predicting what sorts of ligands they will recognize. Proteins use highly
functionalized clefts to bind ligands and catalyze reactions. These clefts do
not appear to be optimized for protein stability. This study is designed to
remove known binding sites by residue substitution, testing significant
stabilization of a protein by certain surface alterations. The establishment of
such relationships would have broad applicability to structure-function studies,
offering a new tool to dissect the structures of proteins and predict what they
will and will not work upon. The didactic program is built around this research
as it integrates biophysical and biochemical techniques and pr inciples into the
requirements of graduate and professional education. tip1 Yes, this is really
the Project Summary Form. The "Project Summary" is in the header and the NSF
Form # is in the footer along with the page number. If you want to print out the
description of what the Project Summary should include, choose' print hidden
text' in the print window.