* 9734285
* CAREER: Theory and Application of Hybrid Estimation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* X. Rong Li, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2003
* USD 226,300.00

9734285 Li Hybrid estimation, as powerful robust adaptive approach, has found
great success recently in solving many problems compounded with structural
and/or parametric uncertainty, ranging from fault detection and isolation to
target tracking and recognition, and from biomedical signal processing to
complex system decomposition. The bottle-neck problem currently exists with
hybrid estimation is that existing techniques are not cost-effective enough for
most real-world hybrid estimation problems, which involve a large set of modes.
The most serious barrier for the further development of hybrid estimation is
associated with the fact that existing techniques are confined to a fixed
structure. In other words, existing hybrid estimation has a fundamental
limitation, inherent to the fixed structure, in that it cannot handle
effectively problems involving more than just a few modes, which is,
unfortunately, the case for most real-world problems. This limitation stems from
the fundamental assumption of the existing techniques that the system mode at
any time can be represented accurately by one of a small and fixed set of models
that can be determined a priori. As a result, existing hybrid estimation with a
fixed structure has arrived at such a stage that great improvement can no longer
be expected within its fixed structure. Nevertheless, existing research effort
is confined almost entirely to this fixed structure. In this proposal, an
investigation of the theory and application of hybrid estimation techniques is
proposed. The theoretical research proposed includes the development of several
promising and complementary variable structure algorithms that are highly cost-
effective, uncomplicated and general enough to be applicable to most hybrid
estimation problems, and some work toward the development of a unified theory of
hybrid estimation.

The technical approach that will be undertaken for the proposed research is to
use variable structure in hybrid estimation: The set of models, rather than the
models themselves, may be made adaptive based on measurement sequences, which
carries valuable information about the system mode currently in effect. This is
a promising new direction for improving significantly on the existing
techniques, which was initiated by the PI recently. Its great potential has been
demonstrated by the recent development of such an algorithm by the PI that is
uncomplicated, generally applicable, and significantly more cost-effective than
the state-of-the-art fixed structure hybrid estimators. This project is expected
to have a significant impact on the theoretical and applied research in
estimation, decision and identification, and their application areas. In the
short term it will advance significantly the state-of-the-art hybrid estimation
techniques, and in the long term, it will provide insight and thrust to future
investigation in stochastic systems theory, random signal processing and
statistical inference.

Education and human resource development are integrated components of the
proposed career development plan. The primary education objective of this plan
is to train students to develop ability, knowledge, and skills for scientific
inquiry and technological discovery and invention, hence preparing them well for
their pursuit of an engineering career. This is achieved by the following: 1)
Provide students opportunities to participate in advnced research projects under
innovative and close guidance of the PI; 2) Develop new graduate and
undergraduate courses for better educating and training students; 3) Disseminate
results from the proposed reseach by textbook writing to reach out to more
students. ***