* 9734191
* PECASE:  Providing a Coherent View of Diverse Distributed Information Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1998,08/31/2005
* Gregory Leazer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 500,000.00

New digital information resources necessitate the creation of new tools for
resource discovery. Users must negotiate a large number of collections of
information, such as new digital libraries and the collections of traditional
libraries and museums. The distribution of resources into separate domains
prevents optimal searching, and users must search multiple systems sequentially
in order to perform exhaustive searches. The solution to this problem is to
provide an integrated control of resources so users can locate information
without regard to its location. The focus of this project is to investigate user
behavior in the selection of diverse information resources from distributed
collections using qualitative field work methods. A prototype system which
integrates various types of metadata and forms networks of linkages is used to
determine how users select resources. The educational component of this project
is to develop a broad interdisciplinary program that integrates various theories
in information retrieval. The curriculum is intended to provide students with a
technological grounding and a theoretical framework for addressing significant
problems relating to networked information resource discovery and retrieval. The
results of this project will provide insight into the integration of digital and
traditional collections, and the optimal retrieval of resources from them. The
findings will also provide for the design of diverse types of information
retrieval systems, including search agents that seek out resources among
distributed collections, and present an integrated view for user consultation.