* 9734258
* CAREER: High-speed Electrophoretic Imaging of Biological    Microenvironments
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Jason Shear, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2003
* USD 275,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focuses on the development of high
speed separation techniques with high sensitivity detection strategies to study
neurotransmitter release from single cells. Professor Shear and his students at
the University of Texas-Austin will fabricate a novel, multichannel capillary
electrophoresis array for the rapid sampling and separation of excreted
neurotransmitters. Multiphoton-excited fluorescence can be generated from
extremely small (sub-picoliter) volumes to provide high sensitivity while
retaining chromatographic integrity. This combination will allow the monitoring
of neurotransmitter release across the 'landscape' of a single cell. This CAREER
research project will expose undergraduate students to modern research
laboratory instrumentation and illustrate the utility of the approaches through
the analysis of `real world` samples. Professor Shear will combine fundamental
aspects of chemical instrumentation in his lectures with hands on problem
solving in the laboratory. One of the long standing issues in the area of
neurochemistry has been the desire to observe neurotransmitter release on the
single-cell level in real time. Professor Shear and his students at the
University of Texas-Austin, are developing monitoring techniques based on the
combination of a novel capillary electrophoresis array and high sensitivity
optical spectroscopy methods. Instrumentation having the capabilities to monitor
individual neurotransmitter releases across the surface of a cell would impact a
number of disciplines. The multidisciplinary aspects of the instrumentation
development portion of this project are complemented by Professor Shear's
interest in introducing undergraduates to state-of-the-art research
instrumentation for solving `real world` analytical problems which may have a
high degree of complexity. ┤Á╝À╝/┤┐/¥Á ¢│╣Á&gt;│Á │%/¢¢Á¢ ½Á_╣│?&gt;┤┐│¥?╝
&gt;/&gt;?║/╝¥╣│%Á¢ /╝Á /&gt; ╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ │%/¢¢ ?Â &gt;Á ┴ _/¥Á╝╣/%¢ ¼©Á` ?ÂÂÁ╝
┐&gt;╣╗┐Á ?║║?╝¥┐&gt;╣¥╣Á¢ ¥? ¢¥┐┤` Â┐&gt;┤/_Á&gt;¥/% ║╝?▓%Á_¢ ╣&gt; ¥©Á
╣&gt;¥Á╝┤╣¢│╣║%╣&gt;/╝` /╝Á/¢ ?Â │©Á_╣¢¥╝` ║©`¢╣│¢ /&gt;┤ _/¥Á╝╣/%¢ ¢│╣Á&gt;│Á
/¢ ┴Á%% /¢ _/&gt;` ║?¥Á&gt;¥╣/% /║║%╣│/¥╣?&gt;¢ ¢┐│© /¢ ¢?%/╝ Á&gt;Á╝À`
│?&gt;└Á╝¢╣?&gt; ┴/¢¥Á ┤ÁÀ╝/┤/¥╣?&gt; /&gt;┤ &gt;/&gt;?Á%Á│¥╝?&gt;╣│¢ ¼©Á
┤Á¥/╣%Á┤ ┐&gt;┤Á╝¢¥/&gt;┤╣&gt;À ╝Á¢┐%¥╣&gt;À Â╝?_ ¥©Á¢Á ¢¥┐┤╣Á¢ ┴╣%% ©/└Á /&gt;
╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ ╣_║/│¥ ?&gt; ¥©Á /║║%╣│/¥╣?&gt; ?Â ¢Á_╣│?&gt;┤┐│¥?╝
&gt;/&gt;?║/╝¥╣│%Á¢ ╣&gt;│Á ¥©Á ║╝?│Á¢¢Á¢ ¥? ▓Á ¢¥┐┤╣Á┤ ┤Á¥Á╝_╣&gt;Á ¥©Á
ÁÂÂ╣│╣Á&gt;│` /&gt;┤ ¥©Á │©Á_╣│/% ¢¥/▓╣%╣¥` ?Â /&gt;` ┤Á└╣│Á¢ _/┤Á Â╝?_ ¢┐│©
&gt;/&gt;?║/╝¥╣│%Á¢ ¬Á¢┐%¥¢ Â╝?_ ¥©╣¢ ¢¥┐┤` ┴╣%% /%¢? /┤┤ ¥? ¥©Á ÀÁ&gt;Á╝/%
┐&gt;┤Á╝¢¥/&gt;┤╣&gt;À ?Â ¥©Á ┤`&gt;/_╣│¢ ╣&gt; ¥©Á ¢?%╣┤ %╣╗┐╣┤ ╣&gt;¥Á╝Â/│Á
┴╣│© ╣¢ Á¢¢Á&gt;¥╣/% Â?╝ ¥©Á ┤Á¢╣À&gt; /&gt;┤ /║║%╣│/¥╣?&gt; ?Â _/&gt;`
╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ ┤Á└╣│Á¢ /&gt;┤ ║╝?│Á¢¢Á¢ ¢┐│© /¢ ¥©Á ¢?%/╝ │Á%% Á%Á│¥╝?│©Á_╣¢¥╝`
/&gt;┤ ©Á¥Á╝?ÀÁ&gt;Á?┐¢ │/¥/%`¢╣¢