* 9734164
* CAREER: Probabilistic and Algebraic Techniques for          Computational Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2000
* D Sivakumar, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 04/30/2000
* USD 100,931.00

The focus of the research activity is developing new tools and techniques for
attacking fundamental problems in computational complexity theory. One thrust is
the search for adaptations of the probabilistic method of Paul Erdos to uniform
complexity theory. A second thrust is the investigation of the connections
between various questions in complexity theory and various structural and
algorithmic questions concerning robust error-correcting codes, and related
algebraic and geometric structures. In addition to contributions to complexity
theory, this research has the potential for making contributions to the
probabilistic method; derandomization and coding theory. The educational
activities are centered around the broader goal of designing an undergraduate
curriculum in theoretical computer science for the new millennium. The
motivation stems from the growing importance of program correctness, and from
the need to design theory curricula relevant to and reflecting the changing role
of computer science. The educational activity integrates and unifies discrete
mathematics, automata and formal language theory, program verification and
correctness, and computational complexity theory. A highlight is a novel
application of automata theory as an effective playground for teaching program
correctness. The educational activities also include developing a curriculum in
algorithm engineering, with a vision to integrate research, education,
experimentation and training in algorithm design and implementation, and with
specific goals to develop ultra-efficient implementations of fundamental
algorithms for massive data sets.