* 9734384
* CAREER: Shock-Tube Investigation of the Richtmyer-Meshkov   Instability and Integration of Classroom Lectures and       Computer and Laboratory Activities
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1998,09/30/2002
* Riccardo Bonazza, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 09/30/2002
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9734384 Principle Investigator: Bonazza This is a
Career Award to conduct experiments to study the evolution of the instability
developing at a fluid interface accelerated by strong shock-waves (up to M = 4
in atmospheric air). The experiments will be carried out in a new vertical,
square shocktube of large (25 x 25 cm) cross section. The time evolution (at
both the early, linear and late, non-linear stages) of interfaces with various
density ratios will be studied, for several values of the incident shock's Mach
number. Both continuous (gravitationally stratified) and discontinuous
(membrane-based) interfaces will be studied. The study of the evolution of the
interface (with particular emphasis placed on the growth rates of its
perturbations and thickness) will be based on high spatial resolution,
quantitative imaging of planar, vertical cross sections of the interface.
Diagnostic techniques will include planar laser induced fluorescence (PLIF) and
Rayleigh scattering, both to be implemented with a pulsed ND:YAG laser. This
topic represents an important unresolved problem in fluid mechanics. It is
related to the overturn of supernova cores, reactive and non-reactive mixing
processes in industrial settings and laser-implosion of microtargets in
inertial-confinement fusion experiments.