* 9734404
* Feedback Coupling Between Flow and Reactions in             Heterogeneous Porous and Fractured Media:Computational and  Experimental Studies  (CAREER)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2003
* Harihar Rajaram, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2003
* USD 224,735.00

9734404 Rajaram An integrated research and education plan is proposed in the
specific area of reaction-transport-flow coupling in porous and fractured media.
The research plan focuses on computational and experimental studies of the
dissolutional growth of fissures in soluble rock and the impact of
precipitation/dissolution reactions on permeability of porous and fractured
media. The educational plan involves the development of observational components
relevant to education in fluid mechanics and hydrology, and curriculum
development relevant to the graduate program in hydrologic sciences. Feedback
coupling between fluid flow and chemical reactions is important in the context
of several geological processes such as conduit and cave formation in karst, and
engineering applications such as "acidization" to increase permeability for oil
recovery. Although reaction-flow coupling has been examined previously, a
systematic study of the influence of geologic heterogeneity on the nonlinearly
coupled dynamics is only beginning. A preliminary study carried out by the P.I.
and a graduate student indicated that random variations in the fissure aperture
accelerate conduit growth in calcite by up to an order of magnitude. The
objective of the proposed research is to quantify the influence of heterogeneity
on the dynamics of flow-reaction coupling in porous and fractured media, based
on controlled experiments and computational studies. Experiments will be carried
out in fractures cast with plaster-of-paris. Surfaces with measured roughness
will be used to assemble the fractures. High-resolution aperture measurements
(through collaboration with Dr. Robert J. Glass, Sandia National Laboratories)
will accompany dissolution experiments. Computational studies will focus on
topical systems such as karst evolution, dissolution of gypsum and anhydrite,
deposition of quartz veins in fractures and the growth of carbonate concretions.
The studies on carbonate concretions will support the work of Drs. Matt Davis
(EAR-9725194) and Peter Mozley (EAR-9726416). The data on concretion growth
history and orientation obtained from their work will be employed to evaluate
different hypotheses on concretion growth. Continuing educational activities
include development of an interactive undergraduate fluid mechanics course and a
bench-top watershed module to be used for qualitative and quantitative
visualization. Proposed module development activities focus on simple
experiments to illustrate the impact of heterogeneity on flow and transport
processes in porous and fractured media. Curriculum development involve a new
integrative course on reactive transport modeling, to serve as a core course for
the graduate program in hydrologic sciences. The course will provide an
integrated perspective on reaction-transport interactions in atmospheric,
oceanic, surface and groundwater systems, emphasizing the unifying aspects
across different media. The relationship between spatial/temporal scales of
interest and the types of models used will also be a theme. The course will
include a field component on experimental modification of water quality in small
streams (through collaboration with Dr. Diane McKnight) and experimental
studies.