* 9734103
* CAREER: An Infrastructure in Support of Configurable,       Consistent, Interactive Computational Steering
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1998,12/08/1998
* Eileen Kraemer, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/08/1998
* USD 103,874.00

9734103 Interactive steering permits users to monitor a program's execution and
adjust application parameters and resource allocation in an online fashion.
Steering tools must address issues related to the consistency, lag, scalability,
and induced perturbation of monitoring, display, and interaction components.
However, the ideal balance among these concerns varies with execution
environment and target application. Thus, configurability is an important issue.
This research focuses on the design and development of infrastructure for a
steering environment that permits users to specify the configuration to provide
the desired balance among consistency, lag, and perturbation. This project
includes the development of modular algorithms for the collection of snapshots
with varying degrees of consistency, and algorithms that permit the consistent
application of changes to the executing program, while minimizing resulting lag
and perturbation. These algorithms for consistent monitoring and steering build
on existing work on snapshot algorithms, and extend this work from the realm of
consistent observation of distributed systems to ensuring consistency in the
application of changes to an executing distributed computation, through an
innovative application of optimistic computing techniques. Another interesting
feature of this work is the use of monitoring and steering ``agents'',
implemented as scripts, and deployed in a modular, hierarchical monitoring and
steering environment.***