* 9734041
* CAREER:  Understanding Strong Correlations in Real          Materials with Scalable High Performance Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Shiwei Zhang, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

9734041 Zhang This is a CAREER award which integrates research and education in
computational materials physics. The research will address long-standing
questions on electron correlations in high temperature superconductors. Intense
theoretical effort to understand these materials has been hampered by the lack
of effective computational algorithms. Such algorithms are essential in order to
solve model systems to compare with experiment and guide the selection of
analytic approximations. Among such model systems the Hubbard model, believed to
contain the gross features of electron correlations in high temperature
superconductors, has received an unprecedented level of attention. Yet many
basic questions remain open on its properties. By developing new algorithms for
scalable high-performance computing, we will perform accurate computations of
electron correlations in this and related models. The objective in education is
to incorporate computing into the curriculum in a seamless way. High-performance
computing impacts more than research and presents enormous opportunities. To
fully take advantage, students must be adequately prepared with skills in
computation. By curriculum development, outreach and mentoring, and cross-
disciplinary collaboration, the gap in computational science in the William and
Mary curriculum will be filled and students will be involved in state-of-the-art
computational physics research. %%% This is a CAREER award which integrates
research and education in computational materials physics. The research will
address long-standing questions on electron correlations in high temperature
superconductors. Intense theoretical effort to understand these materials has
been hampered by the lack of effective computational algorithms. Such algorithms
are essential in order to solve model systems to compare with experiment and
guide the selection of analytic approximations. Among such model systems the
Hubbard model, believed to contai n the gross features of electron correlations
in high temperature superconductors, has received an unprecedented level of
attention. Yet many basic questions remain open on its properties. By developing
new algorithms for scalable high-performance computing, we will perform accurate
computations of electron correlations in this and related models. The objective
in education is to incorporate computing into the curriculum in a seamless way.
High-performance computing impacts more than research and presents enormous
opportunities. To fully take advantage, students must be adequately prepared
with skills in computation. By curriculum development, outreach and mentoring,
and cross- disciplinary collaboration, the gap in computational science in the
William and Mary curriculum will be filled and students will be involved in
state-of-the-art computational physics research. ***