* 9734177
* CAREER: Low Temperature Deposition of Thin Metal Films from Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1998,05/31/2003
* James Watkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2003
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract - Watkins - 9734177 The demands of present and future microelectronic
and optoelectronic device fabrication place stringent requirements on metal
deposition schemes. These include high film purity, low temperatures and rapid,
controllable deposition rates. The PI postulates that these objectives can be
met via Chemical Fluid Deposition (CFD), a new approach to metal deposition that
involves the chemical or thermal reduction of soluble organometallic compounds
in supercritical carbon dioxide at low temperatures (40-80oC) to yield
continuous films on inorganic or organic substrates. CFD exploits the unique,
and adjustable, physicochemical properties of SCF solvents, which lie
intermediate to those of liquids and gases, to circumvent the limitations of
both vapor and liquid phase techniques. In CFD, precursor transport and
reduction occurs in solution at significantly lower temperatures and higher
reagent concentrations than those of vapor phase techniques such as chemical
vapor deposition (CVD). While CFD is a solution-based process, the "gas-like"
transport properties of the SCF and its miscibility with gaseous reducing agents
such as hydrogen, render the process unencumbered by issues of poor mass
transfer and poor deposition rates associated with liquid phase reductions.
Preliminary experiments demonstrate that high-purity, continuous platinum and
palladium films can be deposited from SCF solution onto silicon wafers and other
inorganic substrates at temperatures up to 170oC below those employed in CVD.
The research program will focus on the deposition of thin films from carbon
dioxide solution by the hydrogenolysis of dimethylcyclooctadine platinum (II)
and the deposition of copper films by reduction of
copper(II)bis(hexafluoroacetylacetone) and
copper(II)bis(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate). The precursors were
chosen to facilitate a direct comparison of film quality and reduction kinetics
in CFD to those of existing techniques and the potential utility of the m etal
deposits in microelectronics copper and catalytic platinum devices. The
educational portion of the work are to: (1) train graduate students who will
work at the interface of engineering and materials chemistry, (2) provide
undergraduates with opportunities for research experience, (3) develop a two-
course series in materials processing that addresses the interests of students
and is reinforced by the expanding materials research efforts in the Department
of Chemical Engineering, and (4) incorporate research problems and active
learning principles into the classroom and assist in the implementation of
interactive teaching tools across the curriculum.