* 9734131
* CAREER:  Anisotropic Femtosecond Spectroscopy of High-Tc    Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2003
* W. Andreas Schroeder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/2003
* USD 300,000.00

9734131 Schroeder This is a CAREER Award which will investigate the fundamental
properties of intrinsically anisotropic high-TC cuprate superconductors using
powerful, sophisticated, and polarization-sensitive time-resolved ultrafast
spectroscopic techniques. An ultrabroadband femtosecond terahertz (THz) probe
pulse (generated by optical rectification of a 50fs optical pulse) will be used
to spectrally time resolve the far-infrared transient response of high-TC
superconductors induced by an optical pump pulse through the change in the
reflectivity produced by the perturbed complex conductivity. Since the spectral
extent of the linearly polarized THz probe pulse includes the superconducting
gap 2A, this technique will be used to monitor directly the optically-induced
perturbations to the anisotropic order parameter A, the pseudogap in under-doped
materials, and transient inter- and intra-plane coupling between Cu-O layers and
chains using untwinned Yttrium- and Barium-based cuprate crystals. In addition,
to aid the understanding of the time-resolved THz spectra, two-photon excited-
state angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy will be employed to determine
the relevant characteristics (lifetime and momentum) of the optically-coupled
unoccupied states above the Fermi level. All measurements will be performed as a
function of TITC to elucidate temperature dependencies. The results from these
carefully designed ultrafast spectroscopic measurements should have a great
impact on our understanding of the unique properties of high-TC superconductors
in a manner parallel to that provided by similar femtosecond optical techniques
in semiconductor physics. The educational component will involve both
undergraduate physics majors and students from Chicago area high schools in
research in the investigators laboratory that is connected to the goals of the
project. %%% This is a CAREER Award which uses sophisticated optical methods to
study high temperature superconductor s. The discovery in 1986 of copper-oxide-
based ceramic materials, which exhibit zero electrical resistance at liquid
nitrogen (-3 F) (rather than liquid helium (-450 F)) temperatures, has ignited
technological interest in superconductivity as a means of dramatically reducing
energy distribution costs, developing efficient high-speed levitating
transportation, and making ultrafast electronic switches. However, despite a
decade of exciting research into the properties of high-temperature
superconductors (HTSCs), a definitive experiment leading to a clear
understanding of the physical mechanism responsible for superconductivity in
these unique materials has not been forthcoming. The goal of this research
program is to exploit the sub-picosecond (shorter than one-thousand-billionth of
a second) temporal resolution provided by today's laser technology to study the
fundamental physical processes occurring in HTSCs. Specifically, ultrashort
pulses of far-infrared radiation will be used to monitor the response of HTSCs
in an effort to time-resolve the mechanism responsible for superconductivity in
these ceramic materials. These ultrafast optical investigations will open a new
regime of study for superconductivity in which radiation is used to monitor
directly the electronic dynamics of the superconducting state. The results from
these novel spectroscopic studies should have a significant impact on our
understanding of the unique properties of HTSCs which, in turn, may lead to the
development of superconductors operating at even higher temperatures. Indeed,
similar ultrafast optical techniques have already improved our understanding and
design of everyday semiconductor devices. The educational component will involve
both undergraduate physics majors and students from Chicago area high schools in
research in the investigators laboratory that is connected to the goals of the
project. ***