* 9734072
* CAREER:  Mechanisms of Intercellular Communication in       Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Amy Bejsovec, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/2001
* USD 300,000.00

The secreted signaling molecule, Wingless (Wg) and its vertebrate homologues,
the Wnt family, play critical roles in generating embryonic positional
information and in regulating cell proliferation. Recent work in this laboratory
has revealed that active cellular transport of the Wingless signaling molecule
is essential for specification of cell fates in the embryonic epidermis of
Drosophila. A mutant form of Wg that shows restricted movement away from the
cells that produce it is associated with a reduction in the diversity of cell
fates normally specified by Wg signaling. Thus, lateral movement of Wg through
cells in the epidermal epithelium is functionally important for cell fate
specification. This planar form of transcytosis is very different from known
instances of transcytosis, which occur in an apical-basal or basal-apical
direction across a polarized epithelium. Understanding the mechanism of this
novel intercellular transport is essential to the study of Wg/Wnt biology. The
specific goals of this proposal seek to: (1) identify structural features of the
Wg protein, and of Wnt proteins in general, that are required for transport; (2)
explore the cellular machinery responsible for effecting the movement of Wg by
perturbing the endocytic process both in vivo and in vitro; and (3) characterize
genetically and molecularly two new genes that appear to be involved in Wg
protein transport during development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research work
has inspired the development of demonstration materials for stimulating interest
in biology in pre-college, undergraduate and graduate educational settings.
Drosophila mutant strains are commonly used for demonstrating genetic
principles, but they can also provide dramatic illustrations of basic
developmental and cell biological phenomena such as pattern formation and
endocytosis. A major goal of the proposed education plan is to develop and
popularize their use for these purposes in the classroom. Specific goals include
improving several fly strains for easier manipulation by educators, writing a
set of instructional materials to present and explain the cellular phenomena at
increasing levels of sophistication, and piloting the use of these demonstration
materials in an advanced undergraduate cell biology course at Northwestern
University.&lt;br/&gt;