* 9734832
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Ecology and Conservation Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 04/30/2001
* USD 162,798.00

The UMAB REU Site will provide students an intensive summer research experience,
focusing on issues of conservation biology, ecology, and biodiversity.
Consistent with the mission of the University, the project aims to involve a
diverse group of students, including non-traditional students from urban
environments, minorities underrepresented in science, and women. Twelve
undergraduates, recruited locally and nationally, will participate in research
with ten faculty sponsors in the Department of Biology. The two complementary
components of the program are (1) intensive individual research projects, in
which each student works closely with an advisor/mentor, and (2) weekly group
discussions for all students. Potential research topics include the
physiological ecology of Lepidoptera, the diversity of bacteria, the genetics of
endangered plants, and the genetic diversity of deep-sea molluscs. Each student
will prepare a report and present research results in a student research
symposium. The group meetings will address the theory and practice of research
and its conduct and implications, including ethical issues. The ethics component
will focus on the research process. Participants will also visit two or more
field sites and learn directly about each other's projects. A hands-on workshop
on molecular techniques will demonstrate the great potential of such methods for
ecology. An end-of-session retreat at the University Field Station on Nantucket
Island will serve to articulate impressions and bring cohesion to the summer
experience.