* 9734472
* Scientific Method, Stochastic Dynamics &amp; Deterministic      Forcing: Integrated Modelling, Field Research, &amp; Educational Outreach to Understand Population Dynamics of the B
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1998,12/31/2004
* David Eggleston, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2004
* USD 466,405.00

9734472 Eggleston Populations of animals and plants often fluctuate in a
seemingly chaotic manner. Fundamental challenges include formulating population
models that can tease apart the precise effects of different environmental
forces on population dynamics, and determining the interaction between
biological feedback mechanisms and the environment. This project addresses
processes that determine population dynamics in the blue crab (Callinectes
sapidus) in North Carolina, through comprehensive and integrated field
observations and experiments, population modeling of long- term abundance data,
and computer visualizations of water currents. The overall hypothesis is that
environmental perturbations, primarily in the form of tropical cyclones, will
markedly alter biological feedback mechanisms, producing large fluctuations in
abundance of juvenile and adult crabs. The overall goal of the student/teacher
enrichment program is to enhance scientific literacy, and involve students and
teachers in the scientific method that have traditionally been under-represented
in science, by linking public schools, state, and academic scientists together
with a common research goal. Fisheries species are an ideal focal point since
they are of significant cultural and economic importance to coastal counties,
and lie at the center of such critical issues as overfishing, water quality
degradation, and habitat loss.