* 9734310
* CAREER:  Analytical Modeling for Demanufacturing Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1998,10/31/2000
* Julie Ann Williams, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/2000
* USD 246,499.00

9734310 Julie Ann Stuart This research focuses on the development of strategies
for "product take-back centers" receiving a variety of discarded products. To
improve the profitability and efficiency of product take-back centers, decision
tools will be developed for the strategic production planning decisions and for
the operational grouping and scheduling decisions. The goal of the strategic
decisions for take-back production planning models will be to reduce staging
inventory and increase frequency of outgoing shipments. Mixed integer
programming models will be developed to represent the linear quantities of take-
back products and the integer quantities of outbound truckload shipments. The
goal for the grouping algorithms will be to assign take-back products to
processing groups in an effort to improve outbound shipment value while
considering additional inventory and material handling expenses. The focus of
the scheduling heuristics for demanufacturing will be to decrease the cycle time
for outbound shipments. The performance of these new decisions tools will
initially be tested using simulation models since incoming product
characteristics vary considerably. In addition, these new models will be
validated with case studies in U.S. take-back centers. This research will
contribute to the establishment of a methodological foundation for
demanufacturing planning and operations modeling. If successful, the results of
this research will improve take-back center profitability that may lead to the
increase of product take-back processing. The increase of product take-back
processing will divert many tons of discarded products from landfills and
increase the supply of materials for reuse in new products. Grouping strategies
to improve the quality and value of outbound materials may also increase the
possibilities for materials reuse. Furthermore, the challenges and approaches
for materials reuse, product design for demanufacturing, demanufacturing
planning, and sustainability will be communicated to undergraduate and graduate
students, researchers, and practicing engineers through innovative learning
modules for existing and new university courses, presentations, papers, and
workshops.***