* 9734051
* CAREER:  Surface and Interface Properties of                Antiferromagnetic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2002
* David Lederman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/2002
* USD 309,500.00

9734051 Lederman This is a CAREER Award to an EPSCOR grantee. Model
antiferromagnets will be used to study surface and interface magnetic
excitations and surface magnetic ordering phenomena of artificial
heterostructures. There is much interest in these materials because they have
simple structures and therefore they can be understood theoretically and their
behavior modeled by a computer. The results will significantly contribute to our
basic understanding of low-dimensional magnetic systems, and will be used to
understand more complex systems that have important technological applications.
A novel waveguide-thin-film spectroscopy will be employed to probe the magnetic
excitations. Additional information regarding the antiferromagnetic surface long
range order will be obtained from magnetic measurements of ferromagnetic
overlayers and neutron reflectivity measurements. The educational objective of
this proposal is to develop science outreach and recruiting programs in the
State of West Virginia to prepare students for the technology-based economy of
the twenty- first century. The educational portion of this project will be
composed of three parts: 1) integration of collaborative and hands-on activities
into the physics curriculum at West Virginia University; 2) participation in
science outreach and recruiting programs in the State of West Virginia; and 3)
involvement of undergraduate physics students directly in the research program.
%%% This is a CAREER Award to an EPSCOR grantee. The research objective of this
project is to study the magnetic properties of interfaces between model magnetic
materials. There is much interest in these materials because they have simple
structures and therefore they can be understood theoretically and their behavior
modeled by a computer. The results will significantly contribute to our basic
understanding of very small magnets, and will be used to understand more complex
systems that have important applications in magnetic storage and magnetic sensor
applications. The educational objective of this proposal is to develop science
outreach and recruiting programs in the State of West Virginia to prepare
students for the technology-based economy of the twenty-first century. The
educational portion of this project will be composed of three parts: 1)
integration of collaborative and hands-on activities into the physics curriculum
at West Virginia University; 2) participation in science outreach and recruiting
programs in the State of West Virginia; and 3) involvement of undergraduate
physics students directly in the research program. ***