* 9734586
* Gravitational Lensing Geometry and Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Arlie Petters, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 211,254.00

Abstract Proposal: DMS-9734586 Principal Investigator: Arlie Petters This
project centers on two mathematical programs dealing with the optical caustics
created by gravitational fields. One program investigates the magnification
cross sections of caustic-curve networks due to generic multiplane weak-field
gravitational lens systems. The other program studies the links between the
global geometry of the optical caustic surfaces in a spacetime (e.g., along our
past light cone or about rotating black holes) and the singularities of the
associated spacetime metric. These issues point to a new and promising direction
in the mathematical theory of optical caustics. Furthermore, their rigorous
treatment may also lead to a deeper understanding of the flux enhancement of
gravitationally lensed quasars and their overdensity around foreground galaxies,
and rapid X-ray variability in active galactic nuclei. Equally important, such
investigations may reveal new and powerful ways of understanding and organizing
fundamental physical concepts in gravitational lensing, and can provide a
theoretical check on results from numerical simulations. Gravitational lensing
is the deflection of light from a distant source (e.g., quasar, extended galaxy)
by an intervening matter distribution (e.g., galaxy, cluster of galaxies). When
foreground galaxies magnify background quasars, it causes an ``amplification
bias'' in certain quasar samples. This has led to a mathematically difficult and
physically important problem in gravitational lensing: Determine the probability
that a light source is magnified greater than some specified amount. A rigorous
study of this problem directly bears on the the issue of ``magnification bias.''
Another important problem is to investigate gravitational lensing by dynamical
lenses (e.g., rotating black holes). This is physically relevant since most
galaxies seem to have black holes at their centers. Moreover, gravitational
lensing by a rotatin g black hole may account for rapid X-ray variability in
active galactic nuclei. The aforementioned problems will lead me to interact
with astrophysicists and astronomers for physics discussions and latest
observations, computer scientists for sophisticated numerical codes running on
high-performance computers, and mathematicians for issues in singularity theory
and differential geometry. Also, implicit with this general aim is isolating and
studying the underlying mathematical structures invoked by gravitational
lensing. Once determined, these structures can then be made available as
potential mathematical tools for other physical systems (possibly shock
formation in fluids) that may call upon them.