* 9734585
* CAREER: New Traffic Models for Internet Connections and VBR video Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/1998,02/28/2003
* Kavitha Chandra, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 02/28/2003
* USD 252,000.00

New Traffic Models for Internet Connections and VBR Video Traffic This project
examines new models for application and connec- tion level traffic on the
Internet. The objective is to better understand the impact of this traffic on
network congestion. Features of Internet traffic such as its non- Poisson
statistics and long range dependence are a point of departure from typical
traffic on circuit switched networks. As packet traffic progresses from the user
application to its destination across a network, it undergoes a variety of
transformations. These linear and/or nonlinear transforma- tions give rise to
structural features in an otherwise ran- dom traffic stream. The result is high
variability in the network traffic mix. Identifying and controlling the source
of these traffic features is important in real-time resource allocation and
network traffic engineering. The work in this project uses measured network data
to identify the feature space required to model Internet usage. Traffic
generation from end users, network protocols and video-coders are con- sidered.
Non-linear time-series models will be used to characterize connection and
application level traffic. These models have the flexibility to address a range
of traffic types from short-range dependent stochastic processes to those with
self-similar and deterministic features. At the application level, particular
attention is paid to the gen- eration of layered variable bit rate video and
into the in- fluence of encoding parameters on traffic characteristics, model
parameters and performance. The time-series modeling framework will be used to
design optimal rate control algo- rithms with perceptual and network driven cost
constraints. The traffic models obtained will allow one to assess and control
end systems and provide network level control for problematic traffic sources.
The results will also provide quantitative evaluation of what types of traffic
can be su- perposed to yield suitable statistical multiplexing gains. In
conjunction with the research effort, a graduate and un- dergraduate curriculum
in the network performance area will be developed. The courses and projects will
support the development of end-to-end problem solving skills. The aim is to
integrate research and interdisciplinary ideas from engineering and physical
sciences into the solution of telecommunications related problems. Ongoing
activities under this project can be found at
http://morse.uml.edu/-kchandra/career.