* 9734044
* CAREER: Research in Nonlinear Numerical Optimization and    Practicums for Computational Science
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Virginia Torczon, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 04/30/2003
* USD 207,995.00

Many scientific and engineering numerical optimization problems are both
computationally expensive and difficult to solve for analytical reasons. Not
surprisingly, for such problems there are also significant issues in the
integration of the software that describes the system being optimized. These
difficulties are often intertwined. The research that will be done will look at
analytical and algorithmic issues that arise in the solution of such difficult
numerical optimization problems. Specifically, the work will evolve along two
complementary lines: the further development and analysis of pattern search
methods for nonlinear optimization, and the design and analysis of techniques
for using approximation models to optimize systems defined by computationally
expensive functions. Both these lines of research include a strong effort in
software development and experimentation. Practical experience working on
numerical optimization problems from science and engineering reveals issues and
techniques that are not covered well in the current computer science curriculum
and yet would serve students well in any multidisciplinary computational
setting. The course development will draw upon existing knowledge and software
tools in computer science and computational mathematics to design new courses---
practicums, in effect---that will teach students more about how to understand,
maintain, enhance, and optimize existing scientific software. The emphasis will
be on systematic analysis and testing with an eye toward performance
programming. Fundamental to this approach is the belief that students should be
taught how to experiment in a systematic, scientific fashion to analyze and
reason about extant, complex computer programs.