* 9734430
* Engineering Glycoforms on Proteins and Cells by             Chemoselective Ligation
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Carolyn Bertozzi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 380,000.00

The focus of this research will be the development of strategies for engineering
homogeneous glycoforms on proteins and cells using the principle of
chemoselective ligation. For gycoprotein engineering, a three-step process is
envisioned. First, recombinant expression of O-linked glycoproteins in the
presence of an oligosaccharide elongation inhibitor yields truncated
glycoproteins with single GalNAc residues at the O-linked sites. Second, an
aldehyde group is introduced onto truncated glycoproteins using galactose
oxidase. Third, synthetic oligosaccharides functionalized with complementary
reactive groups are ligated onto the truncated scaffold, affording glycoproteins
with rationally designed, homogeneous glycoforms. The focus of the educational
activities involves course and web site development. With this Faculty Early
Development (CAREER) award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
supporting the research and educational activities of Dr. Carolyn Bertozzi of
the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley. Professor
Bertozzi will focus her research efforts on developing strategies for
engineering homogeneous glycoforms on proteins and cells using the techniques of
synthetic chemistry, recombinant expression and metabolic engineering. This
approach will be used to investigate glycoproteins involved in leukocyte
activation and cell-cell interactions essential to the inflammatory response.
Course and curriculum development will be stressed in the educational efforts
supported by the award.