* 9734145
* PECASE: An Empirical Investigation of the Dynamics of       Measurement-based Admission Control Algorithms Within an    Economic Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2004
* Sugih Jamin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Admela Jukan
* 04/30/2004
* USD 505,000.00

Abstract On today's Internet, packets are delivered in a best-effort manner.
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is standardizing support for realtime
packet delivery on the Internet. The viability of relaxed, as opposed to hard
guarantees, realtime services depends fundamentally on the ability of its
measurement-based admission control algorithms to determine which connection can
be admitted to the network without violating service specifications. Previous
research has demonstrated the viability of measurement-based admission control
algorithms and relaxed realtime services. However, two important questions
remain. First, independent of any specific algorithm, what traffic
characteristics can serve as primary indicators to guide the setting of an
algorithm's parameters? Second, can global inefficiencies resulting from the
local nature of independent admission decisions be minimized? This research
proposes to use equivalent token-bucket filter of aggregate traffic to guide the
setting of the admission control algorithm's parameters, and to apply a market-
based approach to global resource allocation. While there is a sizeable body of
literature in the application of market-based control to the allocation of
computing resources, no previous work on distributed resource allocation that
involves multiple resources and takes into account transaction costs, i.e.~the
cost to negotiate and execute a transaction, has been reported. Further
information on this project is available from
http://irl.eecs.umich.edu/jamin/research/CAREER.html.