* 9734940
* Applying Learning Theory to Networking Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Sally Goldman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 119,213.00

This project will focus on applying results developed by learning theory
researchers to real-life problems. Such application-based theoretical work is
important so that the learning models and problems studied capture as best
possible the needs of real-life problems. Working to apply theoretical
techniques to real problems creates a better understanding of the real-world
problems and thus can help direct the future theoretical work, facilitating the
transfer of results from theory to practice. Many networking protocols (as well
as other system control algorithms) utilize one or more tunable parameters, e.g.
thresholds and window sizes. Frequently the methods used to set or adjust the
values of the parameters are ad hoc and are based on certain assumptions about
the operating environment, e.g. assuming a particular distribution on the
traffic patterns in a communication network. This project will develop framework
based on formal learning methods for automatic parameter tuning in system
control algorithms to study if better performance can be obtained. One such
networking application this project will study is that of dynamically adjusting
delays of acknowledgements in the TCP protocol. Delaying acknowledgements has
two main advantages. First, it allows a single acknowledgement for more than one
packet. Second, if a data packet is being sent in the opposite direction, then
we can piggy-back the acknowledgement too much can increase the latency. Most
TCP implementations used today employ some sort of acknowledgement delay
mechanism. This project investigates several schemes to dynamically adjust
acknowledgement delay, including ones based on the Weighted Majority (WM)
algorithms and ones based on the Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA)
algorithm. These schemes will be contrasted based on efficiency and efficacy ,
as well as proving theoretical results about them in terms of how well they
respond to "volatile" TCP connections. That is, if the connecti on occasionally
switches from sparse data transmission (where the goal might be to minimize
latency, as in the case of an interactive application) to dense data
transmission (where the goal might be to minimize the number of acknowledgements
and latency is not as important, as in the case of a file transfer) and back
again. Simulation results will be used to supplement the theoretical results.
Applying learning theory results to this problem and other networking problems
will then provide guidance in defining new theoretical learning models that
better model real-life scenarios. This project will also carefully develop and
study such new learning models.