* 9734936
* Combinatorial Optimization Involving Multiple Objectives:   Approximation Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Sekharipuram Ravi, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 06/30/2002
* USD 111,596.00

This is an investigation of combinatorial optimization problems involving
multiple objectives. Such problems arise in a variety of application areas
including communication networks, very large scale integrated systems, facility
location and management of hazardous materials. For many such problems, even
optimizing one objective is often computationally intractable. Motivated by the
practical importance of these problems, the focus of this research is on
developing efficient algorithms that produce solutions which are near-optimal
with respect to all the objectives. The major goals of the proposed research
include identifying classes of multiobjective optimization problems from various
application areas, developing efficient approximation algorithms for the
problems and evaluating their performance through analysis/experimentation,
developing a software library of multiobjective approximation algorithms that
can be used by researchers and practitioners, and obtaining insights into the
intrinsic difficulties encountered in developing approximation algorithms for
multiobjective problems. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be
encouraged to participate in this work. The results obtained will be
incorporated into seminar courses suitable for graduate and advanced
undergraduate students. A number of practical situations require a careful
analysis of constraints and objectives. For example, a business organization may
want to upgrade the communication network interconnecting its branches so that
information can be exchanged among the branches at a faster rate. Often, only a
limited budget is available for the upgrade. It is of interest to the
organization to obtain the best possible upgrade whose cost is within the
available budget. Such situations involving constraints and objectives arise in
a number of contexts including determining appropriate locations for facilities
(such as hospitals, fire stations, etc.) and management of hazardous materials.
Ma thematically, the problems arising in these contexts can be expressed as
optimization problems involving multiple objectives. However, computing the best
solutions to such problems is often infeasible. The focus of this research is on
developing procedures that can quickly compute solutions which are close to the
best solutions with respect to all the objectives. The research will investigate
problems from a number of application areas. One of the goals of this research
is to develop a library of software procedures that can be used by both
practitioners and researchers.