* 9734109
* CAREER: Experimental and Numerical Modeling of Coastal      Boundary Layer Processes Induced by Shoaling and Breaking   Surface Gravity Waves
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Daniel Cox, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 09/30/2002
* USD 228,625.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9734109 Principal Investigator: Cox This CAREER
grant is for the study of breaking waves. Wave breaking is the dominant process
in the surf zone, but our understanding of the effects of wave breaking on the
cross-shore wave transformation, undertow, and bottom boundary layer processes
is rudimentary. The design of coastal engineering structures, predictions of
nearshore wave and current conditions for amphibious landing, beach
renourishment projects, and predictions of the suspension and transport of
sediments all require a clear understanding of these processes. The study will
focus on time-dependent and time-averaged fluid motion in the bottom boundary
layer under shoaling and breaking waves in order to develop a new turbulent
boundary layer model in the nearshore zone. The methodology will employ a hybrid
approach of numerical modeling and laboratory experiments. The numerical
modeling will consist of a time-dependent boundary layer model to second order
with a one-equation turbulence closure scheme and will include pressure gradient
effects due to the wave setup. In parallel with the development of the numerical
model, detailed laboratory measurements will be made of the flow in the bottom
boundary layer under breaking waves for the realistic case of irregular waves
breaking over a barred beach. The data will be used to guide the development of
the model by assessing the relative importance of each of the five terms in the
turbulent kinetic energy transport equation and for the empirical coefficients
used in the numerical model. It is emphasized that this type of detailed data is
non-existent for the surf zone and that many surf zone models employ empirical
coefficients that were obtained for steady flow conditions without wave
breaking. Nevertheless, it essential to include the effects of the wave
generated turbulence introduced into the bottom boundary layer inside the surf
zone. In addition to studying the processes on short time scale s (on the order
of the wave motion), an existing time-averaged surf zone model will be improved
significantly using the same data set so that this model can be incorporated
with confidence into practical sediment transport models on longer time scales
(on the order of several hundred to several thousand wave periods, representing
a large storm event). .