* 9734918
* Computational Complexity Theory and Circuit Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Eric Allender, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 238,301.00

The final goal of research in complexity theory is to classify the complexity of
real-world computational problems by providing lower bounds on the resources
required to solve them. To date - in spite of impressive lower bounds for
restricted types of circuits - almost the only useful progress toward this goal
has come via the tool of reducibility which allows to show that a problem is
complete for a complexity class. Thus the complexity class has become the
fundamental object of study in complexity theory, and the basic questions in the
field concern the relationships among complexity classes. Until these
relationships are clarified, many important activities in computing ( in
particular: public-key cryptography) will rest on uncertain conjectures. Many of
the most important complexity classes can be characterized in terms of boolean
circuits of restricted size or depth, etc. Recently, it has become apparent that
arithmetic circuits are also very useful in this regard. The relationships
between Booleau and arithmetric circuit complexity are still only poorly
understood, although there has been significant progress on this front recently.
This project will work to clarify these relationships further, and will seek to
exploit the algebraic characteristics of arithmetic complexity classes to devise
new approaches to prove lower bounds. Most of what we know about the complexity
of real-world problems comes from the surprising fact that the overwhelming
majority of such problems are complete for well-studied complexity classes,
under very restrictive reducibilities. Recent progress has shown that these sets
are actually isomorphic to each other, under very simple isomorphisms. Up to
now, the work on isomorphisms has been primarily of theoretical interest. This
project will work to see if the isomorphism theorems can be used to derive
practical information about the complexity of real-world problems. More
generally, this project will attempt to clarify the rel ationships among
complexity classes, and the various notions (nondeterminism, unambiguity,
symmetry, Boolean and arithmetic circuits, etc.) that define models of
computation characterizing important complexity classes.