* 9734276
* CAREER:  An Energy-Subtraction Compton Scatter Camera for   Medical Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1998,01/25/1999
* John Valentine, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 01/25/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9734276 Valentine The research component of this project involves the
development of a novel medical imaging camera based on reconstruction of gamma-
ray events which underwent an initial Compton scatter interaction. The unique
camera design, which has been termed the Energy-Subtraction Compton Scatter
Camera (ESCSC), could revolutionize medical imaging while using existing
technologies. The clinical implementation of this design may enhance sensitivity
by a factor of over 100, while maintaining or improving spatial resolution, as
compared with existing clinical single photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) cameras. Furthermore, significant clinical implications of the improved
sensitivity realized by the ESCSC include: shorter imaging times (resulting in
reduced motion blur, faster patient throughput, and greater patient comfort);
reduced patient/worker radiation exposure; more effective diagnostic imaging for
patients undergoing subsequent cancer therapy; and very likely reduced cost both
for the initial capital investment and in terms of maintenance and staffing.
Additionally, the proposed system would be more compact, more portable, and less
cumbersome to operate than current cameras. To implement this design,
fundamental shifts in data acquisition and analysis over current imaging systems
are required. To produce a clinical ESCSC design, it is proposed to: 1) optimize
all aspects of the camera using simulations, along with experimental data; 2)
characterize components to optimize performance; 3) develop an optimal data
acquisition scheme; and 4) develop image reconstruction algorithms. The
education component of this project involves developing two- and three-
dimensional animations illustrating radiation science and technology topics and
will be used in part to convey the significance of medical imaging research to
all audiences. More specifically, a) the interactions of radiation with matter,
b) the response o f most radiation detectors, and c) the behavior of complex
electronic systems, such as the proposed ESCSC, can be much better comprehended
by an audience when animations are used to simulate the process(es).
Consequently, the objectives of the educational aspect of this proposal are to
develop the expertise necessary to produce two- and three-dimensional animations
and interactive computer exercises, then to use them in: 1) the undergraduate
and graduate radiation detection and measurement curricula; 2) junior high and
high school teacher workshops, which are aimed at helping these educators
effectively teach their students about radiation science and technology; 3) an
introductory course in medical imaging to be developed; and 4) presenting the
results of this and other research projects. In addition, these animations could
be very useful in helping to improve patient understanding about the medical
procedures they are considering or have been recommended to have. ***