* 9734234
* CAREER:  A Stochastic Approach to Designing Affordable,     Environmentally Acceptable Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2002
* Dimitri Mavris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

The research goal under this grant is to develop a probabilistic, decision-based
methodology for the design of affordable, environmentally acceptable systems.
Affordability is defined as the ratio of benefits derived from a system over the
cost of achieving those benefits. The research is characterized by activities in
three important areas: modeling techniques that encompass the entire life cycle
of a system; procedures for modeling, assessment, and mitigation of a variety of
uncertainties (which may vary in time); and algorithms for the identification of
key economic and environmental parameters that lead to robust design solutions.
These three areas are critical to computing probabilistic estimates of system
feasibility and viability early in the design/development cycle. Demonstration
and validation of research results will occur via a joint effort with industry,
through an application study focused on the combined engine/airframe design of a
High Speed Civil Transport aircraft. Such an application contains all the
relevant issues addressed in the new design methodology: an emphasis on
affordability, significant economic uncertainty, and environmental challenges
such as excessive community noise and emissions of oxides of nitrogen. If
successful, this research would assist design engineers and decision makers in
responding to the new paradigm in design, where affordability and environmental
compliance are primary objectives. Designers will benefit from the developed and
demonstrated techniques for linking these key objectives to elemental design
parameters and associated uncertainties. Further, the proposed methods are
applicable in almost any setting in a wide variety of fields. In addition, a
plan for integration of the methods developed under this research into a newly
formed graduate design curriculum to teach students the fundamentals of
probabilistic design and mitigation of uncertainties within the context of
affordability is presented. The intent is to better prepare engineering
graduates for the challenges which await in the new century.