* 9734090
* CAREER: A Framework for Resource Allocation in Wireless     Networks with Multi-User Receivers
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* David Tse, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Julia Abrahams
* 01/31/2002
* USD 272,500.00

ABSTRACT NCR-9734090 Tse, David Institution: University of California -
Berkeley Title: CAREER: A Framework for Resource Allocation in Wireless Networks
with Multi-User Receivers
________________________________________________________________ A central
problem in the design of wireless networks is how to use the limited resources
most to meet the quality-of-service requirements of applications. Two particular
classes of techniques have received much attention: 1) at the physical layer,
development of novel multi-user receiver structures which mitigate interference
between users; 2) at the network layer, dynamic allocation of resources such as
transmit power, bandwidth and bit-rates in adaptation to channel conditions.
While the networking aspects for conventional multi-access techniques are well
understood, the same cannot be said for problems of resource allocation and
power control in the context of these multi-user receivers. In this project, we
propose to establish a coherent framework to study problems of dynamic resource
allocation for multi-user receivers in an integrated manner, drawing on
information theory as a fundamental basis for performance evaluation. The
specific topics we will study in the proposed framework are: 1) linear multi-
user receivers: system capacity under optimal power control; 2) optimal resource
allocation for Shannon capacity-achieving multi-user receivers; 3) capacity gain
from the use of adaptive antenna arrays; 4) impact of multipath fading on
achievable capacity; 5) resource allocation for cellular networks with multi-
user receivers. The solution of problems in resource allocation and QOS
provisioning in wireless networks requires a marriage of networking and physical
layer concepts. With this in mind, my education plan aims to accomplish the more
general goal of providing a solid theoretical basis to our students in
networking and communications, as well as the more specific goal of highlighting
the interplay between networking and physica l layer concepts in wireless
networking. These goals will be implemented by course development in four
subjects.