* 9734130
* CAREER: The Fate of Hormones in the Aquatic Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* David Sedlak, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/2003
* USD 320,000.00

9734130 Sedlak The objective of this research is to study the fate of natural
and synthetic hormones in three aquatic environments- laboratory, wastewater
treatment and natural river. Since hormones interact with the endocrine systems
of humans and wildlife, the effect of endocrine disruptors must be understood
and reflected in environmental policies about chemical use and the management of
water resources and water reuse. To date, most research on endocrine disruption
has focused on industrial chemicals, such as pesticides, plasticizers and
surfactants. However, trace amounts of natural and synthetic hormones can cause
endocrine disruption and previous measurements of estrogen and related compounds
in urine suggest that these hormones could be more important to endocrine
disruption than other compounds found in wastewater effluent. To access the
importance of wastewater effluent as a source of endocrine disrupters, research
will be conducted to determine the environmental fate of estrogens. In the first
phase of this project, new analytical methods will be developed for measuring
estrogens at environmentally relevant concentrations using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and gas chromatography. These methods will then be
used to assess the removal of estrogens during wastewater treatment and their
fate in a river that receives significant discharges of treated wastewater. A
series of interactive demonstrations will be developed and displayed at public
forums to educate the public about emerging water resource issues. To provide
environmental engineering students with the skills needed to address problems
associated with resource conservation and reuse, a series of graduate-level
courses will be developed. These courses will consist of a lecture course, a
laboratory course and a graduate seminar that highlight the role that
environmental engineers can play in solving problems related to the conservation
and reuse of resources.