* 9734181
* PECASE: Toward a Unified Theory of Social Evolution: Reproductive Skew and Aggression in Social Wasps
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1998,09/30/2003
* H. Kern Reeve, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* H. Jane Brockmann
* 09/30/2003
* USD 500,000.00

Increasing complexity is a central theme of evolution. The most recent step in
this trajectory is the transition from solitary to social life. This transition
resulted in enormous consequences; it can be said that nearly all land
ecosystems are dominated by social species. It is of great importance, then, to
understand how sociality evolved. Historically there have been two bodies of
theory that apply; one deals with the evolution of sociality within kin groups
and the other with sociality among nonrelatives. The "reproductive skew" theory
addressed in this research has the potential to provide a general theory of
social evolution that is relevant in both situations. Skew theory holds that a
dominant individual within a society must provide incentives to subordinate
individuals in order to secure their cooperation and assistance. Ecological
factors combined with the genetic similarity among individuals dictate the
payoffs for cooperation and therefore define the optimal "reproductive skew"
(the degree to which one or a few individuals co-opt direct (production). This
research will continue the development of the theory and test it with an ideal
study species, a social wasp, Polistes fuscatus. Investigations of the social
wasp in nature will measure the ecological and genetic similarity factors, along
with observation of reproductive skew to determine if there is a quantitative
agreement with the predictions of optimal skew theory. This project also
involves a large educational component designed to provide tomorrow''s
behavioral scientists with both theoretical and empirical skills. In addition, a
major new Web site will be created to better enable students to communicate with
theorists and empirical behavioral biologists. The study of sociality using
insect models has provided pivotal contributions to the field, including kin-
selection theory. Kin-selection theory changed the way we think about social
animals, solved a dilemma that had existed since Darwin''s time and changed the
way that some anthropologists think about human sociality. This research has the
potential to develop an even more general theory of how social behavior evolved
and holds considerable promise for broad application.