* 9734402
* CAREER: Investigation of Fuel Sprays and Air Mixing in      Lean Direct-Injection Four-Stroke Spark-Ignition Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Chia-fon Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 05/31/2003
* USD 322,000.00

Abstract - Lee This is a study of the interaction of fuel spray mixing and
combustion in a lean direct-injection engine. Advanced optical diagnostics and
multi-dimensional modeling are used to characterize in-cylinder fuel/air mixing
and combustion in an optically accessible, direct-injection engine. Optical
diagnostics include exciplex fluorescence for visualization of spatial
distributions of liquid and vapor fuel under firing conditions, planar laser-
induced fluorescence (PLIF) with fuel dopants for visualization of liquid fuel,
and phase/Doppler particle analysis (P/DPA) to characterize drop size and
velocity of the spray. In addition, a new planar droplet sizing technique is
developed by imaging exciplex liquid fluorescence and Mie scattering signals
simultaneously; the ratio of these signals is proportional to the Sauter mean
diameter and the technique can be calibrated using the P/DPA measurements.
Computations are performed within the framework of a model for two-phase
reacting flows that has been used for comparisons of spray and engine
measurements. The results of this work should provide the fundamental basis for
design of a successful lean direct-injection spark-injection engine. Such an
engine is believed to offer improved fuel economy and reduced emissions, but its
development has been hampered by poor understanding of the relationships among
fuel injection, mixing, and combustion.