* 9734236
* CAREER:  Photocrosslinkable Polymers for Fracture Fixation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2003
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/2003
* USD 289,273.00

9734236 Anseth Treatment of bone fractures through fixation requires the use of
materials with sufficient strength to allow fixation, good tissue/material
compatibility, and facile molding (into potentially complex shapes) for easy
placement by the surgeon. In addition, controlled degradation is imperative to
restore optimum bone function upon healing. The material must initially re-
establish the mechanical integrity of the bone and subsequently degrade to allow
new bone ingrowth. Hence, degradable polymeric materials provide an important
alternative to widely-used metallic implants. Degradable polymers eliminate the
need for a second surgery and, if carefully designed, can release compounds to
accelerate healing or prevent infections. The research component of this CAREER
plan targets the development of a new class of high-strength, surface-eroding,
photocurable (i.e., react upon exposure to light) polymers for orthopaedic
applications such as fracture fixation. In particular, the rationale for this
work is driven by three key hypotheses: i) photopolymerization allows in vivo
curing, which will provide great flexibility for the placement and handling of
implantable polymers for surgeons; ii) crosslinking of polymers will provide an
effective tool to control the physical and mechanical properties of materials
without major modifications to the backbone chemistry, which can alter
biocompatibility; and iii) surface-eroding polyanhydrides networks, which
degrade in a controlled fashion and maintain the structural integrity of the
polymer, will be advantageous for orthopaedic applications. The educational
component of this CAREER plan is intimately linked with the research plan.
Special opportunities for undergraduate research (e.g., senior thesis projects)
and incorporation of team-oriented research projects in advanced elective
courses will be developed. Outside of education through research, new courses
will be developed to examine engineering aspects o f the human body and the use
of engineering skills to address medical problems. Finally, the University of
Colorado has completed its Integrated Teaching and Learning Laboratory (ITLL).
This facility is a national model for future directions in engineering
education, and the integrated learning approach (addressing learning styles and
cross-departmental teamwork) will be incorporated and piloted in a new polymer
courses. ***