* 9734804
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Impact of Particle        Transport in Soils on Filter Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1998,07/31/2003
* Lakshmi Reddi, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 07/31/2003
* USD 30,057.00

9734804 Reddi This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lakshmi Reddi, Department
of Civil Engineering, Kansas State University, to pursue with Professor In-Mo
Lee, Department of Civil Engineering, Korea University, for 36 months, a program
of cooperative research on the impact of particle transport in soils on filter
performance. The present collaboration will add an international cooperative
dimension to Dr. Reddi's research presently funded under NSF Grant No. CMS-
9713708. This research addresses problems arising from the fact that a number of
soil structures need filters for protection against erosion and piping which can
damage adjacent structures, and the fact that damage may result if these filters
become clogged. The domestic (CMS) project involves fundamental studies on
physicochemical and biological mechanisms of filter clogging. A complementary
study being undertaken by the team at Korea University focuses on particle
mobilization in residual soils (and filter clogging associated with this
mobilization) and field investigations on failed filters. The broad objective of
the cooperative research effort is to link up the U.S. and Korean domestic
studies in order to achieve a comprehensive and complete understanding of the
filter clogging mechanisms. Specific objectives are: (1) to exchange the
experimental data on particle mobilization from base soils and particle
entrapment in filters; (2) to share the data on field investigations; and (3) to
generalize and validate the filter design criteria in the US domestic research
project in light of field investigations made in Korea. Mutual benefit from the
collaboration is expected because results from the Korean research will aid in
validation of the theoretical and laboratory investigations being undertaken in
the United States. At the same time, both teams will benefit from the
theoretical treatment of data collected by the Korean team. Thus, the
collaboration will provide a unique opportunity t o integrate two different
perspectives of the problem, one, a fundamental laboratory scale study, and the
other, a field-scale and practical study. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project will
provide international training and experience for a U.S. graduate student in an
important area of research. Korean participation is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***