* 9734170
* CAREER:  Regulation of Purine Nucleotide Biosynthesis in    Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1998,05/31/2003
* Ronda Rolfes, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 05/31/2003
* USD 400,000.00

9734170 Rolfes Regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional level is
important to cells in order to link extracellular conditions with metabolism.
The ADE genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae provide an excellent model
system to learn about the fundamental mechanisms that eukaryotic cells use to
regulate gene expression in response to extracellular conditions. The regulation
of the ADE5, 7 gene uses regulatory schemes that are conserved in higher
eukaryotic cells, namely, multiple regulatory circuits to control gene
expression, a common DNA element that binds multiple transcription factors, and
combinatorial control arising from the specific interactions of different
transcription factors at specific promoter elements. The objectives of this
research are to characterize the molecular interactions between the positive
transcriptional activators BAS1 and BAS2 with DNA, determine domains for
transcriptional activation and protein-protein interaction, and characterize
chromosomal mutants and dosage-dependent suppressors to identify additional
regulatory components in a signal transduction pathway linking extracellular
conditions to the transcriptional activators. The results of these experiments
will lead to a deeper understanding of the precise mechanisms used to regulate
this locus. The insights gained from this study will shed light on the
regulation of gene expression in other eukaryotic cells. Science education is an
integral part of modern life. The fruits of science are visible in the advances
made in medicine, agriculture and technology. Since the impact of science in
society is great, a deeper understanding of what science is and how it works is
important for students of today. The ultimate in education in the sciences is
achieved via substantial research experience. At the undergraduate level, this
type of involvement in science is difficult to achieve because it requires a
major investment of time for both the student and faculty member. The objectives
of the education plan are to develop a significant nexus of research and
undergraduate education in the laboratory, enhance the research orientation of a
course in genetics, direct the development of a concentration in molecular
biology within the biology major, and participate in special programs aimed at
increasing student access to, and awareness, of research opportunities. Purine
nucleotides are essential components of cells, composing DNA and RNA,
participating in energy transfer and serving as signaling molecules. Cells
maintain pools of purine nucleotides to participate in these different
reactions. Maintenance of nucleotide pools is essential for ce!ls, and several
human disorders arise from the disruption of these pools, including the
syndromes severe combined immunodeficiency (SCIDS) and Lesch-Nyhan. The results
of this study will provide an understanding of how S. cerevisiae regulates the
synthesis of purine nucleotides. Understanding how these regulatory mechanisms
work in yeast provides a model for purine regulation in human cells.