* 9734550
* CAREER: An Internet-Based Multimedia Approach to Teaching   Developmental Neurobiology with Integrated Research on      Neuronal Migration
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1998,12/31/2004
* Patricia Phelps, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 12/31/2004
* USD 449,439.00

9734550 PHELPS Dr. Phelps' Early Career award contains both educational and
research components related to the field of developmental neurobiology. The
educational aim is to build an internet-based multimedia learning system for a
new undergraduate course on developmental neurobiology, in collaboration with
Dr. Gambhir and colleagues at the Crump Institute for Biological Imaging at
UCLA. During nervous system development, many complex tissue movements occur
that are difficult for students to understand using the typical 2-dimensional
drawings from textbooks, yet they come alive when presented as 3-dimensional
animations. Designing colorful animations depicting these complicated tissue
movements is an important goal of this project. An additional focus is to
incorporate data from scientists working in the field of developmental
neurobiology. For example, time-lapse video microscopy demonstrating
observations of living neurons will be used in classroom presentations to
introduce students to exciting new research techniques. Students are able to
review class presentations over the web, and utilize interactive quizzes as
study aids. Such evaluation tools will help the students, but also will provide
the teachers with information about the effectiveness of this new internet-based
learning system. The aim of the research component is to determine what
structures and/or molecules guide the unique migration of a group of chemically
defined neurons during early spinal cord development. The neurons under study,
called the "U-derived" cells, use acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter and
can be identified by both immunological and histochemical methods. Between
embryonic days 15 and 16, U-derived cells migrate from their initial ventral
locations to their final destinations within the dorsal and central parts of the
spinal cord. These cells migrate in a direction perpendicular to the radial
pathways utilized by most other neurons. To determine the structural and/or
molecular cues that guide this unique migration, Dr. Phelps will attempt to
block the migration experimentally. Dr. Phelps uses an organotypic slice culture
system that has been shown to support normal migration of U-derived cells and
maintains relatively normal intercellular relationships between neurons and
their environment, yet is accessible to both chemical and surgical manipulation,
which would not be possible the whole embryo. A variety of different experiments
are designed to disrupt this cell migration in culture. Results from these
experiments will determine if the dorsal migration of the U-derived cells is
guided by structural cues, such as early forming axons, and/or by molecular cues
such as different types of adhesion molecules.