* 9734527
* CAREER: Isolation &amp; Use of Arabidopsis thaliana L. Mutants  for Elucidating Photomorphogenic Signaling Pathways and for Undergraduate and Graduate Student Instruction and Train
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2004
* Timothy Short, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 05/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

9734527 Short The importance of studying cellular and physiological processes in
higher organisms has become increasingly apparent as a way to discover how
living organisms respond to their surroundings, how malfunction of these
processes affects the organism, and how manipulation of these systems can yield
important benefits. Light regulation of development and gene expression has been
the target of intensive research because of light's importance in the control of
numerous processes at all stages of the plant life cycle. The research
undertaken in this project examines the interactions among light, sugar
availability, and developmental stage in controlling accumulation of the family
of pigments called anthocyanins. Anthocyanins and their precursors have been
implicated in protection from damaging ultraviolet light, defense against
herbivores and pathogens, interaction with beneficial microbes, floral
coloration, and pollinator attraction. They have also been suggested as
potential tools to reduce heart disease and some cancers. In this study, control
mechanisms for anthocyanin production are being examined with a combination of
molecular, genetic, and physiological tools. By studying responses to light and
sugars in existing and newly isolated mutants, the signal transduction pathways
for these gene regulation mechanisms will be investigated, with the goal of
determining how the pathways are integrated within the plant cell to modulate
gene expression. These studies will be performed within the context of teaching
graduate students state-of-the-art methods in physiology, genetics and molecular
biology, allowing these graduate to mentor undergraduates and improve their
teaching abilities, and using the isolated mutants as part of an introductory
undergraduate course in molecular plant physiology.