* 9734125
* CAREER:  Genetic Analysis of Neurotransmitter Release       Mechanisms in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Leo Pallanck, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 475,000.00

IBN 97-34125 PALLANCK. This is a CAREER award that has both a research and
educational component. In his research, Dr. Pallanck will investigate the
mechanisms of regulated release of neurotransmitters at neuronal synapses. He
will use the powerful genetic and molecular approaches to available in the fruit
fly Drosophila to define cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in this
process. Neurons communicate with each other and with targets such as muscle
cells with neurotransmitter signaling molecules, which are released when small
vesicles inside the synaptic terminal fuse with the outer membrane of the cell.
Recent biochemical work has identified candidate molecules that are involved in
recruiting vesicles to the cell membrane at precise locations, promoting fusion,
and allowing the vesicle to reform when cell membrane is pinched off towards the
inside of the cell. Dr. Pallanck's research will ask which of these steps are
carried out by which of the previously identified molecules, and whether there
are components of the release apparatus that remain unidentified by the previous
biochemical studies. In previous work, Dr. Pallanck and his collaborators has
identified in Drosophila two different forms of one of the key candidate release
molecules, N-ethylmaleimide-Sensitive Fusion protein (NSF). One goal of the
current research is to test the hypothesis that multiple NSF proteins are
involved in the targeting, fusion, and/or recycling of synaptic vesicles.
Molecular, electrophysiological and anatomical studies as the electron
microscope level will all be employed in these studies. To address the second
goal, Dr. Pallanck's laboratory will carry out classical genetic screens to
identify novel components of the vesicular release apparatus. The properties of
neurotransmitter release appear to be similar at synapses in all animals, and to
share mechanisms with the vesicular release of other substances such as
hormones. Thus, the results from this study will contribute to a general
understanding of this process.&lt;br/&gt; Dr. Pallanck's educational objective
is to incorporate a research perspective into the undergraduate genetics
curriculum at his university. He will be teaching the core genetics course taken
by most undergraduate biology majors, and will use this forum to emphasize the
experimental basis of scientific knowledge and to introduce students to current
research opportunities in his department. He will also serve as undergraduate
research coordinator, and will develop an undergraduate research seminar course.
Through these three avenues, Dr. Pallanck will be instrumental in preparing
undergraduate students for a career in research at a critical stage in their
educational development.&lt;br/&gt;