* 9734421
* CAREER: MEMS Post-Packaging by Localized Heating
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* Liwei Lin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 03/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9734421 Lin The objective of this CAREER development plan is for the applicant
to become an excellent teacher and researcher in the area of
Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) with initial research efforts in MEMS
post-packaging by localized heating. Elements of this plan include: 1. to
develop MEMS post-packaging process with innovative approach of localized
heating. 2. to develop MEMS educational cuff iculum with innovative student
mentoring and outreach. Research Plan: MEMS has been recognized as one of the
next generation technologies that are of critical importance to the economy and
competitiveness of the US. MEMS has emerged from IC (Integrated Circuit)
technologies, where up to 95% of the manufacturing cost may come from the
packaging process. MEMS packaging is more difficult than the IC packaging due to
its unconventional natural of "micro mechanical structures" which complicates
the packaging issue. It is desired to develop a versatile MEMS post-packaging
process that can overcome the rigorous packaging requirements of wafer-level
process, low temperature, hermetic sealing and rong-term stability. The
objectives of this research are: (1) to develop a versatile MEMS post-packaging
process for pre-fabricated MEMS wafers. (2) to develop an innovative approach of
localized heating to be used in the proposed MEMS post-packaging process All of
the current MEMS packaging processes are case sensitive. They either require
high temperature for bonding such as fusion, anodic or eutectic bonding or they
use low temperature process with non-hermetic grade bonding materials such as
epoxy. Localized heating provides a new approach to solve the bonding problem.
Since high temperature can be locally generated, hermetic and strong bonding can
be achieved. At the same time, the temperature outside the bonding area can be
kept low. Therefore, new bonding materials, better, faster and stronger bonding
mechanisms may be explored by using the localized heating scheme. In order to ch
aracterize the optimal bonding conditions, theoretical and numerical analysis
with experiments on electro-thermal characteristics, bonding mechanisms and
micro fabrication processes will be investigated. The micropackaged sensors will
be gone through accelerated tests and monitored to determine long-term
stability. The optimized MEMS post-packaging process can be directly applicable
for MEMS industry. Educational Plan: The CAREER educational plan includes three
major parts: 1. New courses: Two new MEMS courses will be developed to
strengthen the MEMS education at the University of Michigan and to integrate
with the existing curriculum. The first course is Introduction to MEMS for
senior/graduate students and it focuses on basic micromachining technologies
including design, simulation and manufacturing of MEMS. The second course is
Advanced MEMS for graduate students and it emphasizes on MEMS handson
experiences including microfabrication processes and MEMS testing. A complete
MEMS educational curriculum for students majoring in Mechanical Engineering ftom
fteshman to Ph.D. has been proposed in this CAREER Program. 2. Innovative
mentoring and outreach: Six programs will be carried out at the University of
Michigan for innovative student mentoring and outreach including "MEMS focused
study group"; "MEMS Summer Camp"; "Industrial Internship"; "Student Exchanging
Program"; "Unde?Wraduate MEMS Design Projects" and "Joint research projects". 3.
Laboratory development: A research/teaching laboratory will be established under
the CAREER program at the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied
Mechanics. This laboratory is to complement the existing facilities at the
Solid-State laboratory and will emphasize on the micro-electro-mechanical
testing (MEMT) with initial efforts on MEMS post-packaging by localized heating.
***