* 9734187
* Career:  Nucleic Acid Phosphodiester Modification and       Educational Career Development
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Kenneth Turnbull, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2002
* USD 312,002.00

The focus of this research is the development of affinity transfer alkylating
reagents (ATAR) for labeling the phosophodiester of nucleic acids. Using quinone
methide chemistry, the ATAR will be agents for the covalent, chemoselective
modification of the phosphodiester group in nucleic acid polymers. The
educational focus will include the development of a course to educate
journalists, development of a laboratory course stressing individual creativity
and extending this approach to secondary science education and, developing
apprentiship style laboratory experiments for `real life` problem solving with
community based industry. With this Faculty Early Development (CAREER) award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and
educational activities of Dr. Kenneth D. Turnbull of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Arkansas. Professor Turnbull will focus his research
efforts on developing innovative, chemical means to covalently deliver a variety
of reporter groups or proteins to DNA. The ability to site-specifically attach
such moities to DNA would allow various genetic based, biological studies to be
conducted and provide a new means for efficient diagnostics, therapeutics and
biological control at the genetic level. The educational focus of the project
stresses course and curriculum development with an emphasis on public science
literacy, real life problem solving and secondary science education.