* 9734350
* CAREER:  Dendritic Subunits in Cortical Visual Processing   and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Bartlett Mel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2003
* USD 336,261.00

IBN 97-34350 MEL Neurons, the computing cells of the brain, typically possess
extensive, highly branched tree-like structures called dendrites onto which tens
of thousands of input connections from other neurons are formed. In contrast to
the classical conception that the brain's computation power lies primarily in
the "neural network", i.e. in the richly interconnected network of nerve cells,
evolving understanding over the last 40 years and including modeling work in Dr.
Mel's laboratory, among several others, has established that computations
carried out within the dendritic trees of individual neurons can contribute in
significant ways to the computing functions of neural tissue. One of the
important principles to emerge from this modeling work is that different
computations may be carried out simultaneously in different "subunits" of the
dendritic tree, which could dramatically increase the computational capacities
of individual nerve cells. A second principle is that the learning and memory
may involve changes not only in the absolute potency of cell-to-cell
connectivity but in the spatial arrangements of input connections onto the
dendrites of individual neurons as well. Whether parallel subunit computations
actually occur within the dendrites of real neurons remains to be determined.
However, the design of experiments to answer these questions is complicated by
the fact that the measured physiological responses of neurons can be due to
either to internal operations of individual cells or the combined effects of
networks of cells. In this work, Dr. Mel and his colleagues will model the roles
and interaction of single- neuron computations and those carried out by the
embedded network of interconnected neurons, in order to guide experimental
approaches relating to critical questions of neural processing.