* 9734871
* Quantum Gravity and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2004
* Richard Price, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2004
* USD 791,964.00

***&lt;br/&gt;9734871&lt;br/&gt;Price&lt;br/&gt;The relativistic astrophysics
portion of the program consists of closely related projects, combining numerical
and analytic approaches, all directed towards understanding black hole
collisions. The motivation of this work comes from three directions. First,
black hole collisions are an example of quintessentially nonlinear phenomena in
relativistic gravitation. Second, black hole collisions are one of the most
likely (and certainly the most exciting) sources of gravitational waves that
will be detectable with forthcoming gravitational wave observatories. Third,
black hole collisions are a testing ground for the development of numerical
relativity on supercomputers. This work supports that development by providing
tests of results, by pointing to interesting cases for computation, and by
suggesting approximation schemes that may be useful in a computational
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another set of problems under study aims at
understanding the canonical quantization of Einstein's theory. Black holes are
again at the center of attention, now at the submicroscopic scale. Specific
projects include studying the effects of quantum gravity on formation of naked
and covered singularities, mass inflation inside black holes, and horizon
formation in the high-frequency limit in which zero-rest-mass fields can be
described by null dust. Another main area of research is more fundamental and
general; its goal is to clarify the connection among diffeomorphism invariance,
constraints and observables. Specific projects include the representation of
spacetime diffeomorphisms by canonical transformations and the study of
Kretschmann-type observables in canonical gravity.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;