* 9734167
* CAREER:  Enabling and Supporting Collaborative Knowledge    Building Through Incremental Formalization
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2003
* Frank Shipman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2003
* USD 299,965.00

Traditionally, building knowledge-based systems has been a process involving
professional knowledge engineers. While this process works for well-defined
tasks in limited domains, it is too expensive for domains where the
representation must change frequently and is not feasible for problems where
experts' understanding of the domain and task changes during the course of
problem solving. The alternative approach investigated in this project is one of
"incremental formalization." This approach allows users to initially enter their
understanding of their domain, task, and solutions in less formal
representations and provides computer support for the gradual formalization of
this knowledge. The project includes: (1) designing knowledge representations
and interfaces for capturing emergent understandings and enabling incremental
formalization, (2) developing mechanisms for recognizing implicit structure
within informally represented information, (3) investigating interfaces for
suggesting formalizations, uses of automated formalization, and trade-offs
between suggesting and automating formalization, (4) creating tools which aid
the development of shared languages and support collaborative knowledge-building
tasks, and (5) improving understanding of knowledge-building processes and the
relative merits of prototypes through observations of individual and
collaborative tasks requiring domain modeling. http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/CKBE/