* 9734466
* CAREER: Structural Basis of Transcription Termination in    Thermophilic Eubacteria and Hypertext Curriculum for Advanced Undergraduate Biology Organized by Function and System
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Alan Friedman, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2003
* USD 395,485.00

9734466 Friedman The project is designed to begin to elucidate the structural
basis of transcription termination. Transcriptional termination appears to
result from multiple weak interactions among various factors and between them
and the RNA polymerase. Two proteins that have been identified as being critical
for proper transcription termination are nusG and rho. E. coli rho is known to
be a helicase that unwinds the RNA transcript from the transcription bubble at
rho-dependent termination sites, while nusG acts as an adaptor between rho and
the RNA polymerase. The nusG homolog from T. maritima has been demonstrated to
be readily cleaved by proteolysis into two fragments. The structures of both
fragments will be determined by x-ray crystallography. At the same time,
expression systems for the T. maritima rho protein will be constructed from
presently available clones. Crystallization experiments of this protein will
also be conducted, both with the intact protein and protein proteolytically
cleaved to separate the RNA-binding domain. Finally, potential interactions
between the T. maritima nusG and rho proteins will be investigated to determine
if they also show the same interaction which is seen in their E. coli
counterparts. If this interaction is seen, crystallization trials on a complex
of the two proteins will be initiated. On the education side of this CAREER
proposal, a new set of hypertext-based curriculum materials will be developed.
These materials will be designed to present biology in a "vertical" direction,
focusing on the connections between different levels of organization within a
biological function or organ system. The vertical organization of the curriculum
material should help communicate to under-graduate students how molecular
structure underlies biological processes. It should also provide upper-level
biology undergraduates with an alternative view of their biological knowledge,
thereby solidifying what they have been taught in their introductory classes.
This combination of research and educational projects will help further
integrate structural biology into the mainstream of biology. The research
component will bring a new area of biological research under structural
investigation, while the education component will help integrate our present
knowledge of structural biology into the undergraduate curriculum.