* 9734231
* PECASE: Rapid Tooling with Laminated Dies and Molds
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1998,02/28/2003
* Daniel Walczyk, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/2003
* USD 500,000.00

DMI-9734231 Walczyk Metal tooling made of a laminated construction offers
advantages over tooling made by more conventional methods (e.g., CNC machining)
in terms of tooling accessibility, reduced die geometry limitations, quicker
fabrication with hard tool materials, easier incorporation of sensors for
process control, and more flexibility with conformal cooling passages. The
research objectives of this CAREER project are to first identify the various
manufacturing processes that can benefit from a laminated tooling construction.
Once all of the tooling requirements are established, a structural/thermal model
for clamped and bonded laminated tools will be developed and experimentally
verified. The aim of this model is to give a tooling designer the means to
predict the structural/thermal behavior of a laminated tool subjected to various
loads, pressures, and temperatures. Next, an efficient technique will be
developed for creating kinematically and dynamically desirable trajectories for
abrasive waterjet or laser cutting of laminations based on a solid or surface
CAD model of the tool. An algorithm will also be developed for varying
lamination thicknesses based on geometrical constraints of the tool (e.g.,
vertical walls) and/or manufacturing process requirements. Methods for improving
the accuracy and quality of abrasive waterjet or laser-cut lamination beveled
edges will also be investigated. Finally, methods for bonding laminations into a
solid die (e.g., with adhesives) and ways of automating this procedure will be
developed and experimentally verified. The education part of this project will
be on enhancing and developing undergraduate and graduate courses in the design
of mechanical elements and systems including the consideration of rapid tooling,
fixturing and assembly. The development of a comprehensive set of design tools,
fabrication procedures, predictive models is important to the science and
technology base of rapid tooling. Industry can use the case studies to develop
laminated tooling. The potential proliferation of laminated tooling within US
industry can lead to significant savings in the cost and lead-time of tooling
development.