* 9734478
* CAREER: Potassium and Chloride Channels in Roots and the    Plant Physiology Curriculum
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Herbert
* 09/30/2002
* USD 400,000.00

9734478 Spalding Ion channels are protein molecules that conduct electrically
charged atoms or groups of atoms (ions) across the oily, lipid bilayer of
cellular membranes. Recent research has shown that ion transport by channels is
an important component of the mechanisms plants use to detect signals such as
hormones, light, gravity, and temperature. Dr. Spalding proposes experiments
that will test whether a gene the PIs have recently cloned encodes the chloride
channel that the PIs have found to function in the detection of light cues
important to seedling growth and development. The cloning of such a gene would
enable the amalgamation of molecular genetic and biophysical techniques,
creating unique opportunities to advance the PI's understanding of how the
environment influences the growth and development of plants. The seedling root
will be the focus of the present work because the chloride channel just
mentioned is also necessary for the formation of root hairs, specialized cells
important to the task of absorbing nutrients and water from the soil. Also to be
performed are experiments designed to determine the role of the AKT1 channel in
the uptake of potassium, an essential element, by roots of the Arabidopsis
plant. A mutant plant lacking the AKT1 gene will be used in an unprecedented
combination of genetic and biophysical studies of this agronomically important
uptake process. For the educational component of this proposal, Dr. Spalding
will develop laboratory exercises that will enhance the teaching of ion channels
and membrane transport in the plant physiology curriculum. A reference manual
will be prepared and distributed freely to interested educators.