* 9734807
* REU:  Automated Acquisition of Domain Knowledge and Language Patterns, with Application to Language Metadata
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Julia Hodges, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2002
* USD 278,994.00

The system developed in this project maps World Wide Web documents to Library of
Congress subject headings. It contrasts with systems which accomplish
classification of Web documents through voluntary classification by the public
at large. This project is designed to automatically classify Web documents into
subject headings of the Science (Q) and Technology (T) portions of the Library
of Congress classification system, after being trained and tested on several
thousand documents previously classified by library scientists and experienced
document analysts. The system is an extension of a system which employs machine-
learning methods combined with natural language processing and information
retrieval techniques to produce descriptive phrases for journal articles in the
domain of physical chemistry. The earlier system generated more than 80% of
index phrases produced by trained document analysts with expertise in the
domain. The current project establishes that these methods can be scaled up to
address a much larger problem domain. In doing so it also addresses issues
relevant to all of natural language processing and information retrieval (e.g.,
efficient use of contextual cues, and reduction of errors due to encountering
vocabulary which is unknown to the system). Success in the project will
significantly advance concept-based classification and demonstrate its
applicability to the vast problem of finding information in the largely
unclassified "library" that is the World Wide Web. It will provide an electronic
equivalent to the physical phenomenon of library patrons going to those shelves
which correspond to their favorite or most-used call numbers.
http://www.cs.msstate.edu/artificial_intelligence/kudzu.html