* 9734178
* CAREER:  Integrated Teaching and Research on Molecule and   Cell Biophysics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1998,03/31/2002
* John Marko, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2002
* USD 214,000.00

9734178 Marko This is a CAREER award integrating research and education which is
jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Physics, Molecular and
Cellular Biology and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities. The grant involves teaching and research on the
application of condensed matter physics to problems in molecular and cell
biology. In the past fifty years biology has largely become based on the
physical science of organic molecules. This understanding has largely been the
domain of (bio)chemistry. However, with the advent of new tools that allow us to
manipulate large protein, RNA and DNA molecules, biochemists and biologists are
being faced with a new class of problems related to the physical chemistry of
huge macromolecules. There has been tremendous progress in our understanding of
the statistical physics of large molecules in the past two decades. However,
even the basic ideas from polymer science are largely unknown to biologists, and
even to most biochemists. Further, while in principle useful, much of polymer
statistical mechanics is ill-adapted for application to biopolymers. Most of
polymer physics is aimed at homopolymers or large-block copolymers subject to
relatively weak physical interactions on the scale of kT; by contrast
biopolymers are almost always heteropolymers whose function is defined by their
sequence, and their functions often involve interruption of chemical bonds
characterized by eV energies. This research will attempt to fill the gap between
polymer science and molecular biology using a two-pronged teaching and research
approach. In the classroom, a cross- disciplinary course will be developed aimed
at undergraduates in both physics and biology. This course will be integrated
with a laboratory which will provide hands-on experience with measurements of
motion and forces at the sub-cellular level. Lab projects will include analysis
of microtubule dynami c instability, study of elastic response of vesicles,
study of cell and organelle motility in cell cultures, and physical properties
of single DNA molecules; they will all involve quantitative analysis of video
microscopy data. This will introduce physics students to exciting research
possibilities which are developing in the field of molecular biophysics, and at
the same time can provide some basic background in polymer physics to biology
students. The research program complements the course development by focusing on
theoretical descriptions of test tube experiments on biomolecules, and the
extension of those descriptions to activity of biomolecules in living cells. The
main interest is on the interaction of DNA molecules with one another, and with
enzymes which modify DNA structure. The long term goal is a theoretical
understanding of the enzyme systems which regulate the structure and topology of
prokaryote and eukaryote chromosomes. The main question is how do cells
duplicate, recombine and segregate their centimeter-long genomic DNA's without
fatal entanglements or breakages. %%% This is a CAREER award integrating
research and education which is jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials
Research, Physics, Molecular and Cellular Biology and the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. The grant
involves teaching and research on the application of condensed matter physics to
problems in molecular and cell biology. ***