* 9734822
* Physical Organic Chemistry of Fischer Carbene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Claude Bernasconi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2001
* USD 366,500.00

This research focuses on elucidating the mechanisms by which metallocarbenes of
the group-six triad undergo hydrolysis and facilitate nucleophilic additions.
Electron donating and accepting properties of the coordinated carbene will be
varied through systematic modifications of the groups appendant to the carbene
carbon and correlated with the kinetic and thermodynamic acidities of the
complexes to develop structure-reactivity relationships. Graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates carrying out the experiments will be introduced
to the synthesis of organometallic carbene complexes and to the procedures used
to elucidate the general patterns of their chemical reactivity. With this award,
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research of Dr.
Claude Bernasconi of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California
at Santa Cruz. Dr. Bernasconi will focus his research on correlating the
reactivity of chromium, molybdenum and tungsten carbene complexes with the
structure of the attached carbene. These complexes, which contain an unusual,
reactive form of carbon, facilitate certain organic transformations and are
finding an increasing use in synthetic organic chemistry. Dr. Bernasconi's
educational activities include the training of graduate and postdoctoral
students in organometallic syntheses and the procedures used to elucidate their
chemistry.