* 9734153
* CAREER: Molecular Transport Theory for Nanoporous Solids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2004
* Scott Auerbach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

CTS-9734153 Auerbach Most environmentally friendly technologies rely on
separations that remove pollutants from benign materials. Zeolite molecular
sieves, consisting of regularly spaced, molecular-sized cages shown below, are
ideally suited for these separations. Although much is known about zeolites, no
simple theory exists for accurately predicting how molecules diffuse through
them. This is because of the difficulty in modeling infrequent event dynamics
coupled with strong adsorbate-adsorbate interactions. Furthermore, zeolites are
ignored by the single most important class in physical science: freshman
chemistry. To address these issues, the Principal Investigator will develop
novel educational techniques and molecular transport theories aimed at
accelerating material and process screening of emerging chemical technologies.
The mobility of many hydrocarbons in industrially important zeolites is
exceedingly sluggish, precluding the use of straightforward molecular dynamics
simulations, and hence requiring modeling techniques specialized for infrequent
events. Previous transition state simulations of diffusion in zeolites were
performed at low loadings, so that adsorbate-adsorbate interactions could be
neglected. These conditions are irrelevant to industrial processes, which are
carried out at essentially full hydrocarbon loading. To model transport in
zeolites under industrial conditions, the Principal Investigator will develop a
hierarchy of three new techniques with varying accuracy and speed. An
accelerated molecular dynamics algorithm that adds a novel boost potential for
reducing site-to-site activation energies will predict essentially exact
diffusivities provided that the boost avoids transition states. A lattice Monte
Carlo simulation will be developed that includes a new treatment of activation
energies modified by adsorbate-adsorbate interactions. Finally, a completely
analytical theory will be derived that synthesizes for the first time fluctua
ting activation energies with the mean field theory of fluids. This new
hierarchy provides the opportunity of choosing a model based on the need for
speed or accuracy in process optimization. These models will be incorporated
into a freshman chemistry module entitled: "Zeolites in Industry," involving new
Web-based, interactive software that mimics the physical and chemical properties
of these systems. This research will impact science and society on many levels.
First, incorporating zeolite science and technology into freshman chemistry will
excite and inform thousands of students about real-world benefits of industrial
chemistry and engineering. Second, this novel combination of chemical reaction
dynamics and mean field theory will yield the first truly molecular theory for
transport in zeolites, elucidating how the competition between host-guest and
guest-guest interactions controls these transport processes. This will guide and
complement new diffusion measurements, and will accelerate screening of new
chemical processes. Third, when applied to aromatic separations and
hydrofluorocarbon separations in large-pore zeolites, these calculations will
help guide scientists and engineers in choosing optimal zeolite Si:Al ratios,
zeolite channel structures, temperatures and pressures for carrying out
efficient and cost-effective separations.