* 9734349
* CAREER: An Integrated, Adaptive Modeling Strategy for       Multidisciplinary Design of Electronic Packages
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1998,07/31/2003
* Ganesh Subbarayan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2003
* USD 310,000.00

9734349 Subbaryan The worldwide electronics market is expected to reach $1.2
trillion by the year 2001. The US electronics industry, with the highest
worldwide revenue, has grown by leaps and bounds, surpassing the traditional
manufacturing industries such as automobiles, chemicals and textiles. The
electronics industry is increasingly the indicator of the nation's economic
health and vitality. As the future electronic systems increase in complexity,
incorporating high-speed digital data processing elements together with optical
and/or microwave/mm wave communication elements, the need for system oriented
integration will increase. This, according to the National Technology Roadmap
for Semiconductors, will require an integrated simulation framework from IC to
system for cost-effective design. Package design is expected to be a critical
fimction of this framework, since package complexity is driven as much by
systern-level application needs as by device technology. Many curricular reforms
will also be necessary to ensure that future design engineers possess
integrated, systern-level design skills. The priority, therefore, in curriculum
reform is to instill synthesis skills and interdisciplinary, team-oriented
problem-solving skills. In the present proposal, a design framework based on the
methods of nonlinear optimization is developed for integrated, multidisciplinary
design of electronic products. Although this framework is expected to be valid
at all levels from system down to the device, its demonstration is based on two
"real-life," commercially available electronic packages. This integrated
optimization of the existing packages will be carried out in active
collaboration with the manufacturers. The fundamental idea behind the design
strategy is to partition the design problem at any level of hierarchy into three
tasks and then to recursively ca-rryout these tasks starting at the system
level. In the first task, adoptively accurate approximations to design functions
in the electrical, mechanical, and thermal domains are built using artificial
neural network models. These models are later used in the second task to
decompose the overall op on problem into simpler subproblems. Strategies for
overall optimization are considered in the last task. A broad range of
educational activities that are closely tied to the above three design tasks are
proposed. A sample of these activities at undergraduate level include
demonstrations of modem concurrent engineering practice to freshmen, design
space exploration using neural net function surfaces for juniors, and analysis
of electronic packages by multidisciplinary teams of senior level students. At a
graduate level, an electronics packaging certificate course for practicing
engineers, a course on modeling of electronic packages, and an advanced optimal
design class are planned. The integrated, multidisciplinary design strategy
proposed here do not appear to have been considered for electronic systems in
previous research. Clearly such novel strategies are critical for the continued
success of the vitally important electronics industry. The activities proposed
here enable the building of "virtual systems" for cost-effecfive design of
future electronic products by multidisciplinary teams of engineers possessing
strong synthesis skills. ***