* 9734815
* Integration of Facility Layout, Process Planning, and       Machining Center Selection Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1998,09/30/1999
* Shahrukh Irani, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 46,758.00

This grant funds a one-year exploratory research effort to seek new strategies
to simplify the material flow network that exists in a facility after it has
implemented the best possible facility layout. The research will evaluate
algorithms that could automate the implementation of simplification strategies.
Such strategies assume that, when a facility layout is designed for a facility
using a travel chart, several flows in the chart will be forced to occur between
non-adjacent departments that do not share a common boundary. Examples of
strategies that could eliminate, simplify or reduce the non-adjacent flows
include: change the part mix produced in the facility, eliminate the offending
operations, modify the operation sequences of the parts, create cells to
completely process one or more parts, replace one or more cells with multi-
function machining centers, and merge two or more departments. This research
will evaluate string clustering and matching algorithms used in non-engineering
domains such as genetics and biology to implement these strategies. If
successful, the benefits that could result from this research include reduced
material flow between non-adjacent departments, the ability to make machining
equipment purchases based on logical grouping of dissimilar machines into cells,
and the ability to eliminate flows between non-adjacent departments in the
layout. These benefits would lead to more efficient manufacturing of many
products.