* 9750591
* Electron Spin: An Important Experimental Concept
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Patrick Desrochers, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1999
* USD 34,143.00

Experimental support is needed to augment the treatment of electron spin in
lecture courses. This project is focused on the experimental verification of
electron spin concepts across the chemistry curriculum using an electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer and a magnetic susceptibility balance.
Two purposes will be served: (1) experimental reinforcement of the fundamental
concept of electron spin and (2) improved understanding of the breadth of
magnetic resonance spectroscopies (EPR and NMR). Specific EPR and magnetic
susceptibility experiments are proposed for six different chemistry courses:
Intermediate Inorganic, Organic Spectroscopy, Physical Chemistry, Advanced
Inorganic, Biochemistry, and Advanced Analytical. These experiments will
demonstrate specific electron spin concept such as magnetism and electron
configuration of transition metal centers, hyperfine coupling in organic
radicals and transition metal complexes, and molecular orbital theory. A unique
undergraduate biochemistry EPR experiment involving the paramagnetic copper
center of plastocyanin extracted from spinach leaves is proposed. Chemistry
majors and minors, including some pre-service secondary science teachers, will
be most affected by this project. A primary reason for the scarcity of electron
spin experiments at most institutions is lack of proper instrumentation and the
lack of cohesive plan to implement such experiments in the curriculum. The
proposed multi-course approach to electron spin experiments provides such a plan
and will be shared nationally through appropriate presentations and publications
and shared locally through a workshop once this project has been initiated.