* 9750941
* Printed Circuit Board Design and Prototyping in             Undergraduate Electronic Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* David Delker, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 03/31/1999
* USD 9,820.00

With increased competition from the global market, electronic designers must
move their products into production as quickly as possible. Recent advances in
numerically controlled machining make it possible to produce a production-
quality printed circuit board prototype a few hours after the design has been
modeled using printed circuit board computer-aided design (CAD) software. This
project provides a safe, modern, and efficient printed circuit board design and
prototyping laboratory. The project replaces current board fabrication methods
composed of designs using self-adhesive pads and traces, photocopying to a
thermal transfer film, and exposing to developer and etchant chemicals that are
potentially hazardous to students and to the environment. The modern printed
circuit board CAD software and rapid prototyping engraving machine provided by
this project are used to train our electronic engineering technology students in
every aspect of electronic design, from conception through the prototype stage.
The design process is supplemented with the simulation and automated testing
capabilities already implemented in laboratories. The equipment is of sufficient
quality so that it can also be used to support local industry needs through
student projects that are incorporated directly into the laboratory component of
electronic design and manufacturing courses. The potential impact of this
project is as widespread as is the development of electronic products for end
use, or for use as components in a complex design. Because of environmental and
safety concerns, most manufacturers use one of the few existing board houses for
production, and even prototyping of printed circuit boards. Students in
electronics must be able to produce the files required by board houses, or even
their own companies' prototyping and simulation facilities. This project,
therefore, enables the school to foster every aspect of electronic design
through to the prototyping stage; at the same time, students are able to take
advantage of the available tools used for verifying their designs, namely,
simulation of their designs before prototyping and testing of their designs
after prototyping. This project provides reliable equipment used to reinforce
electronic design and manufacturing theory through student projects that
directly serve industry.