* 9750698
* Beyond the Basics:  Facilitation of Advanced Topics in      Biochemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Sandra Jewett, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 37,889.00

Through this project, eight computer-interfaced spectrophotometers are being
purchased to facilitate the learning of advanced topics in biochemistry in
undergraduate laboratories. This type of instrumentation shortens time for data
collection and thereby increases time for discussion of the significance and
interpretation of data. Furthermore, this instrumentation allows collection of
additional data that facilitates the learning of important principles in
biochemistry. In addition, this project purchases a spectrophotometer equipped
with gel scanning and six-cell compartment accessories for teaching gel analysis
and advanced kinetics and spectroscopy to undergraduates involved in directed
research programs. Students benefitting from the new instrumentation are those
taking biochemistry in the BS Biochemistry program; in the BA and BS Chemistry
programs; in the Medical Technology, Microbiology, and Cellular and Molecular
Biology Programs; and students in the Dietetics Program. Standard methods are
used to faciltitate learning of the advanced topics in undergraduate
laboratories, with the advantage that the new instrumentation allows students to
collect their own data rather than analyze data provided by the instructor.
Laboratory manuals can be revised to include these analyses. Standard methods
are currently in use to facilitate learning of research techniques for
undergraduates involved in directed research projects. The advantage of a new
spectrophotometer for these students is that there is no software
incompatibilities with the computers available in individual research
laboratories as well as in the IBM laboratory where students carry out many of
their data manipulations. The significance of obtaining new spectrophotometers,
which allows introduction of additional data collection for advanced analyses in
undergraduate laboratories and greater ease of data manipulation for directed
research students, is that students are exposed to state-of-the-art
spectrophotometeric instrumen tation of the type that they can encounter in
professional and academic research settings after graduation. This exposure
makes them more competitive for positions in industry and for advanced degree
programs. *