* 9750430
* Implementation of Digital Image Processing and Analysis in aBiology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Richard Fluck, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Gordon E. Uno
* 06/30/1999
* USD 64,961.00

During the past 25 years, video microscopy and digital imaging have
revolutionized light microscopy, and personal computers have changed how classes
are taught. Until now, the Biology Department has lacked the resources to make
digital image acquisition and analysis an integral part of its curriculum. The
department is now acquiring light microscope and computer resources to make this
integration possible. Using a variety of devices light microscopes coupled,
through video cameras, to Macintosh computers with video frame-grabber boards; a
video camera in a gel documentation system; a digitizing tablet; and a scanner
students are digitizing images and then processing and analyzing them. Some of
the processed images are being used as the basis of electronic laboratory
reports and serving as references for other students. Faculty, with the help of
undergraduate Macintosh experts, are initiating the use of the instruments in
two of the department's four core courses and two upper-level elective courses,
helping other faculty in the core courses learn how to use the instruments, and
supervising the use of the instruments by students doing independent research.
The project involves all biology majors, all of the college's pre-healing arts
students, and many students majoring in other science departments. It is
equipping students and faculty with powerful new skills and helping others
expand their uses of this technology. Students often work in groups at the
workstations, so the project also encourages collaborative learning. *