* 9750526
* Geophysical Equipment for Hydrogeology, Environmental       Geology and Geophysics Field Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Laurie Brown, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 05/31/2000
* USD 40,500.00

The Geosciences Department recognizes the importance of hands-on, field-oriented
experiences for undergraduates, especially in the high employment area of
environmental consulting. To this end, the university is increasing its
capabilities in shallow field geophysics for undergraduate students in
geophysics, hydrogeology, and environmental geology courses. A field laboratory
is being developed on campus complete with one pumping well, four observations
wells, and numerous buried objects for geophysical targets. Existing geophysical
equipment allows for investigations of seismic refraction, gravity, and
magnetism, but to ensure coverage and experience in the tools most commonly used
in the environmental industry, the university is providing additional equipment
for electromagnetic, very-low-frequency, ground-penetrating radar and seismic
reflection techniques. This equipment is used extensively in five undergraduate
courses (two in geophysics, two in hydrogeology, and one in environmental
geology) and as the backbone for a new course at the beginning level in
Environmental Field Methods. This new course provides field experience at an
early level for geology students as well as students from other environmentally
oriented programs on campus. The geophysical data are combined with
hydrogeologic and environmental data, using the common field site as a
laboratory. The extensive geophysical and hydrogeologic data collected from the
site are archived on CD-ROM using the method of dynamic digital maps and are
made available to the geologic community. In addition, the site, a unique
teaching tool for field geophysics and hydrogeology, and the entire range of
field equipment, are made available to interested professors and students in the
region. *