* 9750785
* Enhancing Thermal and Fluid Sciences Undergraduate          Laboratory Through the Introduction of Optical Diagnostic/  Image Processing Techniques
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Chiang Shih, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 08/31/1999
* USD 34,583.00

This project integrates innovative optical/digital diagnostic techniques,
including particle image velocimetry (PIV) into the current senior-level Thermal
and Fluid Sciences laboratory course. The inclusion of PIV and other image
processing techniques introduces students to state-of-the-art optical/image
processing technology and enhances students' understanding of fundamental flow
physics through hands-on laboratory experience. The PIV technique not only
provides a global visualization of the entire flow field, it also allows the
flow data to be evaluated quantitatively and compared directly with the results
predicted by relevant theories or principles. Three experiments are specifically
designed to take advantage of the unique capabilities of PIV and strengthen the
curriculum. Detailed laboratory manuals can be prepared and made available
through the Intemet. Additionally, the PIV image processing system provides
real-time image acquisition and analysis to complement other traditional flow
visualization methods such as smoke-wire, shadowgraph, and schlieren techniques.
Integration of modern optical/digital image processing techniques into this
class increases students' interest by allowing them to visualize concepts that
are otherwise difficult to grasp. These courses showcase PIV demonstration
experiments, both in the laboratory and through the use of full motion MPEG
video format, to provide students with a better understanding of the lecture
material. *