* 9750964
* Equipping a Computer Laboratory for Teaching the Techniques of Dynamic Digital Map Making
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Christopher Condit, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 06/30/2000
* USD 37,680.00

Through this project, the Department of Geosciences provides equipment that
enables it to teach a new technique that permits the timely, inexpensive
publication of highquality color geologic maps and ancillary data as stand-alone
programs on the desktop computer. This technique results in a Dynamic Digital
Map (DDM) Template, a hypermedia-based map and data presentation manager. DDMs
are made using a hypermedia authoring environment, by inserting digital maps and
data into a DDM Template, designed for this use. The first DDM has been
published by the Geological Society of America in its first venture into
hypermedia-based digital map publication; it has been used with great success in
a Petrology course. Another, the Dynamic Digital Geologic Map of New Englald, is
used in a Physical Geology course to preview an all-day field trip across the
Appalachian Mountains (it includes maps, text, QuickTime Movies, animated block
diagrams and digital photos, many of which are oblique aerial, all accessible by
point-and-click). Numerous similar publications (some underway, one completed)
are anticipated; the ease of use of these maps and their capability to transmit
large amounts of linked data accurately, and at several different levels of user
sophistication, make it possible to stimulate the interest and general education
of the public in geosciences.