* 9750783
* Instrument Acquisitions in Support of Marine Biology        Curriculum Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Nora Terwilliger, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 02/29/2000
* USD 28,212.00

The University of Oregon's Institute of Marine Biology has a well recognized
program for undergraduates. Courses are attended by students from both the
University of Oregon and from institutions throughout the nation. We offer
students intense field oriented courses with closely correlated laboratories
that cover a variety of marine science disciplines. The problem addressed in
this proposal relates primarily to our course, adaptations to the marine
environment. This course should provide students with opportunities to pose
researchable questions using modern technology and equipment. We do not have the
appropriate equipment for students to use molecular approaches to contemporary
biological questions, and our physiology equipment is techniques in research by
the PI, along with her background in invertebrate zoology, biochemistry and
physiology, have allowed her to plan laboratory exercises giving students the
opportunity to integrate cellular biology and organismal biology. With this
proposal we seek funding for equipment to implement these laboratory exercises .
Students will compare developmental changes in respiratory protein expression,
ion regulation and metabolism in marine organisms they collect from nearby
estuarine and coastal habitats. They will process their experimental data and
obtain a better understanding "from molecules to mudflats" of how organisms
work.