* 9750730
* Incorporation of Basic DNA Laboratory Techniques into       Science Courses at the Two-Year College
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Donna Harrison, Stark State College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 7,114.00

While Stark State College of Technology (SSCT) and many other community and
technical colleges in the U.S. address the scientific and public policy
dimensions of genetic research and the Human Genome Project in their curricula,
it is imperative that we also focus on the technical dimensions. These are
necessary to foster a truly meaningful understanding of this rapidly expanding
field of science which will have profound implications on all of our lives in
the very near future and for many years to come. SSCT students currently have no
laboratory experiences related to molecular genetics. Unfortunately, this is a
common scenario at many two-year colleges. With $7,114 of NSF-ILI funds, Stark
State will develop the project, Incorporation of Basic DNA Laboratory Techniques
into Science Courses at the Two-Year College. With the purchase of DNA
laboratory equipment, several laboratory experiences will be added to reinforce
the lectures of two courses: Principles of Microbiology and Organic & Biological
Chemistry. These courses are taken by students in the College's Nursing,
Respiratory Therapy Technology and Medical Laboratory Technology programs -- who
will be among the next generation of medical technicians in the U.S. The primary
objective of the project is to develop a greater understanding of molecular
genetics, which will enhance students/graduates' ability to perform technician-
level functions in science and health care settings, and participate in the
discussion of developing issues related to human genetics. Faculty involved with
this project also will share their hands-on expertise with area high school and
middle school teachers. by expanding SSCT's capabilities in this area. We will
be positioned to share project outcomes with faculty at two-year institutions
throughout the country.