* 9750583
* Implementation of an Environmental Focus in an UndergraduateChemistry Curriculum by the Addition of Gas Chromatography -Mass Spectrometry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* J. Roger Bacon, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 43,744.00

The Chemistry Faculty members are implementing an environmental focus to the
curriculum. This focus is a natural progression based on the institution's
ecologically diverse location and the students' employment record in
environmental sciences. To achieve this focus, suitable instrumentation is being
used to develop novel environmental experiments to promote student learning in
(1) the identification of synthesized and natural compounds, (2) monitoring
compounds and their degradation in the environment, and (3) analytical method
development. Gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is a powerful
technique used to facilitate this kind of learning and is also widely used in
environmental analysis. Using environmental applications, a benchtop GC-MS
instrument is being integrated into the curriculum. The first objective is being
met by GC-MS characterization of natural products and an environmentally benign
chemical synthesis (green chemistry) involving a dye-sensitized irradiation. GC-
MS is also being employed to research carbonyl compounds as thiazolidine
derivatives in cigarette smoke. In a new environmental chemistry course, kinetic
factors in compound degradation can be illustrated by monitoring the degradation
of insect pheromones and organophosphate pesticides by GC-MS. GC-MS is being
employed to illustrate analytical method development by the identification and
determination of volatiles in samples.