* 9750798
* Enhancing Student Learning with the Use of Computers in     General Human Anatomy
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Debra Howell, Chabot-Las Positas Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 7,122.00

Anatomy 1, the human anatomy course at Chabot College, is currently taught using
cat dissection and models. One human cadaver is used by almost five hundred
students. A student success rate of about 60% over the past five years and loss
of specific groups of students within the three course health science sequence
is an indication that we are not meeting the special needs of some of out
students. Some steps have been taken to address these issues including
implementation of prerequisites for the course and a planned purchase of six
computers and software to be shared by physiology and anatomy students. In
addition, the college has agreed to purchase three computers and sets of
software for exclusive use by anatomy students. The proposed project takes the
next step. The objectives of this project are to increase student retention and
success in the anatomy course by making instruction as concise and direct as
possible and by offering more opportunities for individualized instruction,
increasing access to the Internet to promote student-based experimental inquiry,
replacing cat dissection with computerized and cadaver dissection, and by
enhancing histological studies with computerized micrographs. The equipment
needed to enable us to meet out objectives includes 5 Pentium computers with
carts and security packages, 5 sets of CD-ROM software, and a LEICA-EWS software
program.