* 9750516
* Undergraduate Laboratory Development for Computer           Architecture and Real-Time Embedded Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Yann-Hang Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 05/31/1999
* USD 29,933.00

To project its computer engineering education program for the needs in the 21st
century, the Computer & Information Science & Engineering (CISE) department is
developing a curriculum enhancement plan. The plan calls for an emphasis on
system design and integration methodologies that include the use of computer-
aided design (CAD) tools, hardware prototyping with field programmable gate
arrays (FPGA), and hardware/software co-design. In the center of the plan, an
undergraduate computer hardware design and real-time embedded systems laboratory
is established. The new laboratory consists of PC workstations for hardware
design and implementation, as well as for embedded system development. Included
also are CAD tools, FPGA rapid-prototyping systems, test instruments, and other
necessary laboratory instruments. An existing undergraduate computer
architecture course can be restructured to take advantage of the new laboratory.
Laboratory projects, based on FPGA devices and PCs PCI bus platform, enable
students to gain hands-on experience in designing key architecture components. A
new course on real-time embedded system design can be added into the curriculum.
Using the laboratory facilities, the students can revise a real-time kernel,
implement real-time servers and device drivers, and design embedded systems for
data acquisition and I/O control. This new laboratory and curriculum improvement
plan can be vital to the computer engineering program of the CISE Department
which had no existing hardware design facility. The department is firmly
committed to strengthen the hardware development and hardware/software co-design
components and to continually incorporate leading technology into its
curriculum. All Computer Engineering students can use the laboratory
effectively, learn practical design approaches, and thus be well prepared to
undertake system design tasks in the coming century.