* 9750833
* "Integration of GC-MS into the Undergraduate Chemistry      Curriculum"
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Perry Reeves, Abilene Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 31,450.00

This project is based on the need for a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer
(GC/MS) system for use in the improvement of the undergraduate chemistry
curriculum. Theoretical discussions of mass spectrometry, as well as actual use
of the instrument, can be incorporated into most of the lower level courses. The
basic principles of mass spectrometry and its use in determining isotopic
distributions of various elements can be introduced in the freshman-level
General Chemistry course. Also in this course (taken by all pre-health-
professions majors), the use of GC/MS in biomedical screening and in the
detection of hazardous materials in water can be discussed and experiments
conducted. In the Organic Chemistry course, GC/MS can be used to determine the
composition of various natural products and to determine the identity of various
halogenated hydrocarbons, as well as structural isomers of esters. The
junior/senior-level Analytical Chemistry courses focus on theoretical aspects of
the instrumentation and detailed analyses of fragmentation patterns. In Physical
Chemistry, diffusion rates of liquids and gases are measured. The department is
also in the process of developing a bachelor's degree program with an
Environmental Chemistry emphasis. One of the components of this program is a
course in which analyses of water and soil samples are conducted according to
EPA guidelines. Thus, this project affects a wide range of students (including
both chemistry and non-chemistry-majors), whose career fields make use of GC/MS
technology. *