* 9750648
* An Undergraduate Parallel/Distributed Computing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Stephen Ben-Avi, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Ernest L. McDuffie
* 06/30/1999
* USD 82,421.00

Through this project, the Department of Electrical Engineering (EE) continues to
update and expand its Undergraduate Parallel/Distributed Computing Laboratory.
The project supports existing curriculum offerings and widens the use of the
technology by using it as a base in other, non-parallel-focused courses, such as
Databases, and Artificial Intelligence. Modern computers connected by a LAN can
provide a parallel virtual machine with sufficient reliability that the
parallel/distributed techniques can become an ordinary, everyday tool rather
than just the focus of special interest courses. Old transputer boards have
become obsolete and almost impossible to use after 6 years of heavy utilization,
and this project is designed to retain the parallel/message-passing paradigm in
the EE's curriculum. Many algorithms have portions that could be executed at the
same time if facilities to do this exist. Except for expensive special purpose
machines, computers have traditionally been SISD (Single Instruction Single
Data) processors, executing instructions without the possibility of simultaneous
execution. On a parallel machine or facility, such as this new heterogeneous PVM
(Parallel Virtual Machine), students are able to execute parallel simultaneous
instructions over separate vectors or partitions of data. A modern EE curriculum
should include the application of parallel/distributed techniques to problems at
the frontiers of computing speed such as image or speech analysis, neural nets,
modeling, and graphics. The machines must also be the object of study and be
available for student experimentation. A reconfigurable heterogeneous PVM lends
maximum flexibility to the laboratory, at modest cost, and uses existing
facilities. The refurbished laboratory is immediately available owing to prior
expertise in this area, the readiness of space, current computers, and extant
LAN facilities. *