* 9750570
* Integrated Bioprocess Experiments for the Undergraduate     Chemical Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Edward Fisher, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1999
* USD 21,286.00

The university was originally established with a vision to support the
industries of Michigan and the upper midwest. In the Department of Chemical
Engineering, this has meant supporting the traditional chemical processing
industries that are vital to the region. Yet, each year chemical engineers enter
a marketplace more technically diverse than it was in years past. Today, a
greater percentage of chemical engineers are finding employment in the areas of
environmental engineering, electronics fabrication, and biochemical processing.
To meet this growing diversity, the department has committed substantial
resources to a new biochemical engineering emphasis, which was recognized in
particular because of both student interest and regional demand for engineers
trained in bioprocessing. To initiate this effort, the department has added two
new faculty with expertise in biochemical engineering. These faculty have
responded by developing new biochemical engineering courses for the students
that will provide the needed classroom training. The missing ingredient in the
development has clearly been the lack of hands-on, laboratory experience in
biochemical engineering. To meet this need, this project establishes a pair of
integrated bioprocess engineering experiments that allows students to both
produce a biochemical from raw materials and purify it using industrially
relevant bioseparation techniques. The new system, L-lysine production by
bacterial fermentation and recovery by ion-exchange chromatography, gives
students first-hand experience with a complete pilot-scale facility, while also
serving to demonstrate the application of chemical and biochemical engineering
fundamentals. Thus, the project serves not only the students interested in
biochemical engineering but also the students interested in traditional chemical
engineering since it provides a unique system for studying chemical process
fundamentals such as heat and mass transfer, process control, and chemical
kinetics. This project builds on the department's multimillion-dollar chemical
processing pilot-plant facilities by integrating a bioprocessing pilot-plant
facility. *