* 9750164
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Preston Aldrich, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750164 Preston R. Aldrich This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Dispersal, area and edge effects, and the fragmentation of Amazonian
tree populations." This study examines the effects of forest fragmentation on
tree populations in Brazil. Adults and seedlings are being mapped and tissue
collected from different-sized patches. Microsatellite markers are being used to
reconstruct parentage relations and assess the effect of patch area and edge on
pollen and seed dispersal and effective population size. Valuable information is
being gained on the ecology of species interactions in heterogeneous
environments with important implications for conservation theory and the design
of nature reserves.