* 9750675
* Enhanced NMR Capability for Organic Chemistry, Biochemistry,Molecular Biology, Physical Chemistry, Instrumental Analysisand Student Projects.
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Robert Rothchild, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 48,610.00

This project focuses on the enhancement of a 300 MHz Fourier-transform nuclear-
magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) system with the addition of several new accessories,
including an inverse broad-band probe, inverse modification and decoupler
upgrade, autosampler, and software and hardware for a supplementary Pentium-
based workstation. The new inverse probe and electronics are allowing access to
a wide range of enhanced-sensitivity, inversely detected NMR methods and other
critical experiments (such as 1H observation with 14N decoupling); enormously
increasing effective use of the instrument by permitting more spectra to be run
for entire classes (with the autosampler); and both simplify and extend
instrument use with the workstation. Major applications will be in microscale
organic chemistry laboratory, biochemistry, physical chemistry, and instrumental
analysis. With some advanced NMR spectra, requiring several hours, the
autosampler is providing a solution to the problem of large classes of students
individually acquiring spectra. The workstation is offering simpler processing
and foreground/background techniques to increase the ability of students to
acquire and manipulate new spectra. Use of basic macros is making full automated
use of newer 1-D and 2-D experiments possible. The new probe is providing access
to experiments that provide exceptional enhancement of undergraduate studies.