* 9750647
* An Undergraduate Engineering GIS Spatial Analysis Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Kathleen Hancock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 05/31/2000
* USD 23,794.00

The objective of this project is to educate undergraduate students in spatial
analysis techniques through the development of an undergraduate spatial analysis
computer laboratory that integrates remote sensing, geographic information
systems (GIS), and computer-aided design (CAD). Civil and environmental
engineering students are exposed to a broad array of information that can be
spatially referenced, including transportation, planning, environmental, and
geotechnical data. As undergraduates, they generally address issues around these
data within specific disciplines. The fundamental goal of this laboratory is to
provide students with the ability to interrelate issues and data across
disciplines and to explore the affects that different disciplines have on one
another. For example, a group of students might evaluate the effects that run
off from highways and parking facilities have on surrounding wetlands given
varying soil conditions. Not only does this type of problem emphasize cross-
disciplinary analyses, it also fosters group-based active learning and critical
thinking. Basic GIS skills are introduced to students through carefully designed
project-based laboratory exercises within existing courses. A new spatial
analysis course specifically educates students in critical thinking across
disciplines. Advanced instruction is encouraged through independent study and
undergraduate research opportunities. With the maturing of desktop GIS, spatial
analysis is becoming a standard tool for many engineering disciplines and entry-
level engineers are expected to have a working knowledge of this technology.