* 9750329
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Lorraine van Waasbergen, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750329 Lorraine G. van Waasbergen This action funds an NSF
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
1997. This fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional
scientific training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and
imaginative into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between
organisms and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal,
population, community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Cyanobacteria as a model system for light perception in plants."
Blue/UV- A light controls numerous aspects of plant growth. High intensity white
light causes oxidative photodamage in plants. Both types of light activate some
important plant genes suggesting that the cellular perception of these signals
is interconnected. This research uses a recently discovered gene, hliA, in
cyanobacteria that is induced in response to both high light and blue light.
Cyanobacteria, the blue-green algae, are serving as a model for higher plants to
identify components of the signal transduction pathways involved in sensing and
control of gene expression by various plant pigments. If possible, a blue light
receptor will be identified.