* 9750297
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Julie Stone, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750297 Julie M. Stone This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Pathogen resistance as a model system for the perception of
environmental signals in plants." To gain a better understanding of plant
responses to environmental signals, mutants in the pathogen resistance signal
transduction pathway of Arabidopsis thaliana are being identified using genetic
selections based on a pathogen-responsive promoter fused to selectable marker
genes. Mutants are being characterized with respect to altered expression of
pathogen-regulated genes, and the identity of the mutated genes ultimately
determined using positional map-based cloning techniques. An avirulent strain of
Pseudomonas syringae and the RSP2 gene are being used in this study.