* 9750291
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Carol Lee, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 01/31/2000
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750291 Carol E. Lee This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This fellowship
provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific training
beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative into the
fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms and their
environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population, community and/or
ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each fellowship supports
a research and training plan to be carried out in a sponsoring laboratory. The
research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Evolution of
physiology during habitat transitions." It is subtitled "Repeated invasion of
fresh water by a common crustacean." All animal phyla evolved in the sea, and
most have successfully made the transition to fresh water. This transition
requires adapting to ionic and osmotic changes. The crustacean copepod
Eurytemora affinis has recently invaded freshwater reservoirs from salt water
multiple times independently. Experiments are designed to determine changes in
body fluid regulation during these repeated habitat transitions by combining
physiological and phylogenetic information. Insights are being sought on how
physiology evolves during biogeographic transitions and how species successfully
invade new habitats.