* 9750683
* Computer Laboratory/Classroom for Instruction in Calculus,  Linear Algebra & Differential Equations and for Teacher     Preparation
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Cherry Mauk, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/1999
* USD 51,210.00

This project is developing a computer laboratory to strengthen undergraduate
mathematics education and teacher preparation. The computer laboratory is
allwoign for a sgignificant change in active participation in learning. Problem-
solving skills, situational strategies, and solid understanding of concepts are
resulting from the laboratory format. The calculus sequence and linear algebra
are using the laboratory format, as are other upper-level courses. The
laboratory is also having a strong impact ont he preparation of secondary
mathematics majors. An in-depth exposure to this format is developing an
understanding o the inter dependence of analytical, numberical, and graphical
mthods, which is carrying over to the way these potential instuctors will teach
mathematics. A course is being developed emphasizing technology, in which
students can create lessons (using Maple, Geometer's Sketch Pad, Cabri Geometry,
spreadsheets, etc.), review software for their techig, create online exams and
assessment activites, and sue the World Wide Web to obtain material involving
mathematics education. Secondary education mathematics majors are participating
in "Mentor to Mentor" workshops that use unversity students to "mentor" the high
school techers in using Maple, while the in-service teachoers "mentor" the
students in mathematical pedagogy. *