* 9750919
* Addition of Fluorescence Instrumentation to Upper Division  Laboratory Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* James Bolender, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1999
* USD 28,679.00

The chemistry laboratory is the most important tool to train students for their
future professional, industrial, or academic careers in or related to Chemistry.
The goal of laboratory courses is to teach students fundamental chemical
concepts while exposing them to instrumentation they may encounter after
graduation. While the Chemistry Department had made great strides in obtaining
state of the art instrumentation for student use, there are still voids to be
filled with new instrumentation. One such void would be filled by the
acquisition of a PTI Fluorescence Spectrophotometer. The current chemistry and
biochemistry curriculum covers fluorescence techniques in a cursory one or two
day lecture. Fluorescence methods have become important in all areas of chemical
and, in particular, biochemical research. With the large percentage of
Biochemistry majors in the department, the introduction to fluoescence
techniques becomes more important to prepare our students for their future
endeavors. The acquisition of the PTI fluoescence spectrophotometer will impact
five upper division laboratory courses (Chemistry 121, 122, 125, 131, and 133)
and possibly other special topics courses currently under discussion. The
addition of fluorescence methods and techniques to the department also provide
and additional research tool that will be utilized by several current faculty
members. *