* 9750697
* Digital Signal Processing/Image Processing:  Freshman to    Senior Year
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Louis Godbout, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 06/30/2000
* USD 11,082.00

Digital Signal Processing (DSP) and DSP hardware are extremely important in many
areas of industry. The use of these applications is expanding rapidly throughout
the world, creating an extraordinary demand for professionals well versed in
this technology. Recent efforts in the College of Engineering have resulted in
introducing a new hands-on project course that focuses on DSP hardware and
applications. The course material emphasizes the use of Application-Specific
Integrated Chips in standard kits, manufactured by Texas Instruments. It is
extremely important that students know about these state-of-the-art DSP
processors, which can be used in real-time applications. This project addresses
the resources needed for introducing DSP hardware and their real-time
applications in the B.S.E.E. program. This DSP course, with newly developed DSP
experiments and projects, gives students hands-on experience. Since these DSP
tools are important and relatively easy to interface, they can be used to
introduce first-year students to the design and application process of digital
signal/image processing despite their lack of theoretical background in this
subject. The process involves analyzing a problem, making a decision on how to
approach it, trying different design procedures and comparing the different
outcomes. This approach keeps the freshmen focused on their engineering major
and helps in increasing overall retention. The courses developed can be
disseminated to departments that do not have a DSP hardware course. Students
also are encouraged to publish their research material in conference proceedings
in signal processing, such as ICSPAT and ASEE. *