* 9750137
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Katherine Kelley, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 03/31/2000
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750137 Katherine C. Kelley This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Genetic and parental effects on the development of antipredator
characters." It is subtitled "Experimental analyses of blister beetle coloration
and chemical defense." Many insects are chemically defended and advertise their
noxiousness to predators with conspicuous (aposematic) coloration, but the
inheritance mechanisms underlying intraspecific variation in these traits are
largely unknown. Developmental, quantitative genetic, and experimental
approaches are being combined to measure genetic and parental effects on the
coloration and chemical defense of blister beetles. This research provides a
mechanistic understanding of insect aposematism and a novel analysis of
constraints on character suite integration.