* 9750450
* Enhancing Student Learning in Molecular Biology through     Computer Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Margaret Goodman, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 28,437.00

As knowledge at the molecular level is expanded, the understanding of processes
at many other levels is enhanced. This knowledge, and understanding of the tools
provided by the techniques of molecular biology, is important for all students
of biology. However, there are three difficulties in teaching molecular biology
effectively at undergraduate, liberal arts institutions. (1) The techniques
involved are time consuming and expensive and in many cases require specialized
equipment. (2) When students are conducting experiments in the laboratory, they
are often so intent on learning unfamiliar manipulations and dealing with
microquantities of reagents, that they lose the overall picture of the
experiment. This is even more of a problem when poor experimental technique
results in ambiguous data. (3) Many students have had little practice
visualizing dynamic, three-dimensional interactions at the molecular level and
find it challenging. The objectives of this project are to provide students with
the opportunity to learn a wide variety of experimental techniques and
strategies, design their own experiments, and learn to visualize structure
function relationships at a molecular level. These objectives can be
accomplished through the incorporation of computer facilities employing software
for DNA and protein modeling, gene manipulation, and an exploration focusing on
the relationship between DNA mutation and the forces of natural selection. These
resources are used for students to learn basic concepts of molecular biology and
a wide variety of experimental techniques, many of which can also be performed
in the laboratory. With these tools, students can design new experiments in
molecular biology. *