* 9750853
* Integrating Science and Mathematics -- A Laboratory Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* M Bain, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 08/31/1999
* USD 68,650.00

This project is improving undergraduate education in science and mathematics
through the integration of scientific content and statistics in a hands-on
laboratory environment centering on real-world problems. With emphasis on
increasing the number of women and minorities in science and mathematics, the
project is providing a setting in which students are studying in cooperative
learning teams taught by faculty from various scientific fields. The laboratory
is designed around workstations, each serving four students. Each workstation
houses two major pieces of equipment a standard microscope and a personal
computer with built-in CD ROM drives with probes to conduct online experiments
in the sciences. A fluorescent microscope and a gas chromatography mass
spectrometer is being used by all students. The equipment is permitting guided
investigations of a real-world problem: the possible causes of lung cancer in
Jacksonville, which have resulted in the city having the highest incidence of
lung cancer of any U.S. city. The new scientific equipment is permitting
analyses of air and water samples for possible contaminants. Computers are
allowing for the manipulation of data and access to the Internet and CD ROMs are
permitting simulated experiments. The laboratory is meeting requirements for
laboratory experience for students enrolled in special sections of introductory
courses in biology, chemistry, physics, and statistics. *