* 9750973
* Modern Electrochemistry in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Rudy Gostowski, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 08/31/1999
* USD 19,000.00

Electrochemistry, particularly voltammetry, offers many advantages in
determination of analytical concentrations and physical properties. These
advantages include high sensitivity, minimal sample preparation, and
simultaneous observation of multiple analyses. The method accomplishes a high
level of performance yet has a modest cost compared to other instruments with
similar abilities. In addition, voltammetry has the unique ability to reduce or
oxidize the sample, observe the fate of the electrochemically generated species,
and return the incipient product to its initial state. Because of these
qualities, the ACS Committee on Professional Training has recommended that a
multipurpose electrochemistry instrument be adopted in undergraduate courses.
The focus of this project is the integration of a modern electrochemistry
instrument into the whole undergraduate chemistry program. The three principal
areas of this project include the design of instructional modules available from
webpages, procurement of a mobile, computer-controlled instrument, and
development of new inquiry-based experiments for the relevant courses. In
addition, the instrument is enhancing the effectiveness of student research
projects. The efforts of this project are extending beyond the immediate
department to area high school students and teachers, area community colleges,
and other universities.