* 9750993
* Components and Systems for Communications:  An UndergraduateDesign Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Gabriel Rebeiz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

This project introduces a new concept in the undergraduate curriculum through
the development of a Design Laboratory that aims at providing students with the
fundamental concepts of communications system and component design. The novel
approach intends to introduce a new teaching and learning experience based on
the concept of a complete exposure to the engineering design cycle. This Design
laboratory initially has two associated senior-level courses and senior
independent design courses but may be expanded to provide a nucleus for
developing other modern engineering courses that focus on enhanced learning by
means of novel visualization and hands-on approaches such as fabrication and
measurements. This project establishes two Design Laboratories that allow 50
senior-level students per year to develop a strong background on system- and
component-level engineering. During these courses, the students use state-of-
the-art design and measurement tools and come in contact with engineers from
industry through industry affiliation program developed specifically for this
laboratory. The teaching effort evolves around a practical communications system
such as a 2.5-GHz down-link and learning is accomplished through lectures and
experiments that follow the signal flow graph of this typical communications
system. Teaching is augmented by analysis and design tools currently used by
industry and state-of-the-art fabrication and measurement equipment. The
integration of system and component concepts and their application to a real
system makes this effort unique in the department and a model for other courses.
This laboratory provides the students with a strong background in the area of
communications and with a motivation for further study. Furthermore, throughout
the course development and during teaching, industry plays an important role in
casting young engineers with combined practical experience and strong foundation
in basic science concepts.