* 9750636
* Enhancing the Undergraduate Experience With Innovative LaserFluorescence Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* James LoBue, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 68,280.00

Georgia Southern University requests matching funds to purchase a modern laser-
based fluorescence spectrometer. This purchase will enhance middle and upper
division elements of our dynamic undergraduate curriculum, and will provide
experimental capabilities not currently available at this institution, or in the
entire South Georgia region. Several new experiments, as well as some of a more
traditional nature, are proposed. This instrument provides a unique opportunity
for undergraduates to investigate chemical phenomena on the picosecond timescale
in addition to being able to perform standard fluorometric investigations ALL
within the same routine, user-friendly environment. Student exposure to the
instrument will begin at the sophomore level and continue throughout the
chemistry curriculum, allowing for critically needed enhancement of our existing
upper-level classes. A new course will be developed as a direct result of a
successful proposal. Further, dozens of chemistry students and faculty from area
universities will have access, allowing the benefits to reach far beyond the
confines of GSU. Finally, our department is committed to local outreach,
frequently hosting K-12 students on campus for interactiw demonstrations. Lasers
are traditionally excellent captivators of student interest and their presence
will further enliven these visits. A successful proposal will bring much needed
modern technology to a strong department composed primarily of young and
enthusiastic chemistry educators committed not only to the highest quality of
chemistry education, but also to innovation and reform in the discipline. *