* 9750734
* Improvement of Microscopes for Material Science
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Michael McInerney, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 46,903.00

Equipment is being used to improve the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and
the Zeiss optical metallurgical microscope. The SEM is being improved by the
addition of an Energy Dispersive Spectral (EDS) analyser and digital image
acquisition capability. The Zeiss is being improved by the addition of low-light
digital image acquisition capability. The new equipment is being used to make
observations from the SEM and the Zeiss easily available to many students. These
microscopes have not gotten the usage in teaching that they should because
observations are difficult to make and images are expensive to record. This
problem is being solved by fitting both microscopes with digital image
acquisition capabilities. It is also being used to improve the experimental
components of materials science courses by including experiments that require
the determination of surface element composition. With EDS, the SEM has the
ability to determine surface element composition. This ability allows analysis
of weld and solder failures and cases studied in Engineering Design and Machine
Design. Multidisciplinary student teams that work on industrially relevant
projects in the field of materials failure are being formed. The improved
capability for failure analysis given by the new equipment upgrades open up
opportunities to study industrially relevant projects. Problems involving
material failure are inherently multidisciplinary, so student teams are being
formed from several disciplines to tackle them. This sort of team interaction is
a valuable learning experience. More students are being encouraged to take
advanced physics courses. The Physics Department wishes to expand into the
materials science area as a part of its long-term plan to increase enrollment.
In particular, they would like physics to be the major of choice for students
wishing to continue into the semiconductor device industry. The new equipment is
making the department's material science and solid state courses more relevant
to this goal . *