* 9750572
* Professional Design Laboratory - Bridging the Gap Between   Classroom and Industry
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Martha Sloan, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,982.00

An improved educational model for preparing graduates to enter the engineering
profession addresses the problem that past graduates had been inadequately
prepared to enter the engineering workplace. The project objectives are to
instill the attributes of professional design engineers into engineering
seniors. These attributes include team skills, interpersonal communication
skills, leadership abilities, and an appreciation of diversity. A systems
perspective; a commitment to quality, to timeliness, and to continuous
improvement; and sound technical knowledge are also sought. Specifically, a
Professional Design Laboratory specializing in communication systems and modeled
after the industrial work setting is being established in the Electrical
Engineering Department. The key attribute of this unique facility is the
establishment of a new environment of expectations and performance for the
students. The laboratory provides a rich complement of resources to support
open-ended design projects proposed by industrial partners. Collaborative
learning, practice with interpersonal communication skills, and hands-on
learning are key features of the student experience. Students spend 2 full days
per week in the laboratory modeled after the industry work setting. Besides a
new model for engineering laboratory education, several video-taped
instructional modules are being prepared, including those on written and oral
presentations, and digital communication systems. Each module consists of video,
notes, references to literature, problems, and laboratory exercises. The modules
can be made available to educators at other universities. *