* 9750815
* Proposal for Instruction in Computer-Based Instrumentation  for Food Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Michael Fahy, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Gordon E. Uno
* 11/30/1999
* USD 31,440.00

This project establishes a program of instruction in computer-based
instrumentation as a means of improving the quality of the undergraduate
curriculum in Food Science. The new equipment consists of a texture analyzer and
a viscometer to provide undergraduate students with hands-on training in
measuring rheology of food. These instruments are standard in the food industry
for quality control and for product development, and students use these
instruments in both capacities. The instruments are computer driven, giving
students an opportunity to learn the principles of computer-operated
instrumentation. A bank of computer workstations allow demonstration of this
technology to several students at a time. The students analyze the texture of a
food material, gather the data in a spreadsheet, graph the results, and evaluate
the results individually, or at most, in pairs. The aim of this project is to
provide the students with an understanding of rheology and, more importantly, an
understanding of computer-based instrumentation so that they can use this
knowledge to operate other computer-based instruments. This project improves the
quality of undergraduate education by giving students experience on equipment
used in the food industry, it helps them understand the principles of texture
and texture measurement, and it increases the number of independent research
projects performed by undergraduate food science students. The new instruments
are used in several food science courses. Statistical and data analysis software
is installed on the computers, along with specific software to teach biochemical
proceqses, protein structure, diet analysis, and other food-science-related
topics. Other departments in the Science Division at this university and local
colleges with Food Science programs will benefit by sharing this computer-based
instrumentation laboratory. Undergraduate research generated by this program can
be disseminated by means of a Food Science and Nutrition Home Page on the World
W ide Web, presentations at Institute of Food Technologists Meetings, and
publications in Food Science journals. *