* 9750858
* An Undergraduate Laboratory for Building and Programming    Intelligent Mobile Robots
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Michael Gelfond, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 06/30/2000
* USD 40,000.00

This project establishes an undergraduate laboratory for building and
programming intelligent mobile robots. This laboratory is mainly used in the
undergraduate courses titled Building and Programming Mobile Robots (BPMR),
Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Computer Control. The BPMR course is a new
course that adapts materials from the MIT 6.270 robot contest OMS+ and the
course on robots taught at Stanford by Konolige to this urban university of
17,000 that has 62.7 Hispanic students. The current course on AI will be
significantly modified to incorporate hands-on exercise on mobile robots. The
goals behind establishing the laboratory include increasing the number of
computer science majors, the number of students from the area pursuing computer
science, the number of computer science graduates with a significant background
in robotics, the number of computer science undergraduates involved in research,
and the number of computer science undergraduates continuing on to a graduate
program or to a research career. The faculty associated with this project have
ongoing research programs on topics, such as reasoning about actions, planning,
robot navigation, fuzzy control, and neural networks, that play a big role in
creating an autonomous mobile robot. Undergraduate students, after taking
courses that use the new laboratory, are able to participate in the related
research programs. As a motivational tool, a team that includes undergraduate
students is sent to the annual AAAI/IJCAI robot contests. Robot building
workshops are provided, as are robot demonstrations for high school students and
teachers and other university students. These workshops encourage a larger
number of students to pursue a degree in computer science.