* 9750477
* Development of Environmental-Problem Solving Curriculum:    Acquisition of GC/MS and Sample Preparation Equipment
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Susan Libes, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 62,015.00

This project enables the implementation of modern environmental chemical
analyses in the university's area of emphasis in environmental chemistry, which
is offered as an option within the bachelor's chemistry degree program. The
program's goal is to prepare students for careers in environmental monitoring,
assessment, and industrial ecology research and development by teaching them
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) methods of environmental analysis
and assessment. This is done in two lecture/laboratory courses and a required
independent research project. Students learn environmental assessment techniques
by working as a group to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) using
National Environmental Policy Act (1970) guidelines. Samples are collected and
analyzed to obtain data in support of the EIS. The only inorganic priority
pollutant that had not been measured is Hg, and hence this project provides a
vapor generator accessory to be used on an existing AAS. The project also
provides a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to enable measurement of specific
organic compounds including chlorinated pesticides, PCBs, PAHs, and petroleum
hydrocarbons. Other new equipment upgrades sample preparation procedures to
improve safety, efficiency, and analyte yield and reduce the environmental
impact of the analysis itself. This equipment includes a microwave-assisted
digestor, a grinding mill, a tissue homogenizer, a freeze drier, a sonic
dismembrator, solid-phase extraction units, and equipment to heat and recover
solvents from Kuderna-Danish evaporators. The new laboratory experiences can be
added to the university's Environmental Chemistry Laboratory manual, which is in
use at other institutions. No other undergraduate teaching manual is available
for teaching USEPA methods. The new equipment can also be used in mandatory
student research projects, whose results are traditionally presented off campus.
*