* 9750689
* Instrumentation Improvement of Personal Computer Based      Analog and Digital VLSI Design Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Wallace Leigh, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/1999
* USD 10,892.00

This project improves instrumentation of the introductory VLSI design course,
adds instrumentation for an analog VLSI design course, and provides for a
special topics course in VLSI that emphasizes design strategies usually not
covered in undergraduate courses. This is part of a goal in the Electrical
Engineering Division to expand the VLSI curriculum from one current introductory
course to a pyramid of courses structured to teach the students VLSI design from
several aspects. Emphasis of the new VLSI design curriculum is on design
methodologies and specific applied design paradigms. The new tools are used
solely on personal computers, and the courses are designed so the instructor can
teach the laboratories with little or no computer technical assistance. The
laboratories are designed so that one or two faculty can be used with help from
workstudy students. The introductory course is offered to both juniors and
seniors. Students taking the course in their junior year have the advantage of
more detailed VLSI design experience in their senior year. Expansion of VLSI
design can increase the student's proficiency in analog design using full custom
design and digital design using synthesis tools. In the VLSI special topics
course, students work as a single group on a design problem and emphasis is on
design methodologies, time to market strategies, design for testability, and
design for quality. *