* 9750740
* Purchase of Infrared Thermography Equipment for Mechanical  Engineering Laboratory Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Darrell E. Hoy, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 07/31/1999
* USD 40,900.00

The Mechanical Engineering Department has not had any full-field temperature
measuring capability. Students graduate with theoretical and practical knowledge
of traditional point-type temperature measurement methods, but do not encounter
any full-field temperature measurement systems. This project addresses these
needs by purchasing a state-of-the-art infrared thermography system. The four
primary objectives of this proposal are (1) to integrate theoretical and
experimental methods concerning infrared thermography systems into five existing
undergraduate Mechanical Engineering courses (two of the five courses being
designated as the primary users of the system); (2) to evaluate the impact and
educational benefit of adding a state-of-the-art thermal measurement capability
to an undergraduate engineering curriculum, a capability that is not available
in most university environments because of its cost; (3) to make the infrared
thermography system available for directed study courses in which work on
selected projects under the guidance of a faculty member, with many of these
projects often involving local industries; and (4) to introduce talented high
school students to infrared thermography as part of a Young Scholars Program
held every summer. This successful program is now in its 18th year and includes
a particular emphasis on the introduction of women and minorities to the fields
of engineering and computer science. This project directly affects about 350
undergraduate students per year. *