* 9750713
* Managing Divergent Networks:  Internet/Intranet and         Internetworking Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Eugene Straub, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 08/31/1999
* USD 57,814.00

The goal of this project is the improvement of networking programs by providing
hands-on training in router installation and configuration, router operations
support, network router security, and remote access communications, as well as
web server deployment, operations, and management. This approach is giving
graduates the ability to manage Internet/Intranet and internetworking services
within today's highly diverse business environments and giving the college the
ability to respond to curriculum deficiencies and industry demands. Specific
project objectives include (1) providing students with the equipment to apply
the Internet/Intranet and internetwork theory and concepts currently taught in
the program; (2) exposing students to a variety of Internet/Intranet and
internetwork service design options, resulting in increased critical-thinking
and problem-solving skills; and (3) expanding the current networking curriculum
by introducing four new courses and the accompanying laboratory experiments
addressing Internet/Intranet and internetwork services. The laboratory equipment
is designed to build a wide variety of Internet/Intranet and internetworking
scenarios that mimic real-world operation. With the addition of new courses and
the complementary laboratory exercises, students are being provided a
responsive, well-rounded, hands-on educational experience in information
technology.