* 9750602
* Mating Multimedia and Computer Data Acquisition in The      Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Linda Wilkes, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 23,906.00

The university's previous general chemistry laboratories suffer from a lack of
modern equipment. Laboratories are not tailored to the needs of students.
Standard texts in use employ the experimental recipe book approach. Students
perceive the experiments as uninteresting and irrelevant to their lives.
Laboratories reinforce lecture but do not presage lecture to spark student
interest in discovery and the scientific method. Workplace competency issues are
not emphasized. A pilot project to remedy these problems through the
incorporation of computer-controlled data acquisition instrumentation is coupled
with innovative collaborative exploration experiments. The new laboratory
curriculum is structured to introduce concepts that are more fully developed in
subsequent lecture. Collaborative learning projects where students use shared
computer collected data across a local Intranet compose the principal laboratory
effort. Experiments are presented using a variety of contextual relevance and
include digitized video images to supplement and enhance the traditional student
hands-on laboratory experience. An ultimate goal, upon extension of the pilot
project, is the creation of a laboratory text and accompanying software tailored
to the needs of students. The student population is 23 percent Hispanic and 2
percent other minorities. A typical general chemistry class may have over 60
percent biology majors. Students actually perform experiments based on
traditional topics; however, they explore and discover, guided and facilitated
by the technology and their peer groups. This laboratory-directed approach
employs computerized data acquisition instrumentation and student team
collaboration and holds promise for solving the Nation's science education
problems. *