* 9750721
* NMR Project
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Marion Doig, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 05/31/1999
* USD 86,985.00

The problem to be remedied by this project is a deficiency in the curriculum
with regard to nuclear-magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The objectives of
the project are twofold. First, the pedagogical method of instruction at the
introductory level is improved for spectral characterization by NMR
spectroscopy. Second, at both the advanced and introductory levels, the
curriculum is updated by teaching students how to obtain and interpret 1990's
FT-NMR 1D and 2D data in lieu of 1960's CU-NMR. A gradualistic style of
spectroscopic instruction for introductory organic chemistry is employed.
Gradualistic learning is defined as a series of small steps that build one upon
the other until such time as sufficient skill has been developed to solve
complex problems. This method for teaching spectroscopy to large numbers of
students depends on the use of autosampling instrumentation and has been under
development in this department for several years. Upper-level chemistry and
biochemistry majors manually operate the NMR and perform experiments that
address the theoretical aspects of FT-NMR spectroscopy. The new NMR
significantly improves the quality of the undergraduate research opportunities
for students. Since 1991, 50 percent of graduating majors have been women, over
40 of whom have gone on to graduate studies. This project therefore affects a
large number of women who may enter into the scientific professions. In addition
to the development of many new experiments that fit into the framework of the
traditional chemistry laboratory curriculum, this project also brings to
fruition the gradualistic method of instruction, which can have a significant
impact within the local institution and may have an effect on teaching at the
regional or national level. *