* 9750523
* Development of an Environmental Chemical Engineering        Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Steven LeBlanc, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 06/30/2000
* USD 50,000.00

The resolution of today's environmental problems requires a fundamental
knowledge of mass transfer, reaction engineering, and separation processes.
These technical areas are the foundation of the chemical engineering curriculum.
Chemical engineers will thus play an integral role in protecting the environment
in the 21st century. However, environmental engineering is commonly housed in
civil engineering, where it grew out of sewage treatment, wastewater treatment,
and landfill efforts. The future of environmental engineering, and major
developments in the field, lies in the realm of chemical engineering. The
development of an Environmental Chemical Engineering Laboratory (ECEL) is one
step in a departmental initiative to provide undergraduate chemical engineering
students with a thorough grounding in the principles of environmental
engineering. Within the ECEL, a series of waste treatment processes are
investigated. With the media in which the waste is located as an organizing
tool, this project is primarily concerned with experiments investigating air
pollution control, wastewater treatment, and hazardous waste redemption. As a
result, the experiments are demonstration and performance of an automotive
catalytic converter, supercritical fluid extraction of solid waste, chemical
oxidation of process wastewater, adsorption of aqueous contaminants onto
activated carbon, and reverse osmosis for the recovery of low-concentration
hazardous waste. Each of these experiments not only illustrate environmental
applications, but are based on the fundamental principles of chemical
engineering. Taken together, this group of experiments represent the synergy of
chemical and environmental engineering. *