* 9750545
* Microcomputer-Controlled Automated Nuclear Counting for Advanced Physics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Desmond Cook, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2002
* USD 36,009.00

This is an innovative project which introduces nuclear counting techniques for
the study of materials into a senior undergraduate physics laboratory course at
a typical research university. The specific goal of the project is to instruct
physics majors in the use of nuclear counting instruments and their use with
computer controlled automated data acquisition system. Through the Virginia
Physics Consortium, students from our regional universities and teachers
undergoing re-certification, are also participating in the project.
Additionally, students from Old Dominion's other science and engineering
departments are being integrated into the project through the Materials Science
Program. The nuclear counting instruction are aimed at developing and improving
experimental skills in Nuclear Physics as well as Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics. Experiences with the nuclear instrumentation are being obtained by
using a popular nuclear resonance probe to measure low temperature microscopic
magnetic properties of some common iron oxides. The project is being introduced
in order to train science and engineering students who are now finding
employment at our local research affiliations, The Jefferson National Laboratory
(formerly CEBAF) and NASA Langely. In addition, since many of our graduating
seniors are entering our expanding research program in Nuclear Physics, we see
this need as an important improvement to our undergraduate program. This
undergraduate project meets the goals of our recently revised undergraduate
curriculum by exposing graduating seniors to a near research experience. The
project will also continue to allow our senior students to be involved with oral
and poster presentations and possibly publication of some of their original
findings. The project is a novel role model for senior level undergraduate
instruction using inexpensive nuclear counting techniques for investigations in
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics. *