* 9750965
* Modernization of the Purchase College Microbiology          Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* James Daly, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 20,358.00

The concept of this project grows out of curricular needs in Microbiology. We
will add 4 new exercises to our Microbiology laboratory which will focus on the
major advances that have occurred in molecular techniques commonly used in
modern Microbiology laboratories during the past 15 years. The purpose of these
new exercises is to demonstrate the common techniques that are now used in
modern molecular Microbiology laboratories: (1) fluorescence microscopy for
identification of bacteria using either antibody of oligonucleotide probes
labeled with fluorescent dyes, (2) electrophoresis of proteins and nucleic
acids, (3) Western immunoblotting for protein identification, (4) ELISA for
quick identification screening of specific antigens and (5) PCR for
amplification of DNA for various identification purposes. The laboratory model
which will be used based upon the PI's extensive research experience using
molecular Microbiology for the diagnosis of the fastidious, slow growing fish
pathogen, Renibacterium salmoninarum. This pathogen is excellent for use in the
undergraduate Microbiology laboratory because it is a strict psychrophile, and
is nonpathogenic to humans. With the modernization of the Microbiology
laboratory, we also have the opportunity to update our Cellular and Molecular
Techniques course. A new exercise will be introduced to the existing series of
cloning procedures. In particular, we plan to introduce students to PCR
amplification in the context of the existing series of DNA exercises. Purchase
College undergraduates are required to do a two semester Senior Research
Project. The scope and conceptual sophistication of research projects available
for student participation will also be considerably enhanced. Several of our
faculty have proposed use of the new equipment in new and ongoing projects
designed for undergraduate student participation. This project will enhance the
conceptual as well as the technical training of students. The use of direct f
amiliarity with common techniques in modern Molecular Microbiology, Cell
Biology, and Molecular Biology will greatly improve our student's preparedness
for graduate programs, and/or for entering a highly technical, biotechnology
workforce. *