* 9750951
* Continuing Improvement of Modern Physics Laboratory:  Atomic Force/Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Steven Herbert, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1999
* USD 33,660.00

We are introducing scanning probe microscopy (SPM) into the physics curriculum
in order to update our modern physics capabilities. We are taking a three-
pronged approach: 1) Bench-Top Experiments for freshmen in order to introduce
key methods and concepts of both atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopy
at the earliest possible opportunity. 2) "Standard Experiments" using Park
Instruments Scanning Probe Microscope in the improved modern physics laboratory.
These experiments would include scans of gratings for standardization, scans of
highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), and scans of thin films deposited on
a substrate. While these are called "standard experiments," they represent some
of the most innovative, exciting, and newest techniques in modern physics. 3)
Senior Thesis/Collaboration with Purdue University and Armco Research. Majors in
Biology, Chemistry and Physics will have this SPM available for projects. The
Park Instruments SPM was selected for acquisition because of its mid-range cost,
modular construction and Windows-based software. Instruction in the key concepts
of scanning, actual work with a scanning probe microscope, and senior thesis
research are helping to prepare our students for future work in graduate
research laboratories and high technology industries. The SPM is our next
logical step for the improvement of our modern physics laboratory. *