* 9750533
* A Full-Year Undergraduate Course Sequence in Cell and       Molecular Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Grew, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 07/31/1999
* USD 29,636.00

Jersey City State College (JCSC) and its Biology Department are diverse,
dynamic entities that are evolving into larger, more sophisticated institutions
of higher education. New Jersey is home to major pharmaceuticals, biotechnology,
biomaterials and chemical corporations which employ thousands of graduates of
area colleges and universities in technical and professional positions. Several
institution-wide initiatives are currently in place or in the planning stages
which are intended to provide JCSC students, many of whom are women,
underrepresented minorities and teachers-in-training, with a learning
environment which will allow them to be competitive in graduate education and
the regional job market. A full-year course sequence in cell and molecular
biology (Cell &amp; Molecular Biology I&amp;II) has been designed to cultivate
the knowledge base and technical expertise necessary for success in technology-
based positions. Cell &amp; Molecular Biology I , a course in molecular cell
biology studies the form and function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The
organization, physiology and reproduction of cells are examined, and
accompanying laboratory experiences introduce classical and contemporary methods
of cell study. Cell &amp; Molecular Biology II, a course in molecular genetics,
examines physical and biological properties of nucleic acids, including DNA
replication, gene expression, recombination, mutation, and DNA repair. The
laboratory component introduces students to basic techniques of recombinant DNA
technology.