* 9750859
* Laboratory for Undergraduate GIS Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Jack Kartez, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Martin, Jr.
* 06/30/1999
* USD 41,625.00

The new computer equipment upgrades and expands the old limited geographical
information systems (GIS) facilities at the university. This upgraded facility
allows the development of new undergraduate courses incorporating the use of GIS
and the upgrade of existing courses in three departments: Geosciences,
Geography/Anthropology, and Environmental Science and Policy. Students benefit
from exposure to a multiplatform setting. They gain experience in raster,
vector, and cartographic design systems and the creation and manipulation of
large databases, while working in IBM and UNIX environments. In addition,
students are exposed to Arc/Info in both platforms, IDRISI, and ArcView 3. This
project (1) increases the university's capacity to make GIS exposure available
to a larger number of students than is currently possible, (2) expands
systematic GIS exposure from one to three departments, and (3) expands the
current GIS capability from a PC platform to a multiplatform system. The GIS
facility acts to enhance the synergy among the three departments and to more
effectively integrate course offerings benefitting from the use of GIS among the
three. The system also serves to strengthen ties between the traditional student
majors, local professionals with an interest in GIS, and state and local
agencies with appropriate databases and GIS facilities. *