* 9750854
* Enrichment of Comparative Physiology Courses Using Modern   Physiological Techniques
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* David Rivers, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 24,380.00

New research tools available to physiologists working in academia and industry
have lead to major breakthroughs in our understanding of physiological
mechanisms. The college, like many medium-sized, liberal arts schools, offers a
very good program in traditional physiology, but offers courses that provide
only limited opportunities for gaining hands-on experience using these modern
physiological techniques. Thus, many of the graduates lack a thorough education
in physiology that is necessary to succeed in graduate and professional
programs. The Department of Biology is cmrrecting this curriculum deficiency by
revising its current Comparative Physiology course to offer a strong laboratory
component that emphasizes modern physiological approaches to basic biological
questions. The new physiology laboratory concentrates on providing practical
experience for biology majors and accommodates students with broad interests and
backgrounds. The laboratory uses a goal-oriented approach, with students working
cooperatively in small groups to answer a basic biological question. The student
teams formulate hypotheses, develop protocols from the primary research
literature, and conduct the experiments that they design. Students completing
this course should display an increased interest and curiosity toward biology
and be equipped with skills essential for any area of the biological sciences.
The course is intended to enhance instruction in upper-level biology courses,
prepare students for independent research programs, and serve as models for
similar efforts at other undergraduate institutions.