* 9750505
* Integrating Experiemental Techniques/An Inquiry-Based       Laboratory Approach to Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Surendra Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 04/30/1999
* USD 54,120.00

The performance of concrete depends on chemistry and processing and the
resulting microstructure and properties of the material; yet, undergraduate
civil engineering students are not exposed to laboratories that develop these
relationships. For students to have the opportunity to discover the diversity
and ultimately come to understand performance of this complex material, it is
critical to provide relevant laboratory experiences as well as classroom
instruction. This project provides funding for equipment that addresses three
basic areas of concrete materials science and engineering: (l) hydration, (2)
flow properties, and (3) transport properties. In combination with existing
mechanical testing facilities, the new laboratory becomes a novel undergraduate
experience, both from a pedagogical and content-based perspective, which brings
together key issues in chemistry, processing, microstructure, durability, and
mechanical performance. The goals of this project are: (1) to engage students in
laboratory activities that reveal the relationship among chemistry, processing,
microstructure, and performance of concrete, (2) to shift course content from
passive lecture-based teaching to active hands-on inquiry-based laboratory
activities, (3) to incorporate into the laboratories elements of design,
planning, implementation, and analysis rather than step-by-step follow-the-
instruction exercises, (4) to permit students to direct their own laboratory
experiences whereby each student may perform different experiments, (5) to
promote collaboration among students to expand the knowledge base by combining
the results of many individual experiments into a cumulative greater whole, and
(6) to replace traditional discrete laboratory activities that feature single
techniques with a methodology that integrates techniques and illustrates the
relationships among experimental methods and how to interpret such results
collectively.