* 9750521
* Implementing Experiential Education in the Anatomy and      Physiology Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Brian Witz, Nazareth College of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 24,477.00

The Biology Department is implementing experiential learning in anatomy and
physiology through the use of computers and other digital technology. The new
equipment, coupled with an on-line laboratory manual and Internet access in the
laboratories, allow both major and nonmajor biology students to explore
physiological and anatomical concepts in both supervised and independent
laboratory experiences. The equipment is used to meet two identified curricular
needs. The first need is for students to become active participants in
physiological experiments by using computer interfaces to record, compare, and
analyze data. A single MacLab station has been used with great success; however,
it has been limited to instructor demonstrations. Four new mobile computer
workstations, each equipped with digital data acquisition technology, can be
used in conjunction with an on-line laboratory manual to allow students to have
hands-on experience in physiological investigation. The second need is for
students to have the ability to learn sophisticated anatomical relationships by
using a computer-based anatomical package and digital camera to capture, modify,
and link three-dimensional anatomical images and to record dissections. Students
are able to compare homologous structures from representatives of multiple taxa.
The equipment also allows biology faculty to help students link form and
function in physiology and anatomy courses. The project greatly enriches
introductory-level courses for nonmajors, many of whom are preservice teachers.
By modeling computer-enhanced instruction and experiential learning for
preservice teachers, the project has a significant impact on science teaching at
the K 12 level. It also allows biology majors to do more sophisticated senior
research projects in physiology and anatomy.