* 9750603
* Acquisition of a Gas Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometer      System for Undergraduate Teaching and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Mitchell Rhea, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 35,926.00

This project provides a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer system consisting of
a Hewlett Packard model 6890 gas chromatograph and a Hewlett Packard model 5973
mass selective detector. This instrument system is used to remedy the most
significant deficiency in our instrument holdings by allowing students to gain
first-hand experience with mass spectrometry and with gas chromatography mass
spectrometry. Students also learn the principles of computer-interfaced
instrumentation and of spectral database searching. The gas chromatograph mass
spectrometer system is used throughout the chemistry curriculum, including
courses for chemistry majors, other science majors, and non-science-majors. On
average, 330 students per year enroll in these courses. The instrument system is
used in each course in such a way that there is a progression, both in
laboratory skills and in conceptual understanding of gas chromatography and mass
spectrometry, from the introductory courses through the advanced courses. The
gas chromatograph mass spectrometer system also enhances many student-faculty
research projects, including ongoing studies of photochemical reactions in
micelles, new legends for the synthesis of bridged or caged metal complexes,
products of metal complex-catalyzed reactions on stabilized clay colloids,
molecules designed to study the principles of intramolecular catalysis,
aminogallane precursors for new semiconductor materials, and unusual pyridine
rinds and brominated allylic and nonallylic alcohols.