* 9750681
* Environmental Impact Assesment, A Capstone Course for an    Environmental Science Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* David Oetinger, Kentucky Wesleyan College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 12,431.00

Faculty of the Department of Biology are implementing a new capstone course in
their Environmental Science Program Environmental Impact Assessment. This upper-
division course is available as a 3-semester-hour course for non-science-majors
or a 4-semester-hour laboratory course for science majors. Students, working in
teams that include both science majors and nonmajors, are confronted with a
simulated scenerio in which industry (e.g., a PCB removal facility, a battery
recycling facility, a chicken-processing facility, etc.) seeks to locate its
operation adjacent to Panther Creek, the major drainage system of Daviess
County, Kentucky. Laboratory students characterize information (hydrographic
features, substrate composition, riparian/emergent vegetation, and cover) and
collect data (stream velocity, loading capacity, temperature, pH, conductivity,
heavy metal levels, invertebrate numbers/diversity, fish fauna
numbers/diversity, and allozymic variation of select invertebrates and fishes)
at the site(s) of potential impact, over 3 months. All students learn data
management, data analysis, and data presentation. Each team prepares a written
document, an Environmental Impact Assessment. Different students assume
leadership roles according to the teams' activities (physical, chemical,
biological, computer work, statistical analyses, research, and writing). This
project provides flowmeters, remote monitoring /sampling equipment, a computer
system, and appropriate software, electroshocking equipment, and a glass-door
refrigerator for electrophoretic separation of enzymes. Results of the didactic
aspects of this course and environmental data can be presented by faculty and
students at the annual meetings of the Kentucky Academy of Sciences. *