* 9750703
* Instrumentation for Undergraduate Lab Instruction in        Molecular Cell Biology Using Non-Radioactive Labels and     Computer Data Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Barbara Chapman, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 29,899.00

Preparing undergraduates for careers in the biological sciences requires a
laboratory-rich curriculum, which includes hands-on experience with current
technologies. Many methods in cell and molecular biology involve exposure to
toxic and radioactive chemicals. The new instrumentation is part of an effort to
redesign the bioscience curriculum around nonradioactive, nontoxic
methodologies. Exercises that teach quantitation of nucleic acids and proteins
(including PCR products), DNA, RNA, and antibody blotting, analysis of SDS-PAGE,
DNA sequencing, protease and nuclease assays, gel-shift assays for DNA-binding
proteins, CAT reporter assays, and protein phosphorylation assays used in signal
transduction studies can be performed with nonhazardous fluorescent labels
instead of toxic or radioactive detection reagents. The new instrumentation also
provides for computer data analysis, designed to improve student understanding
of computational tools in biology and help them to process and report their
data. Providing for direct, safer experiences with current technologies allows
students to broaden and deepen their understanding of laboratory applications in
biomedical science. Concerns of students, especially women students, about
potential reproductive hazards should be significantly reduced. When fully
implemented, the program can eliminate the need for radioisotopes and toxic dyes
like ethidium bromide, along with their associated financial and environmental
costs. This approach to laboratory instruction in the molecular biosciences
should be broadly applicable and is particularly important for the department's
attempts to increase the number of students preparing to be teachers who opt to
take biology as their science and who will be better prepared in this science..