* 9750553
* Applying Digital Technologies to the Biology Laboratory     Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Steven Spilatro, Marietta College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/1999
* USD 64,735.00

The Department of Biology is enhancing the teaching of data acquisition,
analysis, and presentation in its curriculum. These goals are being achieved by
the introduction of digital instrumentation into student laboratories and the
availability of these technologies for student independent research projects.
The department currently emphasizes hands-on, investigative laboratory
experiences in introductory and advanced laboratories. Digital instrumentation
and computers are modernizing data acquisition and analysis and creating greater
opportunities for interactions between students and instructors. A networked
laboratory of 16 Pentium computers with associated hardware is being
established. Students are using the laboratory for data analysis and
manipulation as well as presentation preparation. New instrumentation includes
analytical sensors and probes interfaced with older generation computers with
upgrades. This equipment is being used in introductory-level laboratories to
introduce students to techniques for continuous data logging and basic
statistical and graphing software, and by upper-level students needing to log
pH, conductivity, temperature, or other parameters. Other digital
instrumentation is being purchased for use in upper-level courses and student
independent research projects. Students are learning the modern methodologies of
ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometry, densitometry, and photomicroscopy using a
digital camera and image analysis software. Application of digital
instrumentation can result in enhancements to laboratory investigations of
photosynthesis, yeast respiration, rat tissue histology, plant tissue culture,
electrophoresis and immunoblotting, metabolite analysis, and ecological
microcosm construction. Overall, the project is strengthening the pedagogy of
the scientific process and greatly expanding opportunities for student
undergraduate research. *