* 9750742
* Undergraduate Photonics Design and Experimentation          Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Robert Brecha, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1999
* USD 30,000.00

In addition to its long-standing commitment to education in electro-optics (EO)
demonstrated by its graduate degree programs, the university's Departments of
Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering (ECE) and Physics are now integrating EO
fully into the undergraduate curriculum. To this end the Physics Department and
the ECE Undergraduate Studies Committee are developing an EO Concentration
exclusively for ECE and Physics majors. The concentration is in many ways
similar to a minor degree program pursued within one's own major department and
is indicated on a student's official transcript upon graduation. The structure
of the undergraduate EO Concentration requires students to take four EO-related
technical electives. These courses are in the areas of Fiber Optics, Linear
Systems in Optics, Optoelectronics, and Physical Optics. Though the Physical
Optics course focuses on basic principles, the remaining courses are more
practice oriented. This project develops a dedicated Undergraduate Photonics
Laboratory to support the design, demonstration, and experimentation components
of the ECE technical electives composing the heart of the new undergraduate EO
Concentration. The Undergraduate Photonics Laboratory stimulates strong interest
in undergraduate research and furthers the efforts of the Women in Engineering
Program. Another program potentially to be benefited by the Undergraduate
Photonics Laboratory is the Get Smart program. Lastly, there are approximately
86 companies within Ohio that regularly hire employees with EO backgrounds. The
new undergraduate EO concentration makes students more attractive to these
companies as both co-op and, upon graduation, full-time employees. *