* 9750658
* Discovery-Based Course Experiences:  Technology and         Equipment Integration in Organismic Biology Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Leona Truchan, Alverno College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 19,311.00

The college, a 4-year liberal-arts college for women with a 28-percent minority
student population, is expanding and enhancing laboratory and field experiences
in four middle- to upper-level biology courses (Ecology, Organismal Biology of
Animals, Organismal Biology of Plants, and Animal Behavior) through the
acquisition of scientific and computer equipment and through the creation of a
field research site on the campus. The project provides students from sophomore
through senior level with a focused, hands-on, and realistic (in terms of needed
scientific skills) continuum of undergraduate research experiences in organismic
biology. Through this project, a discovery-based, or constructivist, approach to
laboratory experimentation and system observations is implemented. Within a
single laboratory period, students are able to test and retest their scientific
hypotheses, discovering through active investigation which of their hypotheses
are correct or incorrect. The high-tech instrumentation is important because it
allows students to discover both the capabilities and, just as important, the
limitations of technology. New equipment includes field sampling equipment for
terrestrial, aquatic, and laboratory systems of study; data-logging devices for
short- and long-term data acquisition; and four mixed-platform computers (two
desktop and two portable) with associated hardware and software. This equipment
allows the incorporation of expanded and improved exploratory research
experiences (field and laboratory), data-acquisition techniques (short and long
term), data interpretation (mathematical and graphical), mathematical and
simulation model construction, and validation of models using student-collected
field data. As part of its institutional commitment to this project, the college
is establishing a field research site. *