* 9750680
* Developing Integrated Molecular Modeling, Dynthesis &amp;       Spectroscopy Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Karen Brewer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/2000
* USD 89,557.00

This project addresses the problem of integrating molecular modeling into the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The objective is to develop a series of
integrated molecular modeling, synthesis, and spectroscopy laboratories. The
integration of molecular modeling within a synthetic laboratory allows for a
unique educational experience. The students are able to use computer-based
molecular modeling within a context that closely mimics its application in
chemical research. This allows the students to use molecular modeling as a
molecular design tool to assist them in the choice of synthetic targets. It also
allows them to critically view the results of molecular modeling as they compare
the results to physical properties of the complexes they prepare. The
experiments consist of a molecular modeling phase in which the students model a
series of structurally similar complexes. This modelling is followed by an
analysis of the molecular modeling results. The students then make some
predictions about the physical properties of the complexes they modeled and
select which complexes to prepare in the laboratory. The students prepare the
complexes in the laboratory, and they study their chemical properties. The final
phase of the experiment involves a comparison of the actual physical properties
of the compounds they prepared with the predictions they made following the
molecular modeling exercises. World Wide Web based tutorials are used to assist
the students in the use of the CAChe molecular modeling package to reduce the
amount of hands-on time needed to teach the students the details of the
molecular modeling computer interface. The initial
modeling/synthesis/spectroscopy experiments are being designed, tested, and
implemented for the inorganic chemistry laboratory and can be expanded to other
parts of the undergraduate curriculum. *