* 9750051
* NSF/Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Postdoctoral Research        Fellowship in Molecular Evolution for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Richard Broughton, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750051 Richard E. Broughton This action funds an NSF/Alfred P.
Sloan Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution for 1997. These
fellowships support studies involving the theoretical, comparative,
computational, and/or experimental analyses of biological patterns and processes
at the molecular level within the framework of organismic evolutionary change
and adaptation. These studies also include the use of molecular data to address
broader evolutionary questions. Each fellowship supports a research and training
plan to be carried out in a sponsoring laboratory. The research and training
plan for this fellowship is entitled "Applying multiple locus genealogies to
molecular evolution and species divergence." The overall goal of the research is
to understand the origin and maintenance of genetic variation in natural
populations. Gene genealogies are being generated from five nuclear loci for
three closely related species of field crickets (genus Gryllus). A series of
questions are being addressed. How do gene trees from different loci differ in
structure and/or length? What do different gene phylogenies indicate about the
relative effects of natural selection, recombination, population subdivision,
and population size fluctuation? Did two concurrently hybridizing species
diverge while in continuous contact, or in geographic isolation prior to
assuming their present distributions?