* 9750895
* Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Instrumentation to     Enhance Project-Based Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Edward Acheson, Millikin University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 34,692.00

A GC/MS system, with mass spectral libraries and complementary mass spectral
tutorial software, is being used in a project-based lab curriculum. Students
work on realistic projects from the day they enter the lab in first semester
General Chemistry. By the time they are seniors, they are ready to tackle true
real-world problems that are open-ended and ill-defined. In order to
successfully solve these problems, students need the sophisticated tools
necessary to bring these problems to a complete, professionally satisfying
closure. Although GC, FT-IR, and NMR are useful techniques for characterizing
compounds, GC/MS allows students to positively identify unknowns, reaction
products, by-products, and impurities. The Instrumental Analysis lab course is
being restructured with the acquisition of GC/MS to incorporate Problem-Based
Learning. Real-world problems that require GC/MS and that reflect the concerns
of the local community are being developed with the help of an outside panel of
industrial experts. These projects in particular engage students in community
outreach activities, a model that can be emulated at other institutions. The
GC/MS system also is used in the undergraduate research program. Acquisition of
GC/MS enhances the research program by putting another powerful problem-solving
tool at the disposal of students, better preparing them for the transition to
graduate school or industry. Finally, we are training our senior chemistry
majors to act as GC/MS student technical experts. These technical experts assist
lower division and research students who need to use GC/MS in their projects but
who do not necessarily need to learn the intricacies of running a GC/MS. This
model, too, can be emulated at other institutions. Dissemination of our approach
to incorporating GC/MS into the curriculum will be accomplished at regional
meetings and through chemical education journals. *