* 9750497
* An Advanced Microprocessor Laboratory for an Electrical     Engineering Techonology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Richard Pfile, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/1999
* USD 19,355.00

This project develops a contemporary microprocessor learning laboratory that
uses sophisticated software tools. This project provides software development
tools, single-board 32-bit computers for embedded applications, an embedded
operating system, and servo trainers. The software development tools provide a
full-feature C++ compiler, a sophisticated debugger, and a real-time operating
system kernel. These software tools can be used with laboratory test platforms
that the department has designed over the years. The servo trainers are the test
beds for the fuzzy logic control algorithms. These platforms can be set up to
simulate a broad class of commonly occurring non-ideal properties for control
problems. The laboratory experiments provide the students with interesting
challenges for fuzzy logic control. Approximately one-fourth of the class time
will be spent on real-time fuzzy logic control. Universities have been slow to
implement software automation tools in microprocessor courses. Industry has
moved very aggressively in this direction, making the university training less
relevant. Industry, particularly in Japan, has also been very quick to implement
fuzzy logic algorithms in many products while universities have lagged in the
implementation of fuzzy logic control in curriculums. Embedded computers provide
options for control that are not available using classical control theory, and
fuzzy logic provides the formal set of rules for implementing these systems.
Fuzzy logic instruction makes sense in an engineering technology program since
very sophisticated control algorithms can be implemented with a limited
mathematical background. *