* 9750874
* Improvement of Field and Laboratory Instrumentation for     Environmental Hydrogeology: Part 2
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Paul Ferre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2001
* USD 52,475.00

Undergraduate environmental education for students majoring in hydrology and
other environmental science and engineering disciplines should be centered
around practical applications. Students must understand the critical scientific
and engineering issues and become proficient in solving multidisciplinary
problems using high-technology tools. This project improves existing field and
laboratory facilities by providing such tools to undergraduate students from
several departments in three colleges at the university. Undergraduate
environmental courses have been taught with laboratory components, in which
practical aspects of environmental science and engineering are emphasized. This
project provides for the field and laboratory equipment needed to improve the
current disciplinary laboratory courses and to initiate new multidisciplinary
courses that aim to develop in students the ability to integrate knowledge
across traditional disciplines. The facility consists of three integrated parts:
(1) a field site equipped with pumping/injecting wells, monitoring wells, and
accessories; (2) a physical and chemical laboratory equipped for determination
of soil and water properties; and (3) a computer laboratory equipped for data
acquisition, analysis, interpretation, and visualization. Field experiments deal
with water flow, water resources evaluation, water chemistry and quality, and
geophysical methods. In the laboratory, tests are performed to determine
physical and chemical properties of soils and chemical composition of water. The
results of field and laboratory experiments are analyzed using data reduction
and data visualization software. The following courses use the laboratory:
hydrogeology, subsurface hydrology, water chemistry, vadose zone monitoring
methods, vadose zone hydrology, groundwater resources evaluation, well logging,
and environmental monitoring. *