* 9750052
* NSF/Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Postdoctoral Research        Fellowship in Molecular Evolution for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Paul Rawson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750052 Paul D. Rawson This action funds an NSF/Alfred P. Sloan
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution for 1997. These
fellowships support studies involving the theoretical, comparative,
computational, and/or experimental analyses of biological patterns and processes
at the molecular level within the framework of organismic evolutionary change
and adaptation. These studies also include the use of molecular data to address
broader evolutionary questions. Each fellowship supports a research and training
plan to be carried out in a sponsoring laboratory. The research and training
plan for this fellowship is entitled "Coevolution of nuclear and mitochrondrial
cytochrome C oxidase genes in a marine copepod." The marine copepod Tigriopus
californicus is being used to determine the degree to which cytochrome C oxidase
genes are coevolving. Cytochrome C oxidase (CO) is a key enzyme of cellular
respiration and is composed of subunits encoded by genes in both the nuclear and
mitochrondrial genomes. Sequence variations are being used to determine the
coevolution of these genes in genetically divergent Tigriopus populations. Also,
it is being determined if nuclear genes from one population can regulate the
expression of mitochrondrial genes from another population and affect their
assembly into the holoenzyme.