* 9750871
* Instructional Equipment for Fieldwork in Physical and       Environmental Geography
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Catherine Souch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2000
* USD 18,537.00

This institution serves a nontraditional student population with high
proportions of returning adults, part-time students, women, and minorities. Many
of these students have little experience with natural environments and little
knowledge of science, particularly outside the traditional laboratory setting.
The focus of this project is the use of relatively simple instrumentation to
introduce a wide spectrum of students to the aims and methods of field science,
as practiced in physical and environmental geography. The project is purchasing
basic instrumentation sufficient to teach field methods in each of the major
subfields of physical/environmental geography, including climatology, hydrology,
geomorphology, soils, and biogeography. Field instruction in existing courses,
both introductory and advanced, is being expanded. The expanded instruction
makes it possible to teach a new course in field methods and to develop
nontraditional avenues for geographic field instruction, including
interdisciplinary courses with other departments on campus and workshops for
teachers of geography in primary and secondary schools. This field training is
introducing a diverse array of urban undergraduates to the methods and benefits
of field science in natural settings. Moreover, it includes all facets of
environment, encouraging students to consider environmental interdependencies
and feedbacks. Finally, it is providing applied training to geography majors
interested in the environmental positions. *