* 9750925
* Restructuring Basic Electronic Circuits Education Around    Integrated Circuit Technology of the 1990s
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Edward K. Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 06/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

A major change in how the required introductory electronics course is structured
is provided by this project. From a content viewpoint, this change shifts the
emphasis from modeling and applications of discrete electronic devices to
designing, modeling, and applying integrated electronic devices. This much
needed change is driven by several factors: most material in existing
introductory electronics courses is 25 years old and is obsolete from an
industrial perspective; advanced courses cannot build on current integrated
electronics concepts because they are lacking in the curriculum; and most
industry is no longer hiring electronic circuit designers at the BS level but
rather now requiring a graduate degree. From a pedagogical viewpoint, a major
change in the laboratory environment is needed to support integrated electronic
topics. In this laboratory, students design and test basic integrated circuits
that are fabricated in industry. For this activity, diagnostic probe stations,
workstations, and CAD tools become as important as oscilloscopes, multimeters,
and signal generators. An open laboratory environment with extended operating
hours and with multimedia support is developed around a multiple-station work
area that makes more effective use of the expanded laboratory equipment
requirements. In addition to the changes in equipment needed to support the
integrated electronics concepts, the project focuses on making the laboratory
environment learning oriented rather than teaching oriented in which teaching
assistants are replaced with "coaches" that become resource persons to the
students working in the laboratory. The expectations in the laboratory are also
changed to enhance teamwork skills and to stimulate innovation by the students.
In addition to a group of structured laboratory experiments, a set of four
milestones has been established. These milestones are open-ended design projects
that stimulate integration of fundamental concepts discussed in the lecture part
of the course and in the structured part of the laboratory. These milestones
include an emphasis on integrating environmental transducers with basic
electronic devices and with developing practical design skills. *