* 9750160
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Vladimir Pravosudov, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750160 Vladimir V. Pravoudov This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Social environment and energy strategies in birds." In the temperate
zone, many small birds must survive harsh winters characterized by low ambient
temperatures and reduced food supplies. It has been hypothesized that food-
caching birds use food-caches as an alternative to body fat storage, allowing
them to maintain lower body mass. Most food-caching birds live in socially
structured groups where dominants have priority access to food. This research
investigates the impact of the social environment on optimal fattening and
caching strategies in wintering caching birds. Both empirical and stochastic
dynamic game modeling approaches are being used.