* 9750474
* Statewide Use of the Internet and Simulation Software for   Accessing Modern Instrumentation
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* L. Keith Woo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 05/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

This program is updating introductory chemistry curricula by using modern
instrumentation in undergraduate courses. The updated curricula are enhancing
the quality of introductory chemistry courses, improving the retention of
science students, and easing the transition for community college students
entering 4-year institutions. Interactive instructional software that provides
students and instructors with a "virtual" Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR)
instrument have already been developed. Similar software for a virtual Fourier-
transform nuclear-magnetic-resonance (FT-NMR) instrument is currently under
development. This software can be used by instructors as a lecture aid for
introducing spectroscopic methods and as a tutorial for the use of the FT-IR and
FT-NMR instruments. For actual laboratory courses, students can submit samples
from their own experiments to regional centers for FT-IR and FT-NMR
measurements. Data from each sample are stored on an Internet file server for
students to download locally. This file server provides reasonable access to
instrumentation, which many community colleges and private colleges typically do
not have. By providing students with experience with modern instrumentation and
interpretation of their own experimental data, this program is enhancing their
understanding of important chemical concepts. In addition, students are gaining
insight into the collaborative nature of this scientific process. *