* 9750147
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Brian Nowak-Thompson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 10/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750147 Brian Nowak-Thompson This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Environmental and genetic regulation of penicillin biosynthesis in
Aspergillus." Ambient pH is a dominant environmental factor affecting the
transcriptional regulation of ipnA, a key penicillin biosynthetic gene within
Aspergillus nidulans. Under acid conditions, however, available carbon sources
strongly influence ipnA expression through a mechanism independent of creA-
mediated carbon catabolite repression. The goals of this study are to identify
and characterize carbon regulatory loci affecting ipnA expression, characterize
regulatory elements within the ipnA promoter region required for carbon
regulation, and examine the relationship of ipnA promoter regions controlling
carbon and pH regulation.