* 9750770
* Cross Curricular Addition of Molecular Biology/Biochemistry Lab Experiences for Undergraduate Students in Biology and   Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* WILLIAM THIEMAN, Ventura County Community College District System Office
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 08/31/1999
* USD 19,964.00

An assembly of educational professionals from biology and biochemistry have
designed contemporary exercises that challenge students in undergraduate
laboratories to solve modern molecular problems. Specific new experiments from
molecular biology and biochemistry are being added to the Biochemistry, Biology,
Physiology, Anatomy/Physiology, Marine Biology and Microbiology courses at
Ventura College. These lab course revisions will serve to better prepare
students for transfer and high-tech vocations by providing varied contemporary
problem-solving experiences, using modern techniques in molecular bioscience.
Improved preparation for those entering the biotechnology training program, and
transfer programs results from an advisory collaboration with the UCSB
Math/Sciences Division. The addition of DNA isolation and characterization,
restriction enzyme analysis, cloning prokaryotic vectors, mitochondria and
chloroplast isolation and measurement, bacterial contamination spectroflurometic
asssays, and analysis of protein and aromatic bioproducts, represent significant
lab experience revisions. The equipment that will be needed includes
chromatography, electrophoresis, spectroflurometer, UV spectrometer, gas
chromatogram (upgrade), and metabolic oxygen sensors (the associated restriction
enzymes and reagents will be provided by a local biotechnology company). The new
Science building State Equipment Fund has been cut by more than 40%, making it
impossible to offer these experiences without outside funding. This project will
provide the matching funds needed to purchase the equipment. Each year, over
1,600 students at the college enroll in these courses. Funding of this project
will provide students with: 1. Comprehensive problem-solving activities in
traditional classes: 2. Improved activities in majors and non-majors classes; 3.
Opportunities for individual students to perform individualized research in
special courses with equipment; 4. Increased hands-on learning meaningful to
transfer requ irements.