* 9750568
* A Modernized Undergraduate Psychology Laboratory for        Curricular Enhancements in Learning, Animal Cognition and   Behavioral Psychopharmacology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Michael Kerchner, Washington College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 17,677.00

Recent advances in neuroscience have revolutionized current theories of animal
learning and cognition. In addition, advances in neuroscience and
psychopharmacology have provided new insights into the neurochemical factors
that regulate behavior and thought. Unfortunately, undergraduate curricula in
psychology and neuroscience often has had to struggle to keep abreast of these
advances. The Psychology Department at Washington College has implemented a new
concentration in behavioral neuroscience, revised the general psychology
requirements, and is in need of updating the laboratory experiences available to
majors in both components of the curriculum. This proposal requests automated
operant systems and an acoustic startle platform that will be used by students
to investigate contemporary issues in animal learning and cognition, and in
behavioral psychopharmacology. The equipment will enable us to make significant
revisions to our operant learning laboratory - eliminating or revising
laboratory exercises that have changed very little from the 1970's and adding
new exercises that utilize paradigms which examine current theories of animal
cognition. The equipment will also be used to expand the laboratory experiences
that are components of a new course in behavioral psychopharmacology - one of
three core courses in our new behavioral neuroscience concentration. The
automated systems will be used in exercises that are modeled on standard
protocols employed by investigators conducting both basic and applied drug
research. These systems will also be useful to students conducting independent
research and their senior thesis project that is required for graduation.