* 9750197
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Brendan Bohannan, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750197 Brendan Bohannan This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Bacterial diversity and productivity of the environment."
Environmental productivity is known to strongly influence plant and animal
diversity. The effect on bacterial diversity, however, is poorly understood. The
relationship between environmental productivity and bacterial diversity is being
clarified by estimating the richness of bacterial species in natural ponds that
vary in productivity. Mathematical modeling of and further experiments in field
mesocosms and laboratory microcosms will be conducted to assess the mechanisms
determining diversity.