* 9750830
* Discovery-Based Labs for Calculus-Based Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Dawn Meredith, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2000
* USD 27,264.00

There is evidence that most students do not greatly increase their understanding
of physical concepts through the traditional verification/recipe laboratories
found in most introductory physics courses. Thorton, Sokoloff, and Laws have
created a series of discovery-based, microcomputer-based laboratories that have
shown to increase conceptual understanding of students greatly: Tools for
Scientific Thinking (TST), RealTime Physics (RTP), and Workshop Physics (WP).
While these materials present a significant improvement over the traditional
laboratories, none fits the needs of the university exactly. WP is calculus
based, but requires changes that can not be implemented (i.e., abandoning
lecture altogether and working with students in a laboratory setting with a high
teacher-to-student ratio). TST and RTP allow the laboratory to change
independently of the lecture, but are not calculus based, and are written for a
wide audience (high school through college). This project modifies the existing
curricular materials in TST and RTP to make them more appropriate for this
introductory calculus-based course for engineers and scientists. The project
adds calculus applications, increases the level of difficulty slightly, adds
kinesthetic experiences and computer simulations, adds exercises that help
students synthesize information and create logical arguments, and reorganizes
the laboratory to provide better coordination with lectures. These changes are
made without changing the basic philosophy of the curricular materials: students
must construct their own understanding by making predictions, by testing
predictions, and by focusing on concepts instead of equations.