* 9750944
* NSF Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program in   Microprocessor and Intelligent Control Applications
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Ji Wang, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 08/31/2000
* USD 38,770.00

Modern mechanical systems are becoming increasingly reliant on sophisticated
methods of sensing, signal processing, and control technology. Within this
industry, rapid growth in terms of function, flexibility, and reliability is
being paralleled with a comparable rise in complexity. From the human resource
point of view, the implication of this trend is clear: college education must
appropriately advance the technical level of undergraduate education in order to
serve the needs of modern industry. As part of a concerted college effort to
meet this challenge, an application-oriented laboratory on microprocessor and
intelligent control applications is provided to enhance undergraduate hands-on
experience by providing exercises that emphasize detailed modeling, basic
controller design, simulation, practical considerations, and implementation;
simultaneously, to expose students to current and emerging technology (e.g.,
smart instrumentation and actuation using piezoelectric elements/shape memory
alloy and intelligent control systems design for instance based on fuzzy logic);
and to improve students' integrative thinking and teamwork skills through
interdisciplinary faculty instruction, team formations, and open-ended
assignments. The new laboratory is the accompanying laboratory to an existing
undergraduate course entitled Electromechanical System Control and
Microprocessor Applications. While the emphasis is to serve this course, the
facility of the new laboratory affects several other undergraduate and graduate
courses within the department. New equipment includes one Windows NT server, one
printer, multi-application boards, training units in microcontroller
applications, 1/0 interface boards, real-time kernel and control toolbox
software, dc motors, and servo amplifiers. *