* 9750278
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related     to the Environment for FY 1997
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Caitlin Gabor, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract DBI 9750278 Caitlin Gabor This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for 1997. This
fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain additional scientific
training beyond the doctoral degree and to pursue innovative and imaginative
into the fundamental mechanisms underlying the interactions between organisms
and their environment at the molecular, cellular, organismal, population,
community and/or ecosystem level in any area of biology supported by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences of the National Science Foundation. Each
fellowship supports a research and training plan to be carried out in a
sponsoring laboratory. The research and training plan for this fellowship is
entitled "Reproductive character displacement on mate selectivity in live
bearing fish." Reproductive character displacement (RCD) has been proposed to
play an integral role in the speciation process. Studies to date suggest that
the hypothesis has value but all have been limited in one way or another. This
research uses the bisexual sailfin mollie, Poecilia latipinna, and the unisexual
mollie, P. formosa, a hybrid with strict maternal inheritance, to evaluate RCD
on male mate selectivity for conspecific females versus gynogenetic females
along a transect of allopatric and sympatric populations. Allozyme variation is
being used to estimate gene flow and its relationship to the spread of the male
discrimination trait.