* 9751576
* Facilitating Student Access to Mathematics Programs - A     Mathematics Learning Center.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ronald Morash, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2001
* USD 44,327.00

The Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Michigan-
Dearborn seeks funding for equipping a student-tutor and technology- based
Mathematics Learning Center (MLC). The equipment requested includes computer
hardware and related software and audio-visual workstations. Creation of this
new facility is proposed for the purpose of improving access to the mathematics
program for students at three levels (I) the freshman remedial level (II) the
freshman-sophomore calculus sequence level (III) the junior-senior
concentrators' program level, with emphasis on nonconcentrators. Existing data
show wide discrepancies, in courses at these three levels having a specified
prerequisite course, between students who completed the prerequisite course at
UM-D and those who did not. The MLC will facilitate access to the mathematics
program for large numbers of students who currently experience difficulty in
joining a structured sequence of mathematics courses at a stage other than the
beginning. This proposal has the endorsement of the Department Executive
Committee. More than half the full-time faculty in the Department have
contributed actively to its formulation. The MLC Committee chair, the principal
investigator in this proposal, is the department chair. It also has the
enthusiastic support of central administration, demonstrated through a number of
grants, including a recent $12,000 salary grant for a program development pilot
project, currently under way *