* 9751511
* Enhancing Experiential Learning and Research-Based          Laboratories by Integrating Molecular Biology Across the    Biology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* David McCullough, Wartburg College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 26,736.00

This project integrates molecular biology into all levels of the biology
curriculum. Molecular biology is not a field by itself; instead, it is a means
by which almost all aspects of life can be studied. This project stresses
inquiry-based learning and exposes students to investigative approaches to
exploring life at the molecular level. The number of students actively exploring
biology at a molecular level is expected to increase fivefold (from 80 per year
to 400 per year). Approximately 145 of the students exposed to molecular biology
each year are nonmajors. As a result of this project, 100 percent of the
college's biology majors can use molecular approaches to enhance their
understanding of critical biological concepts in at least three courses and in
as many as eight courses. This innovation allows students to engage essential
concepts in biology using techniques such as DNA isolation, restriction
analysis, southern, northern, and western blotting, PCR, cell culture work, and
subcellular fractionation. Such exposures in several courses help students have
a richer understanding of life and how it is studied; appreciate the
interconnections between subdisciplines of biology; more fully understand the
ethical and social dimensions of modern biology; and make career decisions in a
more informed manner. The success of the project can be assessed using surveys
(including postgraduation surveys of alumni) and course evaluations. Results can
be widely disseminated through science education journals and forums such as
Project Kaleidoscope. *