* 9751114
* Development of an Intranet to Enhance the Instruction of    Research Methodology in Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* John Govern, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 13,530.00

This proposal requests computing equipment and software necessary for the
Psychology department at Towson State University to: 1) establish a local area
network (LAN) of the 30 existing personal computers in the department's
laboratory, and 2) establish an "intranet" connection between the Psychology
department computer laboratories at Towson State University and Rowan College of
New Jersey. The goal of these improvements is to enhance the learning
experiences of students in the statistics and Experimental Methodology courses,
which are required of all Psychology majors and minors. The LAN will provide all
Towson Psychology majors with access to statistical analysis, graphics and data
collection software. The intranet connection with Rowan will expand the library
and computing resources of both institutions. Both the LAN and intranet will be
employed in a pilot collaborative instructional effort between the two schools.
Students in the methodology courses will cooperate on laboratory and homework
assignments, participate in group discussions and decision making, and solve
research together. They will also collaborate in the literature review, design,
data collection, analysis and interpretation phases of a required independent
research project. Students will be encouraged to present the results of these
projects at Rowan's annual undergraduate research conference. Through this
unique process, students will learn the fundamentals of research methodology
through "hands on" lab experiences, learn how to use communications technology
(e.g., email, file transfer, etc.) in a meaningful context, gain experience
working with others -- both in person and via electronic media, and learn the
benefits and limitations of the use of technology in collaborative efforts.