* 9751280
* Integrating Techniques of DNA Analysis Across the Biology   Curriculum for Majors and Non-Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Carl Colson, West Virginia Wesleyan College
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 06/30/1999
* USD 18,242.00

This project is designed to address a systemic lack of laboratory experiments in
molecular biology in majors' and non-majors' courses at West Virginia Wesleyan
College. Experiments centered around DNA analysis will enhance student
understanding of major biological concepts and scientific reasoning, and majors
will develop strong skills in many of the common techniques of DNA analysis.
Teams of students will carry out experiments in forensics, phylogenetics,
population genetics, cell biology and animal behavior at the freshman through
senior level. This equipment will also support student-faculty research in a
project that will use microsatellites to assess genetic relatedness. Experiments
for non-major's courses draw on student fascination with DNA evidence in the
courtroom and directly relate scientific processes to human concerns. Techniques
to be introduced include agarose and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, use of
restriction enzymes and analysis of restriction fragment length polymorphisms,
DNA isolation and quantitation, the polymerase chain reaction, reverse
transcription-PCR, Southern transfers, use of chemiluminescent probes, computer-
based image analysis, bacterial transformation and colony screening. The
proposed project is of interest because of its focus on DNA-related techniques
across a broad spectrum of questions to be investigated, the way in which
technical skills are reinforced throughout the majors' curriculum, and the
emphasis on non-majors' as well as majors' courses. Biology majors constitute
almost 9% of the student body at WVWC, and over 200 students per year enroll in
the affected on-majors' courses, including all elementary education majors, for
whom one of the courses fulfills a state requirement. At this small, liberal
arts institution with a tradition of successfully preparing students for medical
and graduate school, curricular changes are often difficult to justify. Our
evaluation of the proposed project should be of interest to similar colleges
faci ng the same challenges.