* 9751634
* Incorporation of Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic         Resonance Spectroscopy into the Undergraduate Chemistry     Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Edgar Drake, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 05/31/1999
* USD 59,250.00

The Chemistry Department has been in the process of redesigning its
undergraduate laboratories in order to provide students with exposure to modern
chemical instrumentation and current laboratmry techniques. The department is
acquiring a 200 MHz Fourier-transform nuclear-magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) that
complements the department's existing instrumentation. The 200 MHz FT-NMR is
replacing an inoperable 90 MHz CW-NMR, and enabling the department to expose
students to nuclear-magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques frequently during their
chemistry training. The sequence of laboratory exercises is allowing NMR
instruction to begin early and proceed with increasing depth as students
progress in the chemistry program. Microscale experiments have been incorporated
into the organic curriculum, as well as the synthesis and subsequent analysis of
a locally occurring dye. NMR analysis of products can contribute greatly to the
instructional value of this laboratory. In the physical chemistry laboratory,
the instrument is being used to determine rate constants for a reaction at
equilibrium and illustrate Heisenberg uncertainty relationships evident as line
broadening. Two-dimensional NMR is also being introduced, during the
instrumental analysis laboratory, in the context of sequencing short peptides.
The department is also integrating this spectrometer into the biochemistry and
molecular biology laboratory by having students determine the sequence of a 10
base-pair DNA duplex. Exposing chemistry students to NMR theory and applications
through the department's laboratory courses, including individual research, is
greatly enhancing their overall research experience.