* 9751327
* Inclusion of Audio and Video Analysis System in Teaching    Observational Methods in Developmental Psychology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Gorjana Litvinovic, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/1999
* USD 7,032.00

Through this project, the teaching of observational research methods in an
upper-level undergraduate psychology class are being improved. The specific
goals pertain to the improvement of the students' understanding of the
relationship `etween empirical data and psychological theory. Three areas of
weakness in the thinking of undergraduates about psychological research are
being addressed. First, students come to understand how psychology maintains
methodological rigor in spite of fuzzy, real-world conditions of research.
Second, students perceive observed phenomena as data, not personal experience.
Third, students learn that psychological measurement does not apply to real
things, but is constructed. The desired change in students can be best achieved
through instructional methods that require students' active involvement and that
adequately scaffold student activity. Seminar on Childhood and Culture provides
students with the opportunity to engage in observational research with an
instructor's guidance. Groups of students in this course are responsible for
planning and carrying out a research project, which involves a brief survey, two
semi-structured interviews with an adult and a child, and four sessions of
systematic observation of adult child and child child interaction in formal and
informal contexts. The project includes audio and video recording and
computerized coding and analysis of audio and video data. The benefits of this
approach include increased efficiency of student research; firm scaffolding of
code scheme development by The Observer software; use of materials in class for
longitudinal illustrative purposes, when direct student observation is
inaccessible; and the repetition and sharing of the same recorded material as
many times as necessary. *