* 9751990
* The Northeast Center for Telecommunications Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,02/28/2001
* James Masi, Springfield Technical Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 02/28/2001
* USD 3,000,000.00

With the unprecedented technological advances experienced in the
telecommunications industry over the past decade, the challenge to provide that
industry with adequately trained and proficient individuals is crucial if
American industry is to maintain its competitive edge in the increasingly
competitive global marketplace. The ultimate goals and objectives of the
Northeast Center for Telecommunications Technology are aimed at increasing the
number of trained persons equipped to ensure such a competitive posture. This is
being done by monitoring trends, developing and disseminating relevant curricula
and materials, exploring and promoting the best educational methods, ensuring
the continuing competency of faculty who teach telecommunications-related
programs, and recruiting and educating a diverse student population. By
developing model curricula in conjunction with telecommunications industry
partners, the project is serving as a national model. To this end, an intense
effort is also being made to develop a diverse telecommunications workforce,
including non-traditional workers. The target audience are the faculty and
students at two-year colleges, universities and secondary schools. Both
traditional and newly emerging teaching methods (such as virtual classroom and
laboratories) are being employed. Given the rising importance of the field of
telecommunications, following evaluation of the project, its outcomes are being
disseminated nationally. Led by Springfield Technical Community College in
Massachusetts and Hudson Valley Community College in New York, a consortium of
six senior institutions, ten community technical colleges, numerous secondary
schools, several business/industry partners, government agencies, and the New
England Board of Higher Education are participants in the project. The major
areas of telecommunications are networking, wireless/RF,
Microwave/Millimeterwave and Lightwave technologies. The program articulates
with BSET degrees at four regional universities a nd with the NYNEX "Next Step"
program.