* 9751385
* An Inquiry Based Laboratory for First Semester Biology      Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Katherine Denniston, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 68,061.00

The project improves the quality of the laboratory component of two key courses
in our department. The first is the freshman entry-level biology course, which
is taken by approximately 250 biology majors each year. The other course is the
second semester of the biology sequence taken by students in the Maryland
Collaborative for Teacher Preparation (MCTP) track of the Elementary Education
Major. The old biology course laboratory consisted of a series of 13 exercises
that students carried out in rote fashion. The data obtained were qualitative,
rather than quantitative; as a result, students left the course having had no
experience with data analysis. The students were not challenged to participate
in experimental design; indeed, the lack of equipment precluded the students
from designing and carrying out experiments that would provide quantitative
data. The pedagogical approach has been quite different in the MCTP class. The
students were encouraged to work cooperatively to design experiments and to
critically analyze their data. However, one problem remained the same: the
students did not have available to them the instrumentation that would allow
them to carry out experiments that provide quantitative data or to make the
transition to computer-assisted analysis of those data. The new biology
laboratory investigates half the number of topics and is inquiry-based. This
laboratory provides students with the opportunity to actively participate in the
design of experiments, as well as the implementation. Students begin the
semester with manual data collection and analysis to establish a firm conceptual
basis for the computer-assisted data logging and analysis to be employed during
the majority of the investigations. Students present their results orally and
prepare a written laboratory report for each exercise. Allowing students the
time to design and implement experiments, gather and analyze quantitative data,
and present their results and conclusions both orally and in writing p rovides
them the opportunity to construct their own models for the phenomena studied.
The benefits include modeling the way science is done, promoting critical
thinking, fostering collaborative team efforts, improving comprehension of the
subject matter, and enhancing writing skills. Four of the topics studied in the
biology laboratory are experimentally investigated in the MCTP course.
Furthermore, both courses share the same laboratory space and equipment. Thus,
the new instrumentation allows the MCTP students to perform experiments of their
own design and to learn to use computers to collect and analyze data, thereby
fulfilling the potential of this course. *