* 9751176
* Laboratory Improvement in Plant Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Mark Hammer, Wayne State College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 7,485.00

This project enhances the plant biology curriculum by utilizing instruction
that increases critical thinking skills. The objectives of the project are to
increase student quantitative skill levels, provide students with exposure to
the process of science, increase the level of interest in plant biology, and
allow more opportunities for student research projects. These objectives can be
met by utilizing modern scientific methodology and computer-assisted data
analysis in Botany, Advanced Plant Biology, and Research Project courses. The
Plant Biology course enrolls a significant number of K-12 prospective teachers.
An ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometer with computer analysis software allows
for examining absorption spectra of isolated plant pigment, direct measurement
of enzymatic rates, and measurement of protein during column chromatography. A
photosynthesis package that includes a leaf chamber, oxygen sensor, data logger,
and software allows for measurement of photosynthetic rate, light compensation
point, light saturation curves, and photosynthetic action spectrum. Mini SDSPAGE
equipment allows for an examination of protein changes during stages of plant
development. A notebook computer allows for data collection from multiple
instruments and use of the photosynthesis package in the greenhouse. The scanner
allows electrophoresis gels to be imaged so that protein bands can be quantified
using public domain software. The success of the project is based primarily on
measurements of student performance and by student evaluations. *