* 9751013
* Applying Computational Chemistry to the Undergraduate       Laboratory: A "Wet" Lab - "Dry" Lab Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Mary Karpen, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 29,762.00

Students have difficulty understanding the abstract atomic world of chemistry.
They often learn concepts by an algorithmic approach rather than by truly
understanding the underlying theory. This problem is in part due to the three-
dimensional, dynamic nature of chemistry, as well as the mathematical models
used to predict chemical behavior. Computational chemistry has the power to
overcome these obstacles to student learning. It allows students to perceive
molecules and electronic structure in three dimensions. It displays dynamical
information critical to chemical behavior. Students can manipulate mathematical
parameters and observe the atomic consequences. To aid student learning, this
project incorporates computational chemistry into our physical, organic, and
biochemistry curricula. Computational chemistry is increasingly applied at the
workplace in all fields of chemistry and biochemistry. By experiencing a
computational curriculum closely tied to experiments, students learn to
appreciate computational chemistry in the context in which it is most often
used, to predict and interpret experimental data. Free energy simulations are
used to study the thermodynamics of protein folding, ligand binding, and
solvation effects and of other large systems. These methods, not yet exploited
in the undergraduate curriculum, have great pedagogical value in giving concrete
examples of the molecular basis for thermodynamics. Since they depend on
classical Newtonian physics, the underlying theory is very accessible to the
undergraduate student. Through this project, undergraduate laboratories are
developed using molecular-dynamics-based free energy simulations. The
laboratories developed, tested, and refined here on graphics workstations are
easily performed on the next generation of PCs. *