* 9751172
* Introductory Physics Laboratory Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,04/30/2000
* Paul Zitzewitz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 04/30/2000
* USD 36,047.00

Most instructors of college and university physics courses would agree that the
purpose of the laboratory is to provide a chance for students to grapple with
the phenomena, see the concepts in action, learn to use equipment, and develop
experience with the craft of experimental physics. Traditional labs, mainly
devoted to taking and analyzing data, usually giving step-by-step, or "cookbook"
procedures, are mainly ineffectual in achieving these goals. The laboratory is
an important part of a thorough change in the way we at the University of
Michigan-Dearborn are teaching introductory physics courses. We emphasize
student engagement with material in lecture, collaborative group problem
solving, and concepts rather than calculations. Over the past two years we have
successfully replaced labs in the first term of the two-term calculus-based
sequence with ones that encourage students to grapple with concepts and to solve
real-life problems in the lab. The labs use computers to collect data using a
great variety of sensors. They also support digital video analysis of two-
dimensional motion and simulation programs as appropriate. We now propose to
extend this reform in three directions. First, to create more appropriate labs
for students in the algebra-based course taken mainly by students going into the
health professions. Second, to complete the changes in the labs accompanying the
second term course on electricity, magnetism, and optics. Third, to develop
computer-based training modules that will provide individualized instruction for
students in the operation of computer data collection and analysis programs. All
students who take physics, whether from engineering, the sciences, or
mathematics, will benefit from these changes. Most laboratory development
projects have concentrated on giving students experiences that develop their
conceptual understanding. The laboratory exercises we develop that also include
the solution of experiment problems will be disseminated through presenta tions,
publications, and workshops. *