* 9751465
* Integrated Chemical Instruction and Computation:  Local and Distance Learning and Evaluation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Ralph Dougherty, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 98,129.00

The three goals of this project are: (1) development of exportable models for
distance learning in chemistry lectures with a focus on the first two years of
instruction; (2) development of computer workstation based evaluation for
chemical instruction that can be used either locally or in a distance learning
mode; and (3) integration of computational chemistry into all levels of our
undergraduate curriculum. The means for attaining these goals are the
installation of the Open Chemical Computation Laboratory and currently scheduled
program development. Chemistry lecture presentations for laboratory and lecture
courses are available on the World Wide Web (web) as digitized audio and
graphics. Evaluation of learning at a distance is based upon voice recognition
technology for examination certification. The initial phase of these
developments focuses on General and Organic Chemistry. Examinations using the
Computation Laboratory will focus on student generated responses to questions.
Typed input, digitized graphics, and drawing program input are utilized. This
department has initiated comprehensive curricular revision involving
introduction of computer use in lecture and laboratory courses at all levels of
the curriculum, starting with courses designed for chemistry majors. Laboratory
and course revisions covering the first two years of the curriculum have been
implemented by the Fall 1997. Students' interest in the results of computations
on unexplored systems promotes learning and acquisition of useful information.
The three year implementation period features formative and summative
evaluations of distance learning, computer based laboratory and lecture
examinations, and curricular revisions. These changes in instruction enrich the
learning of more than 5000 students each year, 21% of whom are minorities and
55% of whom are women. *