* 9751111
* Integration of the Data Acquisition and Control Software LabVIEW Throughout the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum at    University of the Pacific
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Edwin Pejack, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 08/31/2000
* USD 16,400.00

Increased visual reinforcement and hands-on experiences promote learning. In
addition, it has been found that repetitive use of a software package in a
number of undergraduate courses and use of state-of-the-art commercial software
is beneficial for enhanced learning. In view of these principles, this project
integrates the use of the data acquisition and control software LabVIEW
throughout the mechanical engineering curriculum. LabVIEW is one of the most
sophisticated data acquisition and control programs available and is heavily
used in industry. Implementation of seven carefully planned experiments into six
separate courses ensures that students are using LabVIEW during each year of the
curriculum. The experiments begin with introductory laboratories in the freshman
and sophomore years. Junior- and senior-year experiments are more complex and
include control as well as data acquisition. Furthermore, the software and
hardware for the experiments can be made available for final projects in courses
in instrumentation, controls, and the capstone senior design project.
Demonstrations that use the project's equipment are planned in several other
courses as well as in presentations given to K 12 students to promote interest
in engineering. For this project, LabVIEW software, various data acquisition
hardware and additional computers are required. Each of the seven experiments
stresses the visualization and hands-on capabilities made available by LabVIEW
through its graphical programming environment and data flow visualization
capabilities. National Instruments (producer of LabVIEW) has committed to work
with the university to publish results of this project both in their trade
journal and in the university portion of their Web pages. *