* 9751256
* CS150 Laboratory Development
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Ann Smith, Saint Mary's University of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 05/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

This project seeks to transform the introductory computer science course to
better excite and sustain student interest and to provide broader problem
solving skills needed for success in later courses. The course will be
transformed by: * exposing students to a variety of programming paradigms, *
expanding course presentation to accommodate additional learning styles *
developing relevant assignments which make use of current technologies. These
transformations will be accomplished by adding a java-based multimedia
laboratory component to the course. Java facilitates the introduction of a
variety of programming paradigms in a visually stimulating manner and is a
comparatively easy language for introductory students to learn. A structured,
hands-on laboratory will allow students to acquire a view of computation as a
dynamic, interactive, and collaborative process. Together these will help to
better prepare students for the increased rigor and theoretical nature of later
classes. The visual and hands-on experiences in the lab will also accomplish our
goal of appealing to diverse learning styles. The traditional view of
computation as a static, isolated enterprise is no longer applicable in today's
dynamic, networked and graphically oriented environments. Moreover, the
traditional approach to teaching introductory computation is neither applicable
to the current view of computation nor to many of the learning styles of the
students who populate it. This project, therefore, intends to provide a model
for migration away from the traditional course toward one which is more
appropriate for today's students and computing environments. *