* 9751644
* Beyond Traditional Statistical Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Dianne Cook, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Martin, Jr.
* 06/30/1999
* USD 57,000.00

Today's courses in statistical methods, for the most part, focus on the same
methods that were taught 30 years ago, before the use of computers became
standard in the classroom. The actual practice of statistics has, of course,
moved beyond these traditional statistical methods. Modern methods include
dynamic computer graphics, nonlinear estimation of various types, spectral
analysis, neural networks, resampling, and other simulation-based inference
methods. Although these modern methods are often computatiollally demanding,
today's computers make their use feasible, if not easy, to perform. Many
scientists and engineers use these modern statistical methods routinely. As a
result, current statistical methods courses are often viewed, from the outside,
as being somewhat outdated. This project develops a collection of instructional
modules, built around actual applications from science and engineering. These
modules are self-contained with a minimum prerequisite of a first course in
statistical methods. They illustrate an appropriate modeling and inferential
approach for the problem and illustrate the appropriate application of some of
these newly developed and developing statistical methods. The modules include
all necessary instructional materials including objectives, examples, lecture
materials, computer implementation of the methodology, homework class/discussion
exercises, and laboratory assignments to test students' knowledge of basic
material and reinforce important conceptual ideas. These modules make it easy
for instructors to experiment with and explore the use of modern statistical
methodology in undergraduate statistics methods courses. *