* 9751530
* Improvement of the Biochemistry Curriculum by Incorporation of Fluoresence and CD Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John Hansen, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 63,825.00

Them Department of Chemistry at the State University of West Georgia is actively
pursuing the modernization of its teaching laboratories by providing hands-on
experience with modern instrumentation. Presently, we are making major changes
in our curriculum as we convert to a semester based system. This provides an
ideal opportunity to make dramatic changes in our biochemistry curriculum that
address the significant changes that the field has recently undergone.
Biochemistry has been revolutionized by techniques developed for manipulating
DNA. These techniques have opened avenues of inquiry into the physical chemical
nature of biological systems. Thus, physical biochemistry has increasingly
become the fundamental basis of biochemical understanding. Since this background
is often absent in the education of undergraduate biochemistry majors, we
propose to restructure the present curriculum to reflect the contemporary
biochemical outlook. In a novel approach we plan to combine the traditional
topics of biochemistry with topics in physical biochemistry and spectroscopy of
biological macromolecules. In the laboratory course we will use CD and
fluorescence spectroscopy to explore areas such as structure, stability and
dynamics of macromolecules, enzyme kinetics, protein folding and membrane
dynamics. These spectroscopic techniques are not inordinately difficult
techniques for students to Learn, and they can be readily applied in a
laboratory course. The goal is for our students to be conversant in, and
comfortable with a more physical chemical approach to biochemistry. Those that
enter graduate school will have the confidence to pursue broader research
interests, while those that seek positions in biotechnology will have experience
in the instrumental techniques used by the industry. Many of the companies have
broadly defined concerns in physical biochemistry (e.g., designing and
engineering new enzymes, and minimizing aggregation in the recombinant
production of therapeutic proteins).