* 9751282
* A Groupware Laboratory for Software Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* William Mitchell, Louisiana State University Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 18,184.00

Until recently, students could be introduced to the relevant concepts of
software engineering environments by simply placing a variety of these tools on
various computers and requiring students to build software with them. Now the
nearly universal practice of industry is toward the use of groupware tools that
allow and control the sharing of software artifacts among large teams spread
over time and space. This project outfits such a groupware laboratory to support
medium- to large-scale distributed software development. This environment cannot
be emulated by students on their home computers; nor can the department's
computer laboratory be configured for this use because of the emphasis on remote
accessibility of artifacts through the use of centralized software. The
integration of groupware activities into software engineering programs is
particularly important for small, urban colleges and universities that are
located in the same city as the employers of their students. These programs are
rewarded for maintaining parity with industry practices and run great risks in
credibility if the instructional program is observed to be seriously out of step
with the practice of local industry. In these same urban settings, students are
often nonresidential, and therefore they will greatly appreciate a distributed
instructional environment that allows them to meet and work electronically. The
very software tools that are to be assessed for their productivity in industry
solve the scheduling impediment that has discouraged academic programs from
large team exercises. Through the groupware laboratory, students experience the
convenience as well as the power of distributed software development
environments. *