* 9751202
* The Spectroscopic Workstation: A Tool for Education in      Universities with Limited Instrumentation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* George Long, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 19,816.00

This project involves the assembly of a variety of components (optical and
electrical) to create a "spectroscopic workstation" (SW). This workstation is
providing teaching-quality versions of a wide range of spectroscopic
instruments. This approach allows more efficient, repeated use of equipment,
rather than more limited use specialized instrumentation. The use of SW allows
the development of a wide range of spectroscopic experiments at lower capital
investment per experiment. Thus, the approach is attractive to instructors
because it reduces the financial constraints which often limit their creativity.
In addition, the SW-approach encourages student not to treat instruments simply
as "black boxes". In addition to developing the hardware for the SW, this
project is developing a SW-based curricula for instrumental analysis and
physical chemistry laboratories. These curricula use SW to reinforce an
understanding of how measurements are made, how spectrometers work, and the
pelationship between instrument design and measurement quality. Special
attention has been given to developing curricula that foster experimental design
skills and encourage integration of knowledge from physics, mathematics, and
chemistry. This approach should engage students by making them more directly
responsible for all components of their laboratory work. The success of this
approach is being evaluated by student questionnaires designed to determine the
students' perceptions of their learning experience. the results of this project,
including laboratory manuals and equipment lists are being made available. *