* 9751617
* An Undergraduate Product Realization and Prototyping        Workcell in Mechanical Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Chih-Shing Wei, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 08/31/1999
* USD 38,200.00

This project develops a product realization and prototyping workcell, based on
an inkjet-deposit prototyping desktop station and a rapid three-dimensional
desktop digitizer, for the purpose of integrating product development training
experience into the undergraduate mechanical engineering curriculum. The new
prototyping workcell enhances the previous courses in engineering design,
manufacturing engineering, computer-aided design and manufacturing, robotics,
and computer-integrated manufacturing. The levels of students to be positively
affected by this project spans from freshman to senior mechanical engineering
students. The project enhances the product development component of the
mechanical engineering curriculum and enables new discussions and demonstrations
of product realization and prototyping to be integrated into existing design and
manufacturing related courses. It also elevates the level of collaboration when
undergraduate mechanical engineering students participate in cross-university
product development projects. The new prototyping workcell complements the
previous configuration of the Computer-Aided Engineering (CAE) Laboratory and
provides a leading technology product development environment for mechanical
engineering students. The expanded CAE Laboratory is also available for use by
students involved with related interdisciplinary projects.