* 9751238
* Modernization of Undergraduate Curriculum through Laser -   Based Spectroscopies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Andrew Leavitt, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1999
* USD 47,865.00

The Department of Chemistry is actively pursuing the modernization of its
teaching laboratories by providing hands-on experience with modern
instrumentation. As a part of the effort to update the entire undergraduate
curriculum, the department is combining the laboratory components of physical
chemistry and instrumental analysis laboratories into a year-long Advanced
Laboratory. New equipment is significantly affecting the students' experience in
this course. State-of-the-art instruments are being used an Nd:YAG pumped-dye
laser and a time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer in a variety of experiments.
These experiments are being selected to illustrate topics discussed in lectures
and to maintain students' interest and enthusiasm by exposing them to current
research topics and methodologies. The novel aspect of this project is the use
of an integrated laser-based approach to upper-division experimental
laboratories, with time-of-flight mass spectrometry of biomolecules serving as
the capstone of the students' accumulated experiences. Specific laser-based
experiments include photodissociation of Fe(CO)s, nonlinear atomic spectroscopy
of Fe atoms using a TOF mass spectrometer, and Raman spectroscopy of CHCl3. The
students are subsequently applying laser-based spectroscopy techniques in
inorganic chemistry and biochemistry. In addition, students are being encouraged
to apply these techniques in original research projects chosen across the
traditional divisions of chemistry including, physical, analytical, inorganic,
and biological chemistry.