* 9751483
* Incorporation of Gas Chromatography Across Traditional      Discipline Boundaries
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Gary Buckley, Cameron University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 08/31/1999
* USD 29,683.00

As analytical instrumentation becomes more sophisticated yet more routine,
college raduates from a variety of disciplines need to become familiar with
available methods of chemical analysis in their respective fields. This not only
includes chemistry graduates, but also those in other fields such as
agriculture, forensics, etc. This work proposes the acquisition of a basic gas
chomatograph/mass spectrometer system to be used across these discipline
boundaries. Though the major use of the equipment is in the chemistry
curriculum, there are also substantial components proposed in the agricultural
science and criminal justice areas. ln addition to the standard uses of this
instrumentation in the chemical curriculum, it will be used in agriculture
courses in topic areas such as pesticide analysis and tracking of 15N for
nitrogen balance concerns. In the area oi criminal justice, the instrument will
be used in a criminalistics course concerned with drug analysis, identification
of arson accelerants, and a variety of other topics. Though students are
required to cross disciplines in their educational process, there is no similar
requirement for the instructors of those courses. The addition of this
instrumentation and its interdisciplinary use will help open the communication
channels between these particular disciplines on campus and will likely lead to
enhanced cooperation and a strengthening of undergraduate education. *