* 9751497
* Fourier Transform NMR for Liquids and Solids in the         Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* Gerald Caple, Pittsburg State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 04/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

The Chemistry Department plans to incorporate a Fourier-transform nuclear
magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer with solid-state capabilities into its
undergraduate curriculum. The purchase of this spectrometer is a major part of
its continuing effort to modernize the chemistry program. Undergraduates in the
organic laboratory program gain first-hand experience in obtaining proton and
carbon NMR spectra as part of a course emphasizing student planning and design
of syntheses. Advanced FT-NMR experiments involving liquid samples clearly
impact the undergraduate biochemistry, polymer, and physical chemistry
laboratories as well as undergraduate research. The department has a very active
undergraduate research program, with students making presentations at regional
and national meetings of the American Chemical Society. A unique part of the
project is that high-resolution NMR of solids is to be part of the undergraduate
laboratory experience. Five new experiments involving solid-state NMR are
provided for undergraduate laboratory courses in organic, analytical,
physical/inorganic, and polymer chemistry. Solid-state NMR is an important tool
for undergraduate research in catalytic surfaces and polymers. Recent advances
in solid-state NMR instrumentation make it possible to bring solid-state NMR to
an undergraduate program.