* 9751226
* Linking Biology and Physics through Biological Motion       Analysis in Investigative Laboratories and Student Research
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Dean Fraga, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Gordon E. Uno
* 05/31/1999
* USD 48,331.00

Motion is a nearly universal feature of life that can inform the investigator
about the biophysics, biology, and behavioral parameters of the subject. In this
project, motion analysis is being used as a way to demonstrate basic biological
and physical principles and to introduce students to the analysis of complex
systems using a multidisciplinary approach. Students are developing protocols,
troubleshooting them, and identifying the significant variables using five
simple motion analysis stations that can analyze individual moving objects or
points. They then proceed to an automated CellTrak Motion Analysis station that
can perform an efficient analysis of large numbers of moving objects or points
in a matter of minutes. The processed data is then downloaded to the simple
motion analysis stations for graphical and statistical analyses. The project's
educational objectives include Establishing links between the Biology and
Physics Departments that use analysis of motion as a way to introduce students
to an interdisciplinary approach to scientific investigations. Student interest
is being developed in the boundary between biology and physics in a manner
consistent with the interests of both departments. The departments ability to
offer investigative laboratory exercises that demonstrate basic principles in
biology, physics, and computer data acquisition, as well as the analysis of data
using statistics is being improved. Faculty research interests are being more
closely linked with actual classroom exercises so that students see clearly the
relevance of what is done in the classroom laboratory. This project's initial
benefits are affecting two courses and student research (both independent study
and sophomore research) These experiences are also serving as catalysts for
generating similar themes in other courses..