* 9751108
* Computerized Chemistry Laboratory as an Extension of the    Hands-on Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Laura Precedo-Choudhury, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 07/31/1999
* USD 8,451.00

Many community college students have weak backgrounds in the sciences and
therefore have a difficult time grasping abstract concepts in chemistry. The
purpose of this project is to make chemistry less intimidating and more
approachable by introducing a medium into the Laboratory that student are
familiar with - computers. The hands-on experience of laboratories has
traditionally been an invaluable aid in clarifying concepts presented in class.
This project will enhance this important aspect of chemistry by allowing
experimental data be recorded directly to a computer hard drive via a computer
interface to the laboratory instrument. The analysis and subsequent graphing can
thus be accomplished quickly by the computer so that students can observe
graphically the results of their experiments. Computer simulations further
enhance the hands-on experience by allowing student to change the initial
reaction conditions and quickly observe the effect of these changes as displayed
graphically. This combination of real and virtual laboratories accommodates
different learning styles and increases the students' understanding of chemical
concepts. This in turn stimulates their imaginations and entices further
exploration of chemistry. The project impacts nearly 1,800 students during the
two year period of the grant. Improved understanding of chemical concepts should
lead to increased student retention and success rates. The ultimate goal of the
project is to create a science literate students who can understand the world
around them. The results of this project will be disseminated through the
electronic media such as LabNet as well as through professional meetings and
articles in the literature. *