* 9751473
* Expansion of Laboratory Facilities through                  Acquisition of a GC-MS for Undergraduate and Precollege Use
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Yordy, Goshen College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 33,750.00

The goal of this project is to integrate a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer
system, and associated computer and peripherals and data bases, with our
existing laboratory equipment and educational program. Students using this
instrument are gaining experience in data analysis and spectral data base
searching. The addition of the GC-MS is affecting many laboratory courses
beginning with the introductory level and continuing with those courses which
follow in our curriculum. Experiments are designed in a manner commensurate with
the educational level and laboratory skills of students in the particular
course. There is significant impact on all science students but particularly on
those science majors (Chemistry, Biology, Molecular Biology) who continue with
courses such as organic and analytical chemistry. Also important though affected
to a lesser extent are our smaller but significant programs with non-science
majors, education majors, and high school students. The involvement of a high
school teacher with adjunct faculty status at our institution is a unique
feature of this project. Bayer (Elkhart, IN) and Plains Environmental Services
(Saline, KS) serve as consultants for the environmental component of this
project. Results of this project will be presented in journals and regional
scientific meetings. *