* 9751133
* UV-Visible Spectrophotometer for the Undergraduate InorganicChemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Peter Iyere, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 13,848.00

Two semesters of advanced inorganic chemistry have been taught without a
laboratory component to augment the theoretical ideas learned in the classroom.
Since inorganic chemistry is a discipline founded on experimentation, the
previous practice of teaching it without a laboratory gives students a very
flawed view of how inorganic chemistry progresses. The goal of this project is
to find a modern ultraviolet visible spectrophotometer that will be used with
other instruments to incorporate an inorganic chemistry laboratory into the
curriculum. The new laboratory serves two upper-level inorganic chemistry
courses, which cover all essential areas of inorganic chemistry. Consequently,
during the fall, students focus on the use of the new spectrophotometer in
exploring basic principles and ideas of molecular spectroscopy as they relate to
inorganic compounds. In the spring semester, the instrument is used in studying
the chemistry of coordination compounds, analysis of mixtures, light- and heat-
induced color changes in the solid state and in solution, and kinetic analyses.
This project benefits African-American students because the university is a
historically black institution. The inorganic chemistry laboratory greatly
enhances the undergraduate chemistry curriculum because it reinforces the
teaching capabilities and provides an avenue for minority students to get hands-
on experience in the use of a modern instrument. New experiments developed here
can be published in the Journal of Chemical Education. *