* 9751338
* Southeastern Massachusetts Environmental Technology         Instrumentation Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Patrick Tatano, Cape Cod Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 05/31/1999
* USD 42,353.00

The fragile environment of southeastern Massachusetts is threatened by the
extensive pollution at the Massachusetts Military Reservation (MMR) SuperFund
site on Cape Cod. In an attempt to turn this potential disaster into a success
story, a group of state and Federal legislators initiated a state appropriation
to encourage three state institutions to develop an environmental education and
training program that would prepare students to enter the job market or to
continue their education in a baccalaureate program. Students enrolled in the
program have the opportunity to intern with companies working on the clean-up
project at the MMR as well as other environmentally related positions. The new
equipment provides the collaborating institutions with the necessary laboratory
instrumentation and computer software to meet this challenge. The laboratory
experiments are designed to incorporate the new instrumentation in specific
courses in a way that stimulates students and exposes them to real-world field
experience. The targeted population of older students and women who often lack
the confidence and academic background to enroll in science/technology programs
is far more likely to succeed using a hands-on methodology. Faculty at each of
the institutions are committed to the creation and subsequent refinement of
laboratory experiments that teach the essential scientific concepts and their
application in the field. Assessment of student response and success with these
exercises can be carefully measured: employers of interns can be surveyed
regarding student performance, and intern supervisors and other industry
representatives acting in an advisory capacity have agreed to assist in an on-
going review of the relevance of the laboratory exercises and teaching
techniques from the industry point of view. Dissemination is to occur within the
network of Massachusetts community colleges and nationally through the Partners
in Environmental Technology Education publications and on-line database. *