* 9751140
* Development of Hands-On Learning in Modern Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Shinil Cho, La Roche College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Brown
* 05/31/1999
* USD 87,300.00

This project enables chemistry and physics faculty to develop a comprehensive
program of instruction in the theory and practice of modern nuclear-magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The new NMR spectrometer provides the first-ever
NMR instrumentation for the college, and the resulting hands-on availability
dramatically enhances the Chemistry Department's capabilities for conducting
sophisticated experiments in the area of chemical structure determination.
Instruction in NMR is a joint venture of the chemistry and physics faculty.
Physics faculty concentrate primarily on teaching the theory and practical
aspects of NMR hardware, and chemistry faculty concentrate on teaching chemical
applications of NMR. Chemistry and biology majors are introduced to the
instrument in the first-year general chemistry course, and various aspects of
NMR are taught in five subsequent chemistry/physics courses. A multinuclear
spectrometer has been selected in order to expand the NMR experience beyond the
traditional organic chemistry applications. This instrument allows students to
gain continual hands-on experience with a modern NMR spectrometer. This
experience provides the laboratory background needed to clarify the abstract
theoretical concepts that underlie modern NMR spectroscopy. The instrument is
well suited to function as both a teaching and research instrument. Its modular
construction allows its capabilities to be expanded to meet future teaching and
research needs. The diversity of new NMR experiments prepares students for
future creative work with NMR instrumentation, and the NMR can significantly
stimulate student interest in undergraduate research projects. *