* 9751361
* Molecular Modeling in the Undergraduate Curriculum:  HelpingUndergraduate Students CAChe in on Molecular Modeling
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Jan Fleischer, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 18,955.00

The Chemistry Department has always striven to meet the needs of its chemistry
students. Environmental topics have been included in both the introductory and
upper levels, providing ample opportunity for the students to see how chemistry
is used to identify and help solve current environmental problems. Other
initiatives include creating a student affiliate chapter of the American
Chemical Society, incorporating student-designed experiments into the organic
chemistry sequence, introducing spectroscopic and chromatographic
instrumentation methods into the introductory courses, and giving students a
chance to work and learn in the Analytical Laboratory. The curriculum includes
all major areas of chemistry in order to give students a well-rounded chemical
background. However, the department has lacked the computers and software that
would include a very important area of chemistry molecular modeling in the
curriculum. This project remedies this need by providing six CAChe Worksystems
running on Power Macintoshes. These workstations greatly increase the molecular
modeling capabilities and allow the department to introduce students to this
increasingly significant area of chemistry. The long-term development of student
expertise in molecular modeling can be monitored from introductory experience
with molecular modeling in early courses through ongoing use in upper-level
classes. In the new experiments, students learn to (1) use a web browser to find
and download chemistry software, (2) visualize molecules in three dimensions,
(3) rearrange molecules by rotating and translating, (4) set up and direct
chemical calculations by semi-empirical quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics
methods, (5) determine optimum geometry, (6) compare and contrast computed and
experimental vibrational data, and (7) predict and study reaction mechanisms. *