* 9751372
* Development of an Innovative Integrated Learning            Environment for Laboratory Instruction in Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David McDonald, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 06/30/2000
* USD 56,344.00

The current paradigm in engineering course instruction builds on a lecture
prerequisite structure but ignores the need for a laboratory prerequisite
structure. Educational quality is therefore diminished as instructors optimize
specific laboratories but fail to optimize the overall program laboratory
experience. This project focuses on creating a learning environment that forces
students to use not only concepts and skills but also actual data and models
from lower division laboratories in upper division laboratories. The integration
occurs because students must utilize their previous laboratory work as a
reference as they study the different facets of the same experimental setups in
multiple engineering laboratories. The vertically integrated learning
environment builds on a lower division course such as electrical circuits and
targets upper division courses such as dynamics and automatic controls. This
approach requires the students to use specific skills in modern instrumentation
from circuits to verify mathematical models in dynamics, and then use these
mathematical models as sequential building blocks when completing laboratory
exercises in the automatic controls course. The learning environment occurs in a
new Integrated Systems Engineering Laboratory that, in addition to dynamics and
controls, supports laboratories in machine design, vibrations, and digital
signal processing, as well as projects in senior design and undergraduate
student research. This laboratory uses experimental setups such as a vertical
pendulum and a mobile robot that can be shown to be ideal platforms to support
this vertically integrated learning environment. A comprehensive evaluation plan
entails coordination of an internal and external evaluator by the Dean of
Engineering. Further, an aggressive dissemination plan is outlined that relies
heavily on modern technology such as the Internet and a recordable CD ROM. This
project has the potential for national impact because it challenges the existing
par adigm of laboratory instruction and completely redefines the way
universities develop instructional laboratories.