* 9751343
* Development of a Nuclear Instrumentation Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Scott Hughes, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/1999
* USD 33,036.00

The Departments of Physics, in collaboration with the Departments of Chemistry
and Geology and the College of Engineering, is developing a novel multi-
disciplinary approach to the way undergraduate nuclear instrumentation courses
are presented. The program is introducing undergraduates to research quality
activities much sooner than traditionally experienced. It is producing
undergraduates who are valuable to investigators as collaborators rather than
merely technicians. One fundamental instrumentation course is being offered for
many different disciplines, including physics, health physics, chemistry,
geology, and engineering. This approach is providing the fundamentals necessary
for the next semester's advanced course. The advanced course's structure
involves several experimental modules, including high-energy charged particle
reactions, nuclear magnetic resonance, XRF, UPS, SEM, STM, reactor approaches to
critical experiments, environmental radioactivity analysis, and neutron
activation. Students, along with their advisors, are being given the opportunity
to select a fraction of the available modules within a semester period, thereby
building a program most suited to their needs. Through a team teaching approach,
students interact directly with researchers with expertise in each area of
study. These classes, emphasizing fundamentals of instrumentation theory, stress
scientific technique and communication skills. To make this happen, the project
is establishing four experimental stations primarily applicable to the first
course, but available as required in the second course. The stations include
five additional microcomputers, four multichannel analyzer cards, four advanced
oscilloscopes, and two printers. Several NIMs are also being added, including
five spectroscopy grade amplifiers, one TAC, and one PNMR spectrometer.
Specialty items, including an instructional STM and two alpha spectroscopy
systems, are also being acquired. This program reduces duplication of advanced
laborato ry teaching efforts and intensifies the laboratory experience for
undergraduates by providing clear vistas between the fundamentals of technology
and current technological applications. *