* 9751420
* Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for            Undergraduate Teaching Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Rachel Austin, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1999
* USD 52,400.00

Significant revisions are provided to the upper-level offerings in chemistry and
biochemistry to make more explicit the connection between electronic structure
and physical and chemical properties in a wide range of materials. This project
purchases a .63 T electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer, an
instrument of increasingly wide-use in both applied and basic research, ideally
suited to illuminating the electronic structure of many important materials. In
conjunction with the prior instrument holdings of the college, an EPR
spectrometer enables the college to develop new laboratories incorporating
recent advances in inorganic chemistry to help students better understand
connections between chemical structure and function. An EPR spectrometer, in
addition to existing equipment, also enables the college to develop an innovate
immersion course in bioinorganic chemistry to be offered during the short-term.
This intensive 5 days per week, 6 hours per day, 5-week course provides students
with exposure to both the concepts and techniques of bioinorganic chemistry.
This course serves both chemistry majors and the growing number of biochemistry
majors. Projects developed for this course can serve as a model for
undergraduate bioinorganic courses. Incorporation of an EPR-based project into
the existing upper-level spectroscopy course provides an important additional
dimension to the existing projects based on molecular beam spectroscopy and
inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy. Additionally, the EPR
spectrometer markedly enhances the research opportunities available to students
in the natural sciences. *