* 9751626
* Computer-Assisted Instrumentation for Improving Biology     Laboratory Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Debra Barnes, Contra Costa Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 29,555.00

The Biological Sciences Department at Contra Costa College seeks to provide our
students with computerized recording and analyzing instrumentation for use in
the laboratories of Physiology, Zoology, Botany, Microbiology, and General
Biology. this instrumentation will expand and enhance the educational process
for our students, many of whom are minorities and women and are traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. These instruments will provide students with
the ability to measure several biological functions (e.g. heart sounds, pulse,
and EKG) simultaneously, and to store this data for analysis, manipulation, and
graphing. This will enable the department to cease using live animals for
experimentation, and substitute non-invasive techniques on human subjects. This
will prove more relevant and interesting to many students, especially those in
pre-clinical programs. The requested instruments replace very old physiographs
and transducers used in traditional muscle experiments and allow new labs on,
for example intracellular membrane potentials, respiration (where volumes are
coordinated with rate), circulation (heart sounds, pulse, blood pressure, and
EKG) EMG measurements on skeletal muscle, and students on locomotion.
Additionally, computer analysis and graphing of data will become routine in all
of the department's courses. The computers and hardware/software will be
portable and will be employed throughout the department's laboratory courses,
serving approximately 1,100 students per year. Experiments using this
instrumentation will be published in course laboratory manuals and will be
provided to the MacLab manual and to teaching societies such as Human Anatomy
and Physiology Society (HAPS).