* 9751371
* Application of Molecular Techniques to Enrich Environmental Science and Biology Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Teresa Snyder-Leiby, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 19,459.00

The primary goals of this project are to develop undergraduates' ability in
applying molecular techniques to answer questions in the biological and
environmental sciences and to expand the scope of student research in these
areas. Techniques such as DNA sequencing, protein polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, polymerase chain reaction, and tissue culture need to be used
in undergraduate laboratories if we expect students to be competitive in
graduate school and in the workplace. The Biology and Environmental Science
Departments are incorporating these molecular techniques into upper-level
biology and environmental science courses as part of their effort to encourage
undergraduate research. Students apply a broad range of molecular techniques to
environmental and biology studies and gain better understanding of biological
functions of nucleic acids and proteins. Success of the program is determined by
conducting pre- and post-tests of students' knowledge and ability to apply
molecular techniques and by monitoring student research projects. The degree to
which curricula changes prepare graduates for the workplace and graduate study
is also assessed. Evaluation results and student papers can be presented at the
educational sessions of several scientific meetings to allow other colleges to
consider using this approach to improve their biology and environmental science
laboratories. Approximately 240 local high school science teachers, the 7,000
high school students that they teach, and 125 Upward Bound students and their
instructors can also use most of the new equipment. *