* 9751243
* Improving the Physiology Laboratory through Interactive and Sequential Experiments
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Colleen Nolan, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 22,461.00

The goal of this proposed project is to improve the quality of science
instruction, primarily to students enrolled in the General Physiology course, at
St. Mary's University. St. Mary's is an Hispanic Serving Institution with a 69%
Hispanic undergraduate student body. Biology is the largest major at the
University with over 300 majors. The activities of the proposed plan are
intended to improve learning and stimulate the interest of our students in
variety of careers in the biological sciences. The goal of improving instruction
will be achieved through reaching the following objectives: enhancing knowledge
and insight about the roles of different physiological systems; improving
collaborative skills; improving critical thinking skills; improving writing and
speaking skills. These objectives will be realized by creating an interactive
learning environment and a hands-on approach to learning in the physiology lab;
by improving the quality in and variety of instructional delivery; and by
providing students with opportunities to present results of laboratory
experiments to others. The addition of modern instrumentation and enhanced
classroom technologies will increase the hands-on experiences of our students in
data collection, integration and synthesis of data, and will improve the
communication of the results of the experiments. The major equipment purchases
include six Power Macintosh computers, MacLab hardware and software, software
for data analysis and presentation, and specific physiograph components for
collection of data. This equipment will be used to upgrade current experiments
and add new experiments to the physiology course and lab. St. Mary's University
is contributing an equal amount to this project.