* 9751204
* Establishment of a Hydrogeology Field Laboratory on the     Campus of Western Illinois University
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Steven Bennett, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 06/30/1999
* USD 5,774.00

In an effort to better develop student understanding of essential hydrogeologic
concepts, a hydrogeological field laboratory is being established. The field
laboratory contains three shallow monitoring wells, three soil moisture
samplers, and three tensiometers. A geotechnical consulting firm is installing
the monitoring wells, and the project director is installing the remaining
instrumentation. A portable field permeameter and a high-precision pump is being
purchased for use at the field laboratory. Students enrolled in Hydrogeology are
gathering data from the field laboratory each week as part of the laboratory
component of the course. Among the laboratory activities the students are
conducting are ground water sampling, soil water sampling, pump tests, slug
tests, determination of unsaturated zone hydraulic conductivity, in situ
permeability measurements, and shallow seismic refraction surveys. Hydrogeology
laboratory exercises stress methods of collection, analysis, and interpretation
of field data, as well as identification of sources of measurement error. Other
courses that are using the field laboratory are Elements of Engineering Geology
and Environmental Geology. Students wishing to undertake undergraduate research
projects for credit are also conducting studies at the field laboratory. *