* 9751728
* Interactive Oceanography:  Linking Shipboard and Classroom  Learning Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Gary Martin, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2000
* USD 41,914.00

This institution owns and operates an 85-foot research vessel, the R/V Vantuna.
In addition to meeting the instructional demands of students enrolled in marine
science courses, the R/V Vantuna is involved in educating and giving field-based
experiences to students in teacher preparation programs. Extensive educational
outreach efforts aimed at K-12 and students in 2- and 4-year college programs in
the area are conducted by this program. However, since the boat was initially
outfitted 25 years ago, oceanographic sampling gear and methods of data analysis
have moved well beyond its original capabilities. This project is augmenting the
equipment on the boat with sophisticated electronic sampling and
photodocumentation gear that allows students to learn state-of-the-art
techniques and collect numerical and visual data to support integrative studies.
The uniqueness of this project comes from the extended use of oceanographic data
in linking field and classroom activities. Not only are many students, and
especially future teachers, being given access to sophisticated equipment to
learn modern oceanographic techniques, but the high quality data they collect is
being made universally available for analysis through an extensive database.
This approach is extending the value of the oceanographic experience beyond
those groups traditionally served, and benefiting off-campus groups who can
sample the database by searching the Internet.