* 9751135
* Application of Computing Tools and PC-Instrumentation for   Science Students:  Enhanced Learning Through Visualization  and Exploration
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Mark Miksic, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 38,748.00

*** 9751135 Sy Many students perceive science difficult and tedious. The
objective of this project is to make learning science and math easier and more
interesting by means of computer applications. There are three specific goals of
this project: (1) introduce students to PC-driven instrumentation for data
acquisition, (2) introduce students to computing tools that allow them to
interpret difficult science concepts and processes visually as well as
mathematically, and (3) prepare them with skills for the marketplace. We propose
to develop curricula of two laboratory courses: PC-instrumentation for science
experiments, and exploring scientific computing tools. These courses will
introduce students to tools that are commonly used in the marketplace. Using PC-
instrumentation, laborious manual measurements and data recording will be
replaced by automated data acquisition. Students can easily vary the parameters
of their investigation and observe the effect of their changes. Using computing
tools like Math Cad, students can easily graph and visualize difficult concepts
and better understand the underlying principles. More importantly, electronic
books are available, and, when being used with the computing tool, make it an
excellent learning tool. Students can manipulate "live" data/ formula and
visualize the change "on-the-fly. " Learning these tools are indispensable
laboratory activities of the courses. In this project, we will improve an
existing lab to equip with state-of- art computing and PC-instrumentation tools.
The main beneficiaries of this project are upper sophomore and lower junior
science students, as well as pre-service science teachers. This project is
significant because (1) the tools students will learn are useful in many science
courses, and (2) the skills students learned on using tools are marketable
because they are the same tools used in the market place. * ***