* 9751559
* Transforming the Physiology Lab into a Computer-Based,      Active-Learning Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Dana Garrigan, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/2000
* USD 51,071.00

This project seeks to transform the Animal Physiology laboratory at DePauw
University from one of outmoded equipment and pedagogical styles into a dynamic,
inquiry-based learning environment. As a wholly undergraduate, liberal-arts
institution, DePauw falls short of larger, research-intensive programs in its
ability to provide access to modern instrumentation. However, small class sizes,
a motiviated faculty, and otherwise excellent faculities position the Department
of Biological Sciences well for constructive curriculum reform. Recognizing the
value of hands-on experiences in making students active participants in their
education, the goal of this project is threefold - to encourage students to
experience and thus learn the process of "doing" science to provide real-world
experiences with modern instrumentation, and to promote independent research.
Specifically, the physiology lab will be reorganized around computerized data
acquisition and analysis workstations. during the first eight weeks of the
semester, students will " learn the ropes" of research through a series of
guided inquiries structured in such a way to enable students to ask questions of
their own rather than following recipe-like lab protocols. In the process they
will gain experience with instruments for measuring gas exchange, metabolic
rate, animal responses to temperature, osmotic concentration of body fluids,
muscle and electro-physiology, and enzyme kenetics. during the last six weeks
they will progress to developing experiments of their own design. Though not
specifically targeting women or minority students, it has been suggested that
such a small group, hands-on, realistic research experiences maximizes retention
of women in science programs. Because Animal Physiology is the most demanded
course in the Biological Sciences major and a popular course for non-majors in
allied fields, revisions in this course will influence a broad cross-section of
students. An on-line lab manual will be developed and linked to a course web
page and freely available over the internet. *