* 9751442
* A Computer Controlled and System Based Implementation of theCore Electrical Engineering Undergraduate Electronics       Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Fred Moshary, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

Laboratory courses are an excellent environment in which to master basic
knowledge obtained in course lectures. However, it is evident that many
laboratory environments are computer controlled so that automated testing,
measurement, and device protocols are becoming standard. Therefore, this project
is making all of the introductory laboratories computer driven. In particular,
it is enhancing the education of the students in the following areas: (1) system
design and integration; (2) computer interfacing and data acquisition, including
computerized instrument control; and (3) testbed design and automated testing.
The software implementation is being accomplished through National Instrument's
LabVIEW Software, while the hardware implementation is being accomplished using
a Pentium-based personal computer with GPIB card. A Lab-PC+ multifunction I/O
board is performing data acquisition and control of GPIB compatible
instrumentation, which is being connected to the PC computer and controlled via
LabVIEW drivers. In addition, computer controlled laboratories are allowing
faculty to greatly modify the content of the laboratory curriculum so that a
more integrated connection between the theoretical courses and the laboratory
offerings can occur. Finally, laboratory experiments with more design content
can be offered. *