* 9751267
* Addition of Investigative Labs and Modern Data Acquisition  to Physiology Labs at All Levels of the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Patsy Dickinson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1999
* USD 58,837.00

Students graduating in biology must be intimately familiar with both the process
and content of biological investigations. They should be able to integrate
information and use multiple levels of analysis. In addition, they should be
comfortable using a variety of data acquisition tools. Scientifically literate
non-majors must also understand the process of scientific investigations, as
well as fundamental concepts. This project is enhancing the investigative
laboratories in physiology at all levels of the biology curriculum.
Additionally, because most biology laboratories emphasize data collection while
analysis is done individually by the students, modern data acquisition and
analysis techniques are being incorporate that promote analysis in class.
Students are active participants in their own learning, and are involved in all
aspects of the experimental design and execution, including hypothesis
generation, experimental design, data collection and analysis using modern
equipment, and presentation of results in a variety of formats. In three
courses, Introductory Biology, Comparative Physiology, and the Human Physiology
course for non-majors, two investigative laboratories are being added or
enhanced. In the upper-level neurobiology course, the laboratory is being
entirely restructured to include three semi-investigative laboratories ion
fundamental concepts in neurobiology, followed by a longer inquiry-based
project. By enhancing courses at all levels of the curriculum, the department is
helping develop students better critical-thinking skills as well as
understanding the process of science and the fundamental concepts of each level.
In addition, a large proportion of the students taking biology are being exposed
to more realistic science, more discovery-oriented laboratories, and more modern
scientific equipment.