* 9751050
* Undergraduate Mechatronics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2001
* I. Charles Ume, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 01/31/2001
* USD 86,583.00

The objective of this project is to create a Mechatronics Laboratory that
supports two undergraduate courses. The courses are (1) an Introduction to
Mechatronics, a required undergraduate course for mechanical engineers with an
ultimate enrollment of approximately 400 students per year, and (2) Advanced
Mechatronics, an elective course for engineers with an expected enrollment of 80
students per year. Although most students in both courses are mechanical
engineers, approximately 100 students are expected to be electrical engineers
who have an interest in microcomputer-controlled electrical-mechanical systems.
All laboratory experiences are scheduled for 3 hours per week per section. The
new requirement for mechatronics in the mechanical engineering curriculum is a
more modern version of the previous electric power conversion and motors
laboratory. The new Mechatronics Laboratory is located in the School of
Mechanical Engineering. The equipment consists of instrumentation to make
measurement, program embedded microcomputers, control experiments, and display
result; microcomputer kits for building embedded control devices for smart
machines; actuator kits to provide motion; sensor kits to make measurements in
smart machines; and a two-example mechatronic systems, e.g. robots. A
Mechatronics in Engineering Education workshop is being held to promote the
adoption of similar mechatronics courses as part of the mechanical engineering
curriculum. *