* 9751268
* Analytical and Quantitative Understanding of Integrative    Plant Biology through Coursework and Independent Student    Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Zoe Cardon, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 17,520.00

Establishing links across levels of biological organization, and impressing upon
students the importance of those links, are two of the most difficult goals in
biology today, and two of the most exciting. In order to bridge gaps between
subdisciplines of biology, students must be able to understand the basic
vocabulary of the various disciplines, and, further, to recognize the kinds of
questions that are asked and quantitative approaches used to answer those
questions. In order to lead students toward combining information from multiple
classes taught at several levels of biological organization, an experimental
plan linking four plant biology courses is proposed. each class is a unit within
itself, but the threads tying each to the others are designed to build
quantitative skills and technical competence. This structure should draw
students into the process of discovery as they recognize links between levels of
plant biology, while confidently exploring their own biological questions using
familiar equipment and mathematical models. More specifically, the goals of the
curricular innovations proposed here include: Integration of levels of biology,
within plant sciences as a theme Development of quantitative skills both in the
lab and in the field Establishment of field and lab experiments as partners in
exploring biological questions. The strategy for lining class content, and for
developing stronger quantitative skills, revolves around student mastery of the
measurement of photosynthesis and respiration using a LiCor 6400 portable
photosynthesis system, both in the laboratory at Bowdoin College and in the
distinctive vegetative communities in the fled at the nearby Coastal Studies
Center (CSC). As students gather plant physiological data, they will be
introduced to the value of and differences between mechanistic and empirical
models of biological processes, using two widely accepted models of
photosynthesis as examples. Using dataloggers and various sensors at CSC,
students will also gather realistic values for some of the environmental inputs
used in these models. In each of the four classes, these same pieces of
equipment and portions of the same models will be used, but with a different
focus, building a rich base of information from cellular to ecophysiological
levels which ideally will foster integrative thinking and spur independently
inquiry. *