* 9751521
* Incorporating Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Robert Smith, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 28,723.00

This project incorporates a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer (GC/MS)
throughout the chemistry curriculum. In the introductory laboratory courses,
after a laboratory illustrating chromatography, students use the GC/MS to
identify a mixture of liquids using the retention times and molecular weights of
the separated materials. In organic chemistry laboratory, students learn more of
the theory of gas chromatography and mass spectrometry and use GC/MS in the
analysis of a variety of materials they synthesize or receive. A GC/MS also
permits a wider variety of special projects in this course. In analytical
chemistry, students can begin using the GC/MS independently. They can develop a
procedure to analyze potatoes for pesticides and a procedure to analyze gases
that are emitted from materials in simulated space conditions. In the
spectroscopy course, mass spectra taken by GC/MS can be used to illustrate the
experimental parameters that affect mass spectra. In biochemistry laboratory,
students use the instrument to determine the composition of fatty acid esters
isolated and prepared from naturally occurring materials, and they use the GC/MS
to determine the amino acid composition of a protein. In senior laboratory, the
GC/MS permits research-level synthesis products and more difficult unknowns to
be fully characterized. The instrument can further some undergraduate research
projects and permit other projects to be started. A series of seminars on mass
spectrometry can be sponsored for the local chemistry community using speakers
from local industry and local universities. *