* 9751510
* Improvement of Biochemistry Laboratories for Science        Majors and Non-Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Theresa Salerno, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1999
* USD 6,445.00

The field of Biochemistry has changed significantly in the past 20 years.
Lectures are easily updated to reflect these technological improvements and
applications, but laboratory exercises often lack equivalent modernization.
Because laboratories are needed to reinforce lecture concepts, to teach
technical and analytical skills, and to provide active and cooperative learning,
they must be improved. This project introduces new, relevant experimental
problems for biochemistry courses servicing both science majors and nonmajors.
In the elementary nonmajors course, two new experiments are introduced which
focus on the analysis of LDH isoenzymes and LDH cDNAs in normal and disease
states. These experiments require a PCR system for DNA amplification, a simple
fluorometer for DNA quantitation, and electrophoresis equipment for protein
electrophoresis and DNA SSCP analysis. This project provides these instruments
to perform PCR, SSCP analysis, and isoelectric focusing in a laboratory project
for science majors focused on the analysis of apolipoprotein E variants. Through
their participation in the project design, science majors learn to use
literature and protein and DNA structure databases. The equipment selected
allows further modification in project designs that incorporate modern
electrophoresis techniques and the use of computer-accessed information.