* 9751734
* Instruments for Integrating the Study of Photosynthesis in aBiology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Jonathan Richardson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 45,603.00

This project is directed toward the enhancement of students' understanding of
photosynthesis and related aspects of plant function. Photosynthesis is the
primary process fueling life, yet students often have difficulty grasping its
principles. By providing hands-on experience with varied analyses of
photosynthetic systems, this project is helping students overcome their
preconceptions of photosynthesis and gain an understanding on the ecological and
biochemical levels. The project is providing a model for the multifaceted
integration of photosynthesis and related functions into undergraduate
curricula. The lack of such integration is a widespread pedagogical shortcoming.
The project, is serving the college's biology majors and prehealing arts
students, and is also affecting the interdisciplinary environmental studies
program. The department is acquiring equipment to measure photosynthesis in
intact leaves. The new instruments are primarily being used in investigative
laboratory settings where students collaboratively design and conduct
experiments, and in the extensive student independent research program. Projects
are being developed for various courses. The new instruments measure
photosynthesis and related processes in various ways (oxygen evolution, carbon
dioxide uptake, or water vapor pelease), so students understand and integrate
various experimental approaches. Linking instruments to networked computers is
enabling students to use sophisticated data analysis and presentation tools.