* 9751251
* Improvement of a Biochemistry Laboratory Course
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Carol Jones, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/1999
* USD 25,009.00

Science programs at Central Connecticut State University seek to provide
students with high quality instruction and state of the art laboratory
experiences in preparation for careers in industry and education or further
postgraduate education. The B.S. degrees in Chemistry are certified by the
American Chemical Society's Committee on Professional Training (ACS CPT). In
response to student interest and to better prepare students for industry, we are
developing a specialization in Biochemistry consistent with the ACS CPT
guidelines. To achieve this goal we must (1) extend our current biochemistry
lecture course from 3- to 6-credit hours; (2) improve the scope and quality of
our 3-hour biochemistry laboratory program by the incorporation of modern
technology and more innovative experiments; and (3) provide more research
opportunities for undergraduates interested in biochemistry. The present
proposal addresses our intent to improve the biochemistry laboratory program
through the purchase of instrumentation for revised phased high pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC), high speed, low temperature centrifugation, and tissue
homogenization. The instruments will be utilized in the following courses in the
Chemistry Department: Biochemistry Laboratory and Basic Organic and Biological
Chemistry; and in the Biology Department, in Ecological Physiology. The
professors who instruct these courses will also utilize the instrumentation in
their individual research programs which involve undergraduates. Dr. Jones, a
biochemist in the Chemistry Department, is studying the metabolism and toxicity
of polyaromatic hydrocarbons and halogenated hydrocarbons in prokaryote and
eukaryote cells. She has recently established a small tissue culture laboratory
for conducting metabolic studies in primary rat liver cell cultures. Dr. Kapper,
a comparative physiologist in the Biology Department, is engaged in study of the
physiological and biochemical mechanisms of salinity adaptation in marine and
estuarine orga nisms. These studies would be enhanced by access to HPLC
technology. Specifically, we propose to purchase a Waters reversed phase HPLC
system with capability for uv/visible and fluorescence detection. This will be
used for analyses of protein hydrolysates, amino acids and other biomolecules,
and environmental metabolites generated in plant and animal tissues. The Sorval
RC-26 Plus centrifuge (max. speed 26,000rpm) with and aluminum fixed-angle
rotor, will be used for the subcellular fractionation of mammalian tissues
including calcium-precipiated microsomes for metabolic studies, and for the
gradient purification of specific cellular proteins. A tissue homogenizer will
be used to generate tissue homogenates for differential centrifugation. The
acquisition of these instruments would represent a major advancement in the
quality and scope of training in biochemistry within the Chemistry Department,
and contribute significantly to the proposed program development in this area.
An HPLC system would be widely used in other as well as undergraduate research
projects in the Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences.