* 9751519
* Enhancing Scientific Reasoning Through Research Training    in a General Psychology Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Neil Lutsky, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 48,250.00

This project is strengthening the general appreciation for science training that
undergraduate students in psychology gain. The project specifically addresses
two needs: (1) giving a wide range of students (prospective majors and
nonmajors) significant methodological training and active learning experience at
the introductory level, without requiring a full laboratory course; and (2)
giving beginning majors the opportunity to master and apply design and analysis
skills, using multimedia computing, in research representative of contemporary
psychological science. To accomplish these goals, the department is acquiring
equipment for a new General Psychology Laboratory that supports innovative
multimedia research modules on topics such as correspondence bias in social
psychology and behavioral self-control in learning psychology. Two modules are
being incorporated in the introductory course. Each one is leading students to
collect data on a basic psychological effect, to consult World Wide Web-based
summaries of relevant research studies, to critically evaluate theory and
research paradigms, to design and conduct a new study using the module, and to
receive instruction in statistics and research design. These modules are quickly
getting introductory students to think and act like psychological scientists.
Reinvigorated training in two core psychology methods courses is coherently
building upon those introductory experiences. In those courses, majors are
developing the ability to operationalize independent and dependent variables
using multimedia computing. These experiences are reinforcing basic
methodological training and motivating more sophisticated work in psychological
science. *