* 9751731
* Improving Laboratory Sciences Learning Through Computer     Aided Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Perka Kresic, Trocaire College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 34,750.00

Automation in every discipline of Laboratory Science has made necessary an
accompanying adaptation in instructional techniques and associated learning
materials to accommodate these developments. This project will provide a
relevant practical experience that allows computer hesitant science and
microbiology students to learn and apply a broad array of theoretical concepts
in an environment that will closely simulate their work and learning
environments upon graduation. Through the introduction of requested computers,
cameras and microscopy, students will learn to visually recognize salient
characteristics of microorganisms, blood and urine specimens and begin a chain
of thought processes and applications of their theoretical knowledge to
accurately apply appropriate tests, and report conclusions based on a patient
case study model. The instructional model is enhanced through collection of live
patient specimens from a nearby hospital. These specimens will allow the
progression of disease states to be observed in "real life" circumstances.
Examples of cell abnormalities, e.g., will not be taken from text books or
purchased CD-ROMs but be gathered, stained, studied and archived. Individual
cases will be studied collaboratively and cooperatively through the integration
of eleven linked microcomputer stations. The Project Director, in concert with
students will develop computer aided instruction modules, in hematology,
serology, immunology and medical microbiology. These modules will be adapted for
use in a case study instructional approach.