* 9751445
* GPS Instrumentation for Improved Instruction in GIS and     Field Geology Courses, Using Expertise of Geology and       Geography Departments
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* William Dunne, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 05/31/1999
* USD 20,000.00

This project involves the purchase of backpack and hand-held Global Positioning
Systems (GPS) receivers and related equipment. These units upgrade the
technology content of the field-based components in courses from the Departments
of Geological Sciences and Geography. A strong need exists to train students in
data acquisition and navigation with GPS receivers, differential post-correction
of GPS data with microcomputers, and GPS data acquisition for Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) programs. The need derives from the shift to gathering
scientific field data with digital equipment rather than pencil and paper, and
from employers requiring that potential geoscience applicants be well versed in
this technology. The two departments have joined in this proposal to (1)
increase the number of students using the new equipment; (2) provide instructors
who have used GPS equipment for different purposes; and (3) provide the
university with a future basis for expanding field instruction with GPS units
into courses in the biosciences and engineering. The new equipment can be used
in at least eight exercises, and in four courses that affect most juniors and
seniors majoring in Geography, Geological Sciences, and Civil Engineering. The
students train in the use of different types of GPS receivers for determining
position and navigating. They are expected to determine the effectiveness of
these different tools as a function of scale of mapping, ease of use, and
accuracy. Students are trained in differential post-correction calculations with
microcomputers to demonstrate the improved accuracy in positioning and
navigation with more advanced GPS receivers. Students are also shown the uses of
GPS data beyond just issues of position and navigation. For example, they input
data into GIS programs to construct geological maps with graphical databases,
and input data into bitmap-based drawing programs to correct aerial photographic
distortions. *