* 9751318
* Geotechnical Field Investigation Equipment for the          Instruction of Civil and Environmental Engineering          Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Gregg Fiegel, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 47,729.00

Defining the characteristics of a subsurface profile is a challenge that is
unique to geotechnical engineering. It is important, therefore, that aspiring
geotechnical engineers have a knowledge of site exploration strategies and
sampling techniques before entering professional practice. In most geotechnical
programs, students are taught these topics using textbooks and videotapes. This
practice is frowned upon by industry professionals since the students are unable
to get a true feel for the work and thought involved in a typical site
investigation. A primary goal of the Geotechnical Engineering program is to
integrate field testing procedures into the undergraduate curriculum using a
hands-on approach. The faculty believe that students must have a complete
understanding of modern geotechnical exploration practices if they are to
appreciate the judgment required in geotechnical engineering design. This
project provides a truck-mounted Mobile B-53 Explorer drill rig and accessories.
The drill rig and accessories complement and upgrade the Geotechnical
Engineering program's field testing capability (cone penetrometer and flat-plate
dilatometer field testing systems have been utilized) and allow the faculty to
integrate field testing procedures in many different aspects of the
undergraduate geotechnical curriculum. The value and need of the proposed
project have been recognized by the College of Engineering, the Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department, and the geotechnical engineering
community. All realize that a student with an understanding and appreciation of
site exploration strategies is better prepared to effectively solve real-world
problems upon graduation. As part of this project, student preparedness, or the
effectiveness of the proposed curricular improvements, can be evaluated by a
team of practicing geotechnical engineers. *