* 9751006
* Implementing Discovery-Based Geochemistry Labs and          Broadening the Scope of Research Projects in Introductory   and Advanced Geology Courses through XRF-Spectrometry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Timothy Lincoln, Albion College
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 08/31/1999
* USD 78,976.00

This project is supporting a sequence of discovery-based geochemistry laboratory
projects. It is making improvements in the research projects of three other
geology courses, including a high-enrollment introductory course, and supporting
an expanding student research program. All of these improvements are being made
possible by the new x-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) and supporting
equipment. In order to make geochemistry more appropriate for chemistry and
biology majors in environmental sciences concentration, as well as for geology
majors interested in environmental fields, a sequence of laboratory projects is
being implemented to give students a detailed view of the rock cycle from a
chemical perspective. The subjects of these projects include chemical
weathering, adsorption, sedimentary differentiation, and igneous fractionation.
The XRF equipment enhancing existing projects in other courses by expanding the
precision and range of analytical work available to students. In Introductory
Geology, a successful water-quality research project is being broadened by
allowing students to work with sediment and soil samples as well as with water.
In Petrology, the precision and efficiency of the spectrometer is allowing
faculty to expand class projects on the chemistry of rock suites to the point
that analytical work is becoming the principal means of introducing the chemical
characteristics of important rock associations. In Environmental Geology, class
research projects are being expanded by work with soils and sediments.