* 9751723
* Incorporating Computers and Innovative Problem-Solving into the Human Physiology Lab Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Jennifer Breckler, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 18,606.00

Human physiology is a fundamental course in the biology major of particular
interest to future teachers, health professionals and researchers. The teaching
of human physiology is traditionally done through the use of animal models,
although the relevancy and excitement of the subject is best conveyed to the
greatest number of students by using the students themselves as experimental
subjects. New experimental approaches using the human model need to be designed
which maintain an emphasis on "integrative function" which is inherent in the
physiology discipline, and at the same time build upon a knowledge base rich in
cell and molecular sciences. Students in the laboratory can learn human
physiology while also acquiring many necessary skills, such as computerized data
acquisition, cooperative learning, and experimental design. Recent advances in
available data acquisition software make this possible, and presents an exciting
opportunity to make fundamental changes in the undergraduate human physiology
curriculum. Students can focus more on integrative concepts and design
experiments. Students can also work in small groups on problem-based learning
assignments. They can achieve more than just an understanding of resting
conditions by focusing on the acute and chronic acclimatizations of the body to
changes in the environment. To implement these ideas, we propose to establish 8
computerized physiology workstations to measure human physiological parameters
and institute a problem-based learning curriculum involving physiological
responses to environmental stress. Students will also participate in a formal
outreach program to local middle schools and be encouraged to carry out research
projects in physiology.