* 9751210
* Enhancing Student Design Experiences by Integrating         Computer-Aided Engineering into the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Darryl Thelen, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 06/30/1999
* USD 65,386.00

The project integrates computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided
engineering (CAE) into the term projects in four engineering courses: Computer-
Aided Design, Solid Mechanics, Finite Element Analysis, and Capstone Engineering
Design. Students are enthusiastic about conducting term projects in engineering
courses, but are often frustrated in their attempts to apply the theories
learned in lecture to the practical challenges faced in applied projects. The
frustration stems largely from the simplifications needed to permit isolation of
underlying effects, and to facilitate simple closed-form solution of relevant
governing equations. Such simplifications create a gap between theory and
practice that engineering students often view as irreconcilable. The project is
bridging this gap by introducing the informed use of numerical methods of CAD
and CAE in the four targeted courses. A 16-seat computer laboratory is being
established to accomplish this objective. The laboratory is being used to teach
professional CAD (solid modeling) and CAE (finite element analysis, dynamic
simulation, and numerical analysis) software applications through structured
exercises conducted under faculty supervision. Term projects can increase in
sophistication each year and build on skills learned in prior years. Therefore,
seniors can enter their capstone course with a range of CAD and CAE skills that
they can call upon to conduct their hands-on design projects. This work can
result in the integration of undergraduate engineering project experiences that
demonstrate the modern application of engineering science and include all of the
challenges of actual engineering design problems. The outcomes of this work can
be presented to the engineering education community and other schools interested
in integrating computer-aided engineering analysis into the undergraduate
curriculum. *