* 9751645
* Field and Laboratory Equipment Support for Student Training in Interdisciplinary Environmental Geoscience
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* James Brophy, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 05/31/1999
* USD 48,524.00

As part of a program of curriculum development in the expanding area of
environmental geoscience, a set of interdisciplinary, field-based, courses are
taught from the Geologic Field Station in southwestern Montana. The setting for
this field instruction is a Demonstration Watershed whose headwaters is a large
snow catchment and whose lower drainage is in an arid structural basin. The
Demonstration Watershed has been established as part of a cooperative effort
involving the university, State, and Federal agencies, as well as the local
water district and ranchers. Having the students become part of this endeavor
provides a balanced perspective on the problems they are addressing and the need
for reasonable, practical solutions that they are helping to create as they go
on in their professional careers. Technical phases of the course involve data
collection from a suite of permanent instruments deployed within the watershed.
Students enrolled in the course participate in calibration of permanent
equipment arrays and undertake additional measurements in watershed sub-areas
and along grid surveys. Reliable, state-of-the-art portable equipment is
necessary to complete these aspects of the courses. To ensure that the location
and final compilation of the data are both accurate and also at the leading edge
of technology, the project incorporates GPS receivers for location and a GIS
system for data display into the students' work. This project provides
additional field equipment and portable lap-top computers that will insure
state-of-the-art training for the next generation of field-based environmental
geoscientists.