* 9751602
* Laboratory Instruction and Experimental Psychology EmployingHands On and Virtual Lab Experiences
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Kenneth Monteiro, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2000
* USD 100,000.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to move our current laboratory
experience for the era of "brass-instrument" technology to computer-controlled,
virtual experimental instrumentation. The goal of this project is to use the
advanced computerized and multimedia technologies to provide students with the
following three learning experiences: 1. direct laboratory research experience
or interactive laboratory demonstrations to the largest number and broadest
range of our student population; 2. instruction for all of our students in
modern research skills, including computer-controlled research design,
implementation, and data acquisition and analysis; and 3. laboratory experiences
in a wider range of areas than we currently offer, e.g., cognitive neuroscience,
learning, perception, cognition, human factors, cross-cultural psychology. In
order to provide these experiences, we will develop a laboratory complex
consisting of a central laboratory/classroom, three specialized satellite
laboratories, and a portable two-way audio/visual system that allows
teleconferencing any lab with any appropriately wired classroom. These
laboratories will be used by three types of courses: (1) dedicated laboratory
courses, (2) large theater-style classes which, through the distance-teaching
technologies, will expose students to interactive laboratory demonstrations
conducted in the specialized satellite laboratories. It is expected that the
added hands-on training provided by this instrumentation and the proposed
curricular changes will enhance students' compentecies in conducting social
science also expected that students will gain deeper appreciation for the
theories, findings, and applications of psychology and science more generally.