* 9751514
* A Microcomputer Laboratory to Facilitate and Enhance        Undergraduate Education in Anatomy and Physiology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Robert Vick, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 31,499.00

The Biology Department of Elon College plans a significant improvement of our
program to fundamentally alter the experiences of 250 students enrolled annually
in the human and animal physiology and anatomy laboratories addressed in this
proposal. We want to enhance testing of hypotheses and data collection and
analysis. This pedagogical approach can be the most dramatic and productive
through the application of computer technologies. Through a cogent program the
Department wants to introduce computer applications early in the courses. As
sophomores, biology majors in zoology will be concerned with the fundamentals of
muscle contraction, nerve conductance and cardiac function. In upper-level
courses these phenomena and others will be investigated in more highly
integrated and independent laboratory activities. Students in sports medicine
will be provided a more realistic study of human anatomy and physiology in
preparation for courses in exercise physiology and kinesiology. Elon College
will purchase 13 Power Macintosh 7200 computers and one Power Macintosh 7600
computer to equip two separate computer laboratories to support the instruction
of human and vertebrate anatomy and physiology. The anatomy group will consist
of six student workstations while the physiology group will consist of one
instructor's station/server and seven student workstations, with each
workstation serving three students. These stations, with appropriate software
and CD-ROM capabilities, will have far reaching pedagogic consequences because
of their tremendous flexibility and capacity to measure, record and immediately
analyze physiological and morphological phenomena.