* 9751211
* Laboratory Instruction in Gas Chromatography/Ion Trap Mass  Spectrometry
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Beverly Swaile, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

The Chemical Technology Department offers multiple degrees including a 5-yr
bachelor of science degree in Chemical Technology. This BS degree program is a
unique laboratory-driven curriculum emphasizing analytical chemistry and
featuring six quarters of cooperative work in industrial or government
laboratories. This project develops a number of new laboratory experiences and
courses to improve and add technical content to the Chemical Technology program
based on acquisition of a gas chromatography / mass spectrometric system capable
of performing tandem mass spectrometry. Incorporating new laboratory course work
is enabling our students to develop working skills with the most advanced
techniques and instrumentation currently used in industry and government
laboratories. Existing courses directly affected by this project include:
Chemical Technology V, Chemical Instrumentation, Senior Project, Biotechnology,
Preparation and Analysis of Organic Compounds, and Basic Pharmaceutical
Technology. New courses planned under this project include Sample Preparation,
Special Topics in Mass Spectrometry, and Design of Experiments. Instrumentation
being used to accomplish this project is a Varian Instruments Saturn 2000 Gas
Chromatograph/Ion-trap Mass Spectrometer (GCIMS) workstation. This equipment is
designed to separate and detect organic chemical species at the parts per
billion level. With the heavy use of the instrument and the time required to
perform each experiment, use of three computers with mass spectral software and
NIST libraries installed permits considerably expanded student participation for
data manipulation and tutorials for interpretation of mass spectral data.
Collaborations to disseminate these laboratory experiences to additional
students at the Raymond Walters College and Clermont College, branch campuses of
the University of Cincinnati, and the independent Cincinnati State Technical and
Community College are underway. Southeastern Community College in Lincoln,
Nebraska, and Miami U niversity in Middletown, Ohio, and six regional alliances
of schools, colleges, and industries are participating as users and evaluators
of instructional materials. Further, applied student research and senior
projects in the Chemical Technology department stemming from project products
will be on going for students resulting in published papers and presentations at
national and regional meetings. *