* 9751246
* Improving Laboratory Instruction through Computer-IntegratedMachine Tool Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Alan Yendall, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 40,265.00

In response to rapid technological advances and changing student and employer
needs, Florence-Darlington Technical College will enhance its Machine Tool
Technology (MTT) laboratory instruction through a comprehensive infusion of
state-of-the-art equipment, instructional software, and enhanced instructional
design. The project will improve the learning environment of MTT students -
emphasizing higher levels of creative problem-solving, teamwork, problem
analysis, creativity and computer skills - and will include the re-design of
core Computer Numerical Control (CNC) theory courses that will directly impact
more than 300 curriculum and continuing education students annually. The project
centers around a modern laboratory environment anchored by computers with
specialized simulation software and computer-controlled lathes with industry-
standard controls. The laboratory environment will simulate that of industry and
be enhanced by an inteactive, eam setting that more closely reflects the global
work environment of the 21st century. This approach will encourage students to
learn how to learn, emphasizing creative problem-solving, effective
communication skills, goal identification and evaluation, and teamwork. Students
will be introduced to machining operations through exercises that combine
practical, hands-on experience with creative problem-solving and project
management within a team environment. The concept of computer integration with
the machining process will be taught by allowing students to perform
experiments, develop scientific and technical skills in creating designs, run
simulations, and produce a product using state-of-the-art technology. Students
will gain a greater working knowledge of the entire CNC process and will acquire
key skills required by local business and industry. The project will integrate
traditional machine tool education with the in-demand skills of leadership,
quality and reliability, production process, computer automation, and teamwork.
*