* 9751660
* Student-Managed Web Servers and the Delivery of QuantitativeResults -- Redefining Computer Literacy for the 21st        Century
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Mark LeBlanc, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 07/31/1999
* USD 25,635.00

Society's embrace of information and our reliance on the distributed networked
environments that carry that information is changing the definition of a
"liberally educated person." The skills required of all college graduates (not
just computer science majors) will soon include the electronic delivery of
information and services. This project constructs a laboratory where non-science
students manage World Wide Web servers. The project has two major objectives.
The first objective is to ensure that each student has a firm grasp of the
computational tools required for manipulating, organizing and displaying
quantitative data. The second objective is to give each student the opportunity
to manage the delivery of that information to interested clients. In this
introductory course in computing for non-majors, students employ common forms of
applications software as tools and then disseminate their results via a
personally-managed web server. The quantitative tool-based component includes a
significant emphasis on mathematical content to address the needs of other
departments that depend on this service course. The server-focused component
addresses the client-server skills that will be required of graduates entering
the workforce in the next century. an interactive web page facilitates
dissemination of the method to instructors at other institutions and permits the
construction of tailor-made lab handouts. Instructors have the flexibility to
choose from examples that use a particular application tool independent of their
choice of instructions for a particular delivery mechanism. *