* 9751681
* Developing a Laboratory Course in the Psychology of         Reasoning and Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* John Best, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 33,617.00

The teaching of scientific principles and practices in psychology is in
transition. Although courses such as "experimental design" and "research
methods" are common in undergraduate curricula at many colleges and
universities, the wisdom of employing these courses as the only source of
science education for psychology majors is open to question at a time when
developing scientific competence is thought to be a critical dimension of the
undergraduate experience. One question has to do with how much "hands-on"
research students actually do in such courses. A second question pertains to the
nature of the research that is done. Often, the projects that students carry out
are canned demonstrations that only tangentially relate to the research
currently being done in psychology. This proposal addresses these issues. We
propose to use microcomputers in a semester-long laboratory course in the
cognitive psychology of reasoning and problem solving. The course will cover the
basic theories in this area of psychology. The laboratory component of the
course will run subjects in an effort to reproduce the findings that are
expected, a priori, theoretically. The laboratory component will also provide
students with the opportunity to design and carry out their own research
projects. The use of this laboratory and the associated learning experiences
will foster understanding and appreciation of the principles of scientific
reasoning. In addition to the knowledge of reasoning and problem solving that
students will develop, the laboratory component has been designed to improve
students' capability for "pure" scientific thinking. *