* 9751113
* A Computerized Laboratory to Enhance Undergraduate          Psychology Education and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Brian Cronk, Missouri Western State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 44,432.00

The college offers a strong program in experimental psychology and related
courses. Over the past decade, psychology students have made more presentations,
and earned more awards, in the Missouri Academy of Science undergraduate paper
competitions than students from any other college in the state, regardless of
discipline. In recent years, the focus of the program has started to shift to
more computer-assisted instruction. All psychology majors now receive training
in the use of electronic mail, word processors, spreadsheets, web-browsers
(e.g., Netscape), and basic statistical analysis software. In addition, students
have been placing their independent projects on the college's World Wide Web
server. In the past, although the college had limited computer resources
available for both in-class and independent use, those resources were heavily
taxed and shared with all other departments on campus. Moreover, the computer
laboratories did not have the required software or technical support for
conducting statistical analysis or for data collection. This project develops a
comprehensive computerized laboratory that allows students to integrate better
the computer skills they learn into their current academic work, their future
professional work, and their future scientific endeavors. This laboratory allows
an increase in both the amount and quality of research that is produced by our
undergraduate students. The skills acquired in this laboratory should give
students the technical knowledge required for critical thinking in modern
society. A further goal is to increase the communication among undergraduate
researchers through the use of modern technology. The project creates a
17-station teaching/research laboratory where students can learn and practice
all steps of the scientific research process. This objective is accomplished
through four components: Basic Research Skills, Statistical Analysis, Data
Collection, and Simulation and Demonstration. These four components should
enhance the psychology students' already exceptional record of independent
research and promote enthusiasm for careers in science. *