* 9751194
* Emphasizing Software Quality in Undergraduate Programming   Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1999
* David Gustafson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 04/30/1999
* USD 11,101.00

Software quality is becoming an increasingly important issue to organizations
that use and develop software. Educators need to emphasize quality as a
foundation concept in undergraduate computer science education. This project
outlines a novel approach, called adversarial testing, that encourages students
to develop high quality programs and to develop test cases for that program.
This approach can be easily incorporated into any course that involves
significant programming laboratory exercises. In adversarial testing, students
are motivated by natural competitive instincts to attempt to expose faults in
their classmates' solutions while at the same time defending against fault-
revealing test cases produced by their classmates. This technique leads students
to a deeper understanding of the sources of faults in software and of different
techniques for building reliable, robust software. This project uses a World
Wide Web-based testing server that manages the program and test data associated
with courses and students, performs the tests, and accumulates and reports the
results of testing. Adversarial testing is introduced into five required and two
elective courses in the computer science curriculum. In the context of these
courses, both the short-term and long-term effects of having students solve
programming laboratory exercises with adversarial testing is studied
empirically. *