* 9751705
* Inquiry-Based Physics Lab for Under-Prepared South Carolina State University Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* James Payne, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1999
* USD 21,239.00

Many students begin their undergraduate careers with rather weak backgrounds in
science. Consequently, many of them fail to grasp the conceptual basis of
physics, the rationale for the successive steps in a traditional physics
laboratory experiment, and the reasoning behind standard data analyses. Both of
these shortcomings are being rectified by replacing the conventional physics
laboratory with a guided-inquiry laboratory. The inquiry-based laboratory is
being patterned after a successful microcomputer-based laboratory. Researchers
have demonstrated that using the computer's fast data-acquisition capabilities
to instantly confront the students' intuition results in a conceptual
understanding vastly superior to that developed in traditional laboratories.
This result is because emphasis in the laboratory is shifted from data
collection to data interpretation and scientific thinking. Students are being
given the hour-long Force Concept Inventory test at the beginning and end of the
semester to evaluate the effectiveness of the inquiry-based laboratory in
imparting physical concepts. The test is a standard measure of whether or not a
student has developed a Newtonian world view. Instituting an inquiry-based
physics laboratory serves as a model for other colleges and universities faced
with the problem of teaching physics to insufficiently prepared students.
Experiences with the laboratory can be disseminated by articles in appropriate
journals, and by conference presentations. *