* 9751390
* Cooperative Learning in the Chemical Engineering Laboratory:A New Instructional Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Steven Peretti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2000
* USD 99,866.00

The laboratory course is critical to the learning and retention of chemical
engineering knowledge. It exemplifies the principle that active involvement is
demonstrably more effective than simply watching and listening. However, the
traditional laboratory course suffers from several deficiencies. Laboratory
exercises are often rote: students complete them mechanically, without analyzing
what they are doing, why they are doing it, or what the results have to do with
the theory they may have studied in other courses. Experiments are often carried
out and reports generated by unstructured student teams, with one or two team
members actually doing the work, all team members receiving credit for it, and
no one being held individually accountable. This project demonstrates a change
in both the format and the content of the chemical engineering laboratory.
Student teams are required to develop their own experimental methodology and to
analyze and interpret data using process simulation tools. They also carry out a
project that involves formulating and demonstrating a new experiment that
utilizes multistage operations. Simulation does not substitute for hands-on
experimentation but supplements it, being used to model the experimental systems
and then to explore what-if scenarios far more extensively than time would
permit in a conventional laboratory. The objectives of the new laboratory course
sequence are to (1) augment instruction in modern chemical engineering practice
through the integration of experiment with process simulation; (2) increase
comprehension of experimental procedures and underlying concepts through
structured cooperative learning; (3) stimulate innovative thinking in a
laboratory team environment by requiring the students to design a new multistage
experiment; and (4) facilitate the development of written and oral communication
skills through explicit training in technical report writing and oral
presentations. *