* 9751131
* Self-Directed Multimedia Geographical Information System andImage Analysis Lab
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* John Ritter, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 08/31/2000
* USD 51,825.00

Geographical Information System (GIS) and Image Analysis techniques have become
a rapidly developing component of our technological age. The sphere of
applications for these techniques spans several disciplines. These tools are
fundamental to site characterization studies for construction projects, mapping
soil types and drainage patters for optimizing crop rotations, identifying the
spatial extent of old growth forests, as well as many others. The current
generation of Civil Engineers and Environmental Scientists must be adept at not
only understanding the theoretical foundations for these tools, but also skilled
in their practical application. Current budgetary constraints dictate that
innovative and fundamental reforms must be found in both curricula and pedagog
to ensure that graduates have attained the technical skills required to meet the
challenges facing our society. A self-directed multimedia GIS/Image Analysis
laboratory is proposed. The laboratory will have sufficient computational power,
data storage, and networking capability to enable a series of instructional
modules in the fields of GIS/Image Analysis to be administered either on or off-
site via CD-ROM or the World Wide Web, the extending the bounds of the
traditional classroom. The proposed effort includes a procedure that will enable
students to gain access to both the requisite software and data independent of
their location. The proposed infrastructure will enable students to access
appropriate data sets without significantly impacting the current campus
networking traffic. The project will be evaluated in terms of the number of
students who enter the instructional time-line, whether or not their curricular
goals were achieved, their recorded proficiency, and their ability to integrate
their skills into student projects. Results will be disseminated at both
national and regional conferences.