* 9751040
* Incorporation of ESCA Spectroscopy into Undergraduate       Science and Engineering Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Prem Vaishnava, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 82,550.00

Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) (aka x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy) is one of the most developed and versatile of the modern surface
analysis techniques and has unique capabilities beyond those of any
instrumentation currently found in undergraduate science and engineering
laboratories. This technique is routinely used for the characterization of
surface and subsurface layers and interfaces of a wide variety of materials,
providing insight into their elemental composition, oxidation states, structure,
and bonding. Although ESCA is a well-established technique, used extensively in
both academia and industry, few undergraduate programs teach the theory
associated with it, and no institution has incorporated its use into
undergraduate course-related laboratories. In the past, all commercially
available instruments were not only expensive ($500,000 and up), but were very
temperamental and required extensive training to operate. With the recent advent
of lower cost ($200,000 range), user-friendly, instruments designed for on-line
inspection, the feasibility of ESCA's becoming a routine teaching tool has been
established. The potential for utilization of ESCA by students (both chemists
and engineers) is great. Knowledge of this technique and its capabilities gives
students an awareness of the types of analyses that are currently being
performed, not only in industrial and academic research laboratories, but also
on the floor of manufacturing facilities. This project provides one ESCA
spectrometer for use in the science and engineering curriculum. ESCA experiments
are incorporated into six chemistry, one physics, and two or more engineering
laboratories. *