* 9751422
* Integration of the Property/Processing/Part Design          Interaction into the Design Experience in Plastics          Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Paul Koch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 46,917.00

Basic to the philosophy of the Plastics Engineering Technology bachelors degree
program, a graduating student should be prepared to make a positive impact upon
entering the plastics industry. This requires possessing engineering technology
skills in plastics materials, design, and processing, and the graduate must also
be prepared to develop and present new ideas. As a cornerstone to the program of
study, the students use leading-edge computer technologies, including solid
molding, finite element analysis, mold flow, mold cooling, and polymer flow;
have a comprehensive laboratory experience resulting in an understanding of the
operation of processing machinery and proper processing conditions to produce
high-quality parts; are required to develop and range an engineering project;
and present the project before their peers and professionals in their field. The
object of this project is to develop a national model for the appropriate
integration of the interaction of the mechanical properties of a plastic, the
effect of processing on mechanical properties, and the relationship of part
design to overall part performance. It is necessary to obtain an instrumented
puncture impact testing system to accomplish this goal. The justification for
this equipment is based on the innovative way in which the new equipment is
used. *