* 9751249
* Theory and Application of Molecular Biology Throughout      the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Paul Gabrielson, William Jewell College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 08/31/1999
* USD 82,623.00

Science is investigative and experiential; the teaching of science should
reflect this reality. A successful biology curriculum should have investigative
components throughout the program. An essential aspect of the investigative
experience is that students be exposed to the tools of the discipline. Nowhere
is this more important than in molecular biology, a field that has
revolutionized all of biology. This project integrates teaching the theory and
techniques of molecular biology throughout the biology curriculum, from the
first course in Evolution and Ecology through the capstone, Senior Thesis
research project. The new equipment provided through this project is standard
and essential to teach molecular biology in the laboratory. The curriculum has
been revised to include molecular biology laboratories in existing courses, and
two new courses, focused on molecular biology, have been added. Molecular
biology also can be integrated into the revised, General Education curriculum of
the college, which begins teaching students about science in Level I courses;
provides an interdisciplinary, hands-on, investigative laboratory experience in
Level II courses; and culminates with an interdisciplinary, capstone course that
applies the theory and techniques learned to real-world problems. The Science
Honors Program in biology, taught by the tutorial method, also has molecular
biology as its central theme. This project serves as a model for how other
institutions, especially small, liberal arts colleges, can integrate molecular
biology into all levels of their curriculum. The new curriculum and equipment
enhances significantly the university's ability to teach biology into the 21st
century. *