* 9751139
* Incorporating Stable Isotope Geochemistry in Undergraduate  Education and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* John Encarnacion, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 05/31/2000
* USD 7,036.00

Undergraduate students are rarely given opportunities to learn about stable
isotope geochemistry and gain hands-on experience in geochemistry laboratories.
This fact is unfortunate because stable isotope geochemistry is more
interdisciplinary than most geoscience subdisciplines. Stable isotopes are used,
for example, to study global climate change, groundwater/surface water
hydrology, and high-temperature fluid rock interaction. Following the
construction of two inexpensive stable isotope extraction lines, undergraduate
students are experientially learning about stable isotope geochemistry and
procedures commonly used in geochemistry laboratories. The new equipment is used
by students enrolled in two upper-division courses Groundwater Hydrology and
Environmental Geochemistry and is available for use in the research-oriented
course entitled Senior Inquiry Research Project. Three-week modules are designed
so that students (1) collect water and rocks samples; (2) analyze their samples
for the stable isotopes of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen; (3) interpret their
results; and (4) write a research report. The class projects are integrated with
projects that local environmental firms are investigating once faculty have
gained confidence with the functionality of this module. The project can be
assessed several times during the tenure of the 2-year project. Students and
faculty associated with the module can be asked to evaluate it. Their comments
and answers to questions listed in the Summative Evaluation section of the User-
Friendly Handbook for Project Evaluation can be reported at the termination of
the 2-year project. The implementation, application, and results of the module
can be disseminated four ways. This process includes distributing the
information on the World Wide Web, publishing in a recognized journal on
geoscience education, and presenting at a national GSA meeting. In addition, a
video that illustrates the construction of the line and analytical procedures
used in the l aboratory can be made available to interested academicians. *