* 9751463
* Integration of Photonics and Electronics in the             Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Richard Bartels, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2000
* USD 15,000.00

This project is integrating electronics and photonics into a single upper-
division physics laboratory course. The new course has been structured to take
advantage of the strong pedagogical links between photonics and electronics, and
to enable students to obtain both hands-on competence with the instrumentation
and a thorough understanding of the theoretical principles. A hands-on
electronics course has long been an important staple within many quality
undergraduate physics programs. However, due to the enormous recent impact of
laser-based photonics technologies, physics undergraduates must also obtain
significant experience with the principles of photonics and fiber-optics
instrumentation. Research and development in photonics technology has already
had major effects on the U.S. economy. As they begin their graduate or
industrial careers, physics students clearly benefit from an in-depth
understanding of the advantages of photonics over electronics for many
applications requiring high bandwidth, low loss, or improved sensitivity. It is
imperative that students gain as much hands-on experience as possible, and that
the course include current applications employing high-quality single-mode
fiber. A lecture course in optics, is being required with the proposed
laboratory course. The new laboratory can be taken either for two credits by
physics majors, who are carrying out both electronics and photonics experiments,
or for one credit by engineering science majors, who are conaentrating on the
photonics investigations. The laboratory course structure serves as a model for
widespread incorporation of photonics into the undergraduate physics curriculum.