* 9751315
* Photoelasticity and Its Synergism with Finite Element Method
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Said Shakerin, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 08/31/1999
* USD 11,500.00

The goal of this project is to enhance mechanical engineering education by
incorporating experiments in photoelastic stress analysis within the existing
curriculum. Photoelasticity is a visual, full-field technique for determining
stresses in parts and structures. In addition to its traditional use in
industry, there is a renewed interest in using photoelasticity to test objects
made by stereolithography. All mechanical (and to a lesser degree civil)
engineering students can benefit from this project. Six new experiments are
introduced in four courses: Mechanics of Materials, Machine Design,
Instrumentation and Experimental Methods, and the Finite Element Method.
Specific instructional objectives are to increase conceptual understanding of
stress distribution through photoelastic visualization; gain experience with
photoelasticity and its advantages/limitations; and appreciate the synergism
between experimental and numerical methods of stress analysis. For the planned
experiments, one transmission polariscope set, one reflection polariscope set,
accompanying accessories, and a video capture device are needed. The equipment
can also be used for in-class demonstrations, testing of senior design projects,
and motivational presentations to K 12 students. Institutional support exists
but is insufficient for the acquisition of these precision optical instruments.
Overall, students experience that, in solving engineering problems, one has to
choose the appropriate tool of analysis and recognize that quite often several
tools must be utilized to validate the results, e.g., validation of numerical
solutions by experimental means.