* 9751138
* Essential Improvement of the Surveying Program at OIT Using Real-Time Kinetic Global Positioning Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Dennis Findorff, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1999
* USD 54,352.00

Changes in technology over the past 10 years have had an enormous impact on
surveyors. The advent of the Global Positioning System (GPS) has brought about
significant changes in the manner in which surveyors gather observational data,
establish project control networks, and locate positions on the Earth's surface.
Recent advances in GPS technology have provided the surveyor with the ability to
determine three-dimensional positions in real time using kinematics techniques.
This real-time kinematics (RTK) system has made GPS technology useful for the
solution of problems encountered by the typical surveyor. The danger in this
technology lies in its use by those who are technically illiterate and view the
system as a black box which merely produces results. Practicing and future
professional surveyors must be educated so they are able to scrutinize results
and discriminate between usable and unusable data. It is imperative that a
comprehensive surveying education provides students with exposure to GPS
technology throughout the curriculum. This integration of GPS within the
curriculum is facilitated by the use of RTK techniques which may be applied to
plane surveying as well as geodetic surveying. Familiarity with the theory and
applications of RTK surveying demystifies the black box and produces graduates
who can have a positive impact on the surveying profession. This project makes
RTK surveying systems available for use by students in the surveying program.
The acquisition of RTK equipment is essential for maintaining a contemporary,
comprehensive curriculum that produces technologically literate students. *