* 9751060
* Undergraduate Physiological Psychology Teaching Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Janie Wilson, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

This project will equip a computerized physiological psychology laboratory. The
equipment will provide laboratory experiences for undergraduate students in
physiological psychology by allowing them to learn human and non-human animal
neuroscience methodology in a "hands-on" environment. It will allow the
Psychology Department to incorporate laboratory demonstrations and exercises in
the existing undergraduate physiological lecture course and to develop a
research laboratory course in physiological psychology. Through a structured
sequence of exercises, students in the laboratory course will become familiar
with the research literature, learn how to design and conduct ethical research
in the physiological area, and learn how to write professional reports about
their research. The laboratory will also allow students the opportunity to
conduct supervised independent research on physiological topics. Instruction in
other courses in the psychology curriculum will be improved as faculty begin to
take advantage of this opportunity to incorporate demonstrations of
physiological phenomena in their courses, and by allowing development of
physiological instructional materials designed for use in these courses. Faculty
in Biology and Kinesiology will also begin to use this facility for improving
undergraduate learning in their disciplines. The design of the laboratory also
allows for production of video instructional material that may be disseminated
to interested faculty at other institutions.