* 9751387
* Development of a New Multidisciplinary Undergraduate        Mechatronics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Mariappan Jawaharlal, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 06/30/2000
* USD 64,196.00

This project will develop a Multi disciplinary Mechatronics Laboratory at GMI.
The proposed laboratory will benefit undergraduate students in two mechatronics
and two other related courses. Mechatronics is the synergistic integration of
mechanical, control and electronics engineering and computer control for the
design, manufacturing and control of products and processes. Intelligent
automobile suspensions, anti-lock brakes, robots, CNC machines and many consumer
electronics are examples of mechatronic products. Developing such products
requires multi-disciplinary knowledge and skills. Towards this end,
undergraduate mechatronics courses have been developed at GMI. Since these are
multi-disciplinary courses, they require a laboratory that is fundamentally
different from traditional mechanical engineering labs. Experiments and projects
for this course have been designed and planned in a sequence that will allow the
students to acquire a complete mechatronic product design experience. This
laboratory will provide the students with cross-platform knowledge and skills
necessary for today's engineer. Upon completion of the laboratory, students will
be able to design mechatronic products involving mechanical design, controllers,
sensors, actuators, intelligent algorithms and interface. *