* 9751067
* The Introduction of Molecular Modeling into the Two-Year    College Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Iraj Nejad, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 44,721.00

The concepts of molecular bonding, electronic structure, molecular orbitals, and
intermolecular and intramolecular interactions are fundamental to all areas of
chemistry. Although these concepts have been covered at several levels of
sophistication in various chemistry courses, they have not been well understood
by the majority of students. The problem that students have had with
understanding these concepts arises from the difficult task of visualizing these
concepts in the microscopic world of atoms and molecules. Recent advances in
molecular modeling, computational chemistry, and 3-D visualization software
provide an exciting opportunity to more effectively teach these critical
concepts in an innovative way. These advances, coupled with relatively powerful
and affordable computer workstations, and superb graphic software and hardware,
make this approach viable. For years, molecular modeling has played a
significant role in chemical and pharmaceutical designs in both industry and
graduate-level researah. Now is the time to incorporate molecular modeling into
the undergraduate curriculum to help students better comprehend critical
structural concepts. To achieve this goal, the department is purchasing 14
computers and one SGI workstation, which can be interconnected and can support
SPARTAN software. This new facility is enabling chemistry faculty to teach
molecular modeling and computational chemistry to students in a meaningful way,
and it is enabling students to visualize a number of fundamental microscopic
concepts that are important to the macroscopic properties of materials.