* 9751079
* Improvement of a Molecular Biology Laboratory that Enhances Core Curriculum Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Brett Larson, ARMSTRONG STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1999
* USD 21,512.00

This project provides support for equipment to improve and enhance instruction
in a previously existing molecular genetics laboratory. The new equipment can
also be used to introduce new laboratories in cell and molecular biology in two
core curriculum courses that are required of all biology majors (Modern Biology
Laboratory) and many nonmajors (Principles of Biology II). The Molecular
Genetics course is designed to introduce students to current theories,
techniques, and methodologies in cell and molecular biology. A major limitation
of this course is the lack of sufficient equipment for a large class. Class size
is currently limited to six students. The new equipment allows 10 to 12
additional students to perform laboratory work simultaneously. Key pieces of
equipment allow students' exposure to additional experiments and techniques. The
equipment can also be used to enhance laboratories in other courses. Some basic
cell and molecular laboratories can be incorporated into two core curriculum
courses. These two courses affect both majors and nonmajors. Other courses
affected include Cell Physiology and Special Topics in Biology (independent
student research). Finally, the equipment can also be used in the department's
outreach program for high school teachers and high school students. New
equipment includes an ultraviolet spectrophotometer, a refrigerated, high-speed
centrifuge, electrophoresis apparati, microcentrifuges, micropipettors, a
shaking waterbath, and a PCR thermocycler.