* 9751426
* Use of a Personal Densitometer for the Mini-Project Approachto Curriculum Enrichment in the Undergraduate Biochemistry  and Physiology Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Mary Lou Caspers, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 13,700.00

The Chemistry and Biology faculty are dedicated to the continued development of
an undergraduate laboratory curriculum that enables our students to be
successfully trained in the current methodologies necessary to compete within
the contemporary scientific community. Thus, we are evaluating a mini-research
project approach in upper-level biology, biochemistry and chemistry laboratories
which will allow students to develop their own problem-solving skills with the
proper supervision necessary to ensure that they are exposed to a wide variety
of research and instrumental approaches. Through the acquisition of a personal
densitometer new experiences will be introduced into our undergraduate
biochemistry and physiology laboratories which will extend and strengthen the
mini-research project concept. At present, experiments requiring the
quantitation of electrophoretic blots or autoradiograms cannot be performed. The
wide use of densitometry in biological and biochemical research makes it
imperative that our undergraduates appreciate the sensitivity and versatility of
this technique. The personal densitometer will also be used in undergraduate
research projects that are currently underway in the chemistry and biology
departments. Implementation of the mini-project approach to the biochemistry and
physiology laboratories, as well as the new experiments designed for the
personal densitometer, will be shared with colleagues within a professional
forum. In summary, the impact of a personal densitometer in our undergraduate
laboratory curriculum cannot be understated. Use of the personal densitometer,
within the framework of the project-orientated laboratory, will significantly
enhance our undergraduate biochemistry and biology programs. It will allow us to
provide our students, many of whom are under-represented minorities and women,
the strong foundation in biochemistry and physiology necessary to pursue their
goals of and advanced degree of professional employment.