* 9751493
* Applied Visual, Event-Driven, Distributed, Object-Oriented, (VEDOC) Computing Using X-Window GUI and the Internet
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* H. Paul Haiduk, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/1999
* USD 5,000.00

Computing technology has rapidly evolved from a focus on the single workstation
to a focus on shared resources over an intranet or the Internet. The Computer
Information Systems (CIS) and the Engineering Departments are struggling to keep
pace with these rapid shifts in computing technology. A critical need, as
pointed out by advisory groups, is to develop skills for software technicians
such that they can productively function in environments requiring visual, event
driven, distributed, object-oriented computing (VEDOC) solutions. Teaching focus
toward this end is moving rather slowly, largely inhibited by obsolete or
inadequate equipment. This project is designed to develop the computing
hardware/software and curricular revisions necessary to train students in cross-
platform hardware and VEDOC environments. This project is based upon X-Window
GUIs, Linux operating system, and Tcl/Tk. These software tools are freely
available and have already been implemented. Underlying hardware is to be
developed and curricula revised to meet project objectives. Java is deployed in
a later stage of curricula development. Undergraduate students seeking the M.S.
degree (a software technicians degree) through the CIS Department, undergraduate
students seeking the A.S. Engineering Computer Science transfer degree, and
students retraining are affected by this project. *