* 9751313
* Consequences of Habitat Fragmentation as a Model for        Inquiry-Based Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Nancy Perigo, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 35,000.00

Reports of the Office of Technology Assessment and conferences sponsored by
organizations as diverse as Sigma Xi, AAAS, and the American Medical Association
have shown repeatedly that undergraduate, liberal arts institutions that link
hands-on research experiences to quality teaching(i.e., small student-faculty
ratios such as Willamette University's 12.8:1 ratio) are particularly successful
in encouraging undergraduates to pursue graduate and professional careers in the
sciences. Presently our program is attracting an increasing number of students
interested in conservation biology topics even among non-science majors. With a
new complex now in place, we propose to expand an existing inquiry-oriented
approach by asking students to pose questions that address both the genetic and
ecological consequences of habitat fragmentation. New microscopes equipped with
video-imaging systems and micromanipulators will allow creative exploration of
movement & function as well as form. New computers equipped with sufficient
memory to analyze images of organisms & DNA bands will be shared among student
teams as they try to 1) classify plant & animal biodiversity as scientists do;
2) examine its connection to habitat reduction using statistical and
conservation-related software; and 3) review and communicate their results in
peer and mentor-based groups. State-of-the art molecular tools will guide
comparative study of the genetic diversity of population relics of rare and
common organisms, and will expand the basis for posing solutions to historical
and contemporary anthropogenic problems. A unique feature is that collaboration
is possible via pairing majors and non-majors courses. Also, future scientists
will be able to better articulate the results of the experiments they initiate,
to perceive differences in ecological and evolutionary scales, and apply their
understanding to real-world situations. The wedding of molecular tools with
ecological and systematic studies is essential if students are to be successful
in a world where environments and interpretations of them are rapidly changing.