* 9751145
* Distributive Computing Environments and Equipment           Interfacing for New Directions in Principles of Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Pistole, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 38,925.00

The Department of Biology has recently implemented changes to create a cohesive
academic community. These changes include establishing a new curriculum, peer
mentorship program, biology student dormitory floor, and funding for
undergraduate research. The department is renovating 10 laboratories used for
undergraduate research. The cornerstone of the new curriculum is a 2-semester
introductory course entitled Principles of Biology. This new course is giving
students a better appreciation of the unifying themes that run through modern
biological science, and ensuring that all of the majors are exposed to new
technology, critical thinking, and experiential learning. The department is
establishing a distributive computing environment with equipment interfacing for
the new course. The project is stressing interactive instruction with
exploration and discovery through a server linked to a computer network. The
network includes a newly developed computer room, lecture and laboratory
classrooms with interfaced equipment, and dormitory rooms. Instructors are
emphasizing conceptual thinking, increasing the level of curiosity towards
biology, and reducing student alienation of tools used in scientific inquiry.
The project is being developed in phases. The department is integrating the
equipment into the course and authoring the course on the server. The course,
along with some equipment, is then being made available to local high schools
and schools for a year. At the end of this phase, the course can be made
available to anyone with Internet access.