* 9751613
* An Integrated Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Computer       Laboratory for Undergraduate Instructional Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Lawrence Braile, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2001
* USD 39,115.00

In this project, computing equipment and software are being purchased to
establish a specialized, dedicated computing laboratory for undergraduate
instruction in the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences. The department
has recently been working specifically on improving the quality of the
undergraduate program. Several assessments have been performed by people within
and outside of the department and by former alumni. Following these evaluations,
a department-wide curriculum revision was initiated, which affected every aspect
of the undergraduate program. Based on these evaluations, the department has
targeted several key areas for improvement of undergraduate instruction. As part
of that improvement, the department is enhancing the geoscience undergraduates'
computing skills, providing laboratory opportunities for the application of
learned quantitative skills, and increasing the faculty's ability to include
open-ended problem-solving activities in the curriculum. A specialized,
dedicated undergraduate computing laboratory is the most effective method for
achieving these goals. It builds on a strong base of computer-assisted
instruction in the department. The intent of the project is to make the computer
laboratory and associated learning activities and experiences integral parts of
the entire undergraduate program. As such, they can be used by every faculty
member and every student (currently 150 majors) in the department and can be
consistently integrated into the department's undergraduate curriculum.