* 9751735
* A Central Molecular Biology Laboratory for Curriculum       Enhancement of Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Jerry Lovelace, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 07/31/1999
* USD 18,789.00

PROPOSED PROJECT: To set up a central molecular biology facility. The objective
of this project is to set up a central, state-of-the-art molecular biology
laboratory to enhance the learning experience of students from various
departments at the university, including, Biology, Chemistry, and Clinical
Laboratory Science. In order for our students to be competitive after graduation
and to enrich their communities, they need to have a working knowledge of state-
of-the-art technology. The project is to acquire the necessary equipment to
teach methods of nucleic acid studies and recombinant DNA techniques. The
laboratory will be set up to perfoun DNA and RNA analysis, such as Southern and
Northern blot hybridizations, genomic and extrachromosomal restriction fragment
length polymorphism, gene banks and polymerase chain reaction. The equipment
will be used in Biology program for teaching Introductory Molecular Biology, in
Clinical Laboratory Science for teaching Advanced Bacteriology, and in Chemistry
for Biochemistry. In Introductory Molecular Biology, the students will be taught
the basic techniques in DNA manipulation and will be given a project of cloning
a bacterial gene from a gene bank. In Advanced Bacteriology, the students will
identify specific bacteria species using restriction fragment length
polymorphism and Southern blot hybridization as well as polymerase chain
reaction methods. In Biochemistry students will use the molecular biology
laboratory to obtain hands-on experience with human DNA fingerprinting
(specifically VNTR polymorphism detection by PCR and A~ Insertion polymorphism
detection by PCR), restriction mapping and southern hybridization of B-DNA,
general DNA restriction studies, and to study the effects of methylation on DNA
restriction analysis. This project would not only enhance the learning of the
undergraduates at the university, its will further benefit the community because
our enrollment also include secondary school teacher certificate students who
will bring their k nowledge to the local schools. In addition, many of our
science and technology graduates become high school science instructors. To
increase the impact of the project, the PIs also propose to provide molecular
biology workshops to demonstrate the ease of incorporation of the techniques
into an existing science curriculum. The following two target audiences would be
addressed: (1) area high school teachers and (2) colleagues at Texas A&amp;M
University - Corpus Christi and area 2-year and 4-year institutions who are
currently not using the techniques.