* 9751993
* Chemical Technology Education Collaborative (ChemTEC): Advanced Technology Education Project
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Chris Ennis, Miami University Middletown
* Continuing grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 09/30/2000
* USD 825,720.00

Miami University Middletown's ChemTEC project continues to build on the solidly
established Partnership for the Advancement of Chemical Technology (PACT)
Consortium and the nationally recognized Partners for Terrific Science
industrial/academic partnership. Through collaboration among all stakeholders,
the ChemTEC project has six goals (which parallel the six themes in Gaining the
Competitive Edge): 1) advancing the professional nature of chemical technicians,
chemical technology educators, and students of chemical technology; 2)
strengthening and expanding existing collaborations of stakeholders; 3)
empowering chemical technology educators with content and pedagogical knowledge,
time, resources, and professional support; 4) collaborating with industry to
keep abreast of the latest technological developments to better prepare chemical
technology students to compete in today's economic environment; 5) developing,
publishing, and distributing content-rich, pedagogically sound curricular
materials; and 6) developing curricular materials for the secondary school level
that engage students in laboratory-driven challenges. To accomplish these goals,
ChemTEC project programming focuses on six initiatives; Networking to Build a
Community of Practice, Research Profile Project, Curricular Materials for
Chemical and Related Technology Education, Professional Development
Opportunities for Educators, Student Programming, and Dissemination and
Outreach.