* 9751257
* An Activity-Based Approach for Teaching Critical Scientific Concepts
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Gary Klug, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2000
* USD 35,578.00

The Department of Exercise and Movement Science (EMS) is providing training to
students seeking careers in health-science professions. The EMS program differs
from the traditional approach to such training in that instruction goes beyond
providing a basic science education. EMS students are taught the importance of
physical activity and lifestyle in health promotion and disease prevention, a
philosophy that has been very successful. The department has 220 majors, teaches
all campus courses in human anatomy and physiology, and contributes heavily to
the general science curriculum. The task of meeting the enrollment pressure
created by these responsibilities is challenging. Moreover, the departmental
developmental plan calls for major curricular additions and improvements; steps
that are impossible without additional laboratory resources. This project is
improving the EMS teaching laboratory environment and permitting the development
of a new physiology sequence that uses human exercise models. Computer
instruction in anatomy, redesign of the laboratory experiences in major core
courses, and expansion of on-going collaborations with both area secondary
schools and practicing physicians are becoming more viable. These changes are
allowing EMS to provide excellent training to pre-health science students while
enriching the curriculum so that students can work independently, communicate
effectively, and have a heightened degree of sensitivity toward the value of
physical activity in disease treatment and prevention. *