* 9751433
* Discovering Hydrology: Development of Interdisciplinary Labs for All Academic Level
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2000
* C. Kent Keller, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 04/30/2000
* USD 18,260.00

Hydrologic science is emerging as an exciting and crucial dimension of numerous
academic disciplines. It provides unique opportunities for students to discover
how geoscience, the other natural sciences, mathematics, and engineering are
linked by fundamental principles. However, the lack of availability of standard
hydrologic instrumentation for instruction within traditional geoscience and
civil engineering departments constitutes a very real barrier to widespread
implementation of active laboratories. This project creates hands-on hydrology
laboratories that enable students to discover fundamental physical and chemical
concepts at all levels of geoscience and engineering education. Problem-based
field laboratories can provide a setting for students to integrate quantitative
and qualitative knowledge gained from observations and to work together with
colleagues across disciplines on dynamic aspects of environmental and geologic
systems. The program is designed to build scientific knowledge and confidence in
problem solving over the 4 years of study. The new equipment provides the
critical instrumentation needed for development of these laboratories. More than
1 ,600 students per year are affected by this project. The new equipment
fulfills an important step toward the larger goal of enhancing quantitative and
interdisciplinary environmental education for undergraduates. Products from
research include (1) presentations describing laboratory development and
implementation at geology and civil engineering society national meetings and
(2) a manuscript describing an introductory-level laboratory using an
inexpensive model aquifer. *