* 9751528
* Aquatic Ecosystem Mapping Projects:  An Interdisciplinary   Approach to Teaching GIS, GPS, and Hydroacoustics in        Undergraduate Field Courses in Geography and Aquatic Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Dann Siems, Bemidji State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1999
* USD 20,400.00

An interdisciplinary project serving undergraduates in geography and aquatic
biology is focusing heavily on the quantification of spatial data. Recent
technological advances have transformed spatial data acquisition and analysis
processes. In particular, approaches integrating geographical information
systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS), and hydroacoustic technologies
are rapidly becoming standard methods in geographical and limnological research.
The equipment necessary to develop an integrated system for site analysis and
acquisition of spatial data from aquatic environments is being purchased. The
project is preparing undergraduates for resource management careers, field
research, or graduate school. The project is also enhancing student
understanding of scientific processes, especially among those students who
enroll in the courses as electives. In addition, demonstration projects with
high school biology teachers on local reservations is serving to encourage a
greater interest in science among Native American students. The main point of
the project is an innovative plan combining teams of two or three students from
the Geography's Field Methods course with two or three students from the Aquatic
Biology program's core Limnology course. Members of each of these teams interact
to produce detailed digital maps of aquatic environments. This project allows
students from the two disciplines to interact as complementary "content experts"
in applying new technologies to real-world problems. The new
GIS/GPS/hydroacoustics system is also being used for field instruction in
several undergraduate geography and aquatic biology courses. Equipment is also
available for student use in directed research projects, which are required in
both majors. *