* 9751439
* Use of Inductively-Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission           Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) for Rapid Multi-Element Analysis in  Earth Science, Chemistry, and Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Robert Crackel, Minot State University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 06/30/1999
* USD 46,653.00

This project is developing the capabilities for rapid, accurate multi-element
analysis through acquisition of an inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission
spectrometer (ICP-AES) and related sample preparation equipment. The ICP-AES is
being used to greatly improve laboratory instruction and research opportunities
for students in the Earth Science, Chemistry, and Biology programs. In Earth
Science, ICP-AES is a critical part of reforming mineralogy and petrology, de-
emphasizing traditional hand-sample description and classification, and focusing
on investigations that teach students how to study minerals and rocks in order
to characterize them and interpret their origins. In Geochemistry and Applied
Hydrogeology, students are investigating interactions between solid earth
materials and water in hands-on experiments. Earth Science students are
developing a better understanding of minerals, rocks, and water as chemical
systems and improving their quantitative problem-solving skills. In the
Chemistry program, students are being introduced to ICP-AES in Quantitative
Analysis. ICP-AES is expanding opportunities for water and soil investigations
in Environmental Chemistry. In Instrumental Analysis, students are learning to
optimize the ICP-AES operating conditions and gaining valuable hands-on
experience with an analytical technique that is routinely used in research and
industry. In the Biology program, ICP-AES is making it possible to include
quantitative analysis in macro-and micro-nutrient investigations in Plant
Physiology. In each program, use of ICP-AES is improving the students'
understanding of important concepts by allowing them to use science in
appropriate coursework. Of equal importance, students are becoming more excited
about doing research. *