* 9751393
* Chromatography for Laboratory Instruction and Undergraduate Research
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Neil Danielson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 19,215.00

Perhaps the most common and powerful analytical technique being used for the
analysis of biomolecules is high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). With
the recent integration of biotechnology into numerous aspects of biochemistry
and chemistry, HPLC specifically, reversed-phase liquid chromatography is
playing an increasingly more important role in the purification and
characterization of proteins. Through this project, two HPLC systems are being
purchased to be used primarily in the advanced undergraduate biochemistry and
chemistry laboratories. They are also being made available both for use in the
instrumental analysis class and for undergraduate independent study projects.
The HPLC systems are being used in the biochemistry laboratory in conjunction
with capillary electrophoresis and sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis to analyze cell extracts and purified protein from E. coli lines
that overproduce a recombinant protein. Generally, students in undergraduate
laboratories are provided with a single method to illustrate a particular type
of analysis. Rarely are they asked to directly compare methods to determine the
relative strengths and weaknesses of each method. The new units are being used
in the undergraduate chemistry laboratory to evaluate the effect of varying the
flow-rate and gradient profile on the elution patterns of a series of proteins.
Students are examining from a theoretical and practical point of view, special
considerations and difficulties encountered by the analytical chemist dealing
with biological systems. *