* 9751664
* Cytochrome c: A Biochemistry Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* John Vincent, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Joseph G. Pelliccia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 23,037.00

The Department of Chemistry is developing a new biochemistry laboratory course
and obtaining equipment for this laboratory. The Department has not previously
offered a biochemistry laboratory course, and no comparable course has been
offered elsewhere at the university. Thus, the new course fills a void in the
department's curricula. The course consists of 1 hour of lecture and 6 hours of
laboratory a week for 3 credits. The concept behind this course is to avoid
filling the time with a collection of miscellaneous laboratory experiments.
Instead, the course focuses on the process of biochemical research. The
laboratory deals entirely with cytochrome c, simulating the experience of a
real-world research project. The laboratory is being built around team learning.
Teams of students isolate cytochrome c, characterize it by a variety of
biochemical and bioinorganic methods, determine its function, and modify the
protein to produce a chemical nuclease. This process introduces them to the bio-
organic chemistry of nucleic acids. Students are being well prepared to continue
their undergraduate education in biochemistry by performing undergraduate
research and taking additional biochemistry courses. By exposing the students to
the excitement of research problems, the course is supporting their interests in
pursuing careers in biochemical research. *