* 9751411
* Promoting Student Learning Through Experimental Studies in  Geoscience Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Dexter Perkins, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 05/31/2000
* USD 33,302.00

It has recently become clear that traditional, lecture-based courses do not
serve the needs of most college science students. Learning facts in a lecture
setting is an ineffective way to prepare students. To help solve this problem,
research components are being introduced in many of the geology courses. This
project, centered around the Mineralogy class, is a further move toward a
research-based curriculum. Students enjoy doing experimental studies. They like
working on projects where they become the expert. They become original thinkers
and investigators. They learn how scientists create science, and learn basic
scientific principles through application. The new equipment being acquired
allows students to conduct more sophisticated, semester-long, experimental
investigations. They work in teams, designing their projects, collecting data,
and interpreting results. They present their conclusions in class, in seminars,
and in publications. The equipment can also be used for teaching and for student
research in classes other than Mineralogy, including Structural Geology,
Geomorphology, Petrology, Industrial Minerals, Ore Deposits, Sedimentology and
Stratigraphy, and Coal Geology. The video system, in particular, simplifies
large group instruction and discussion based on the petrographic microscope, and
facilitates presentations of student research results. *