* 9751344
* A Parallel Processing Curriculum Incorporating Laboratory   Activities and Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Janet Hartman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 06/30/1999
* USD 50,703.00

This project develops a cohesive, integrated program in parallel processing for
Computer Science majors that incorporates laboratory activities and
undepgraduate research projects in appropriate courses. An SGI Onyx2 parallel
computer, with four processors, is being used to introduce a real environment
early in the Computer Science curriculum and in subsequent required and elective
courses, develop a set of laboratory activities in parallel processing to
accompany topics in computer science, support undergraduate research projects,
and eliminate problems related to remote computer access. Specifically, the
computer enables faculty to (1) teach performance analysis more effectively
using experimentation and statistical methods, (2) assign projects that have
been precluded by equipment limitations, (3) support long term honors and
research projects, (4) give students a larger number of more appropriate
laboratory experiences with a real computer, (5) develop a model for a parallel
processing curriculum that integrates the new computer into activities of
appropriate courses and undergraduate research projects, and (6) support
collaborative projects with students and faculty outside the department.
Evaluation of the project includes an instructor questionnaire to ascertain the
effectiveness of laboratory activities and use of the computer in meeting course
objectives. Students are asked to evaluate the laboratory activities and the
computer in carrying out course requirements and undergraduate research. *