* 9751087
* A Hybrid Classical/Digital Control Systems Course with      Laboratory Experiences
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Hakan Gurocak, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 11,700.00

Today's trend is toward a high level of manufacturing automation and design of
smart products. All of these products or their manufacturing processes contain
control systems. As indicated in a recent survey, both analog and digital
control modes are used by the industry to implement controllers. Therefore, a
good control systems education should contain courses both in digital and analog
control theory supported by hands-on experiments. The previous mechanical
engineering program has offered only an analog controls course with no
laboratory. Because of the maximum credit limitations, a digital controls course
cannot be added to the curriculum. To enhance students' learning, this project
provides a set of laboratory experiments supplementing a hybrid analog/digital
undergraduate control systems course is proposed. This approach enables the
students to learn the most fundamental theory of both analog and digital control
systems, as well as their actual physical implementation in a single course.
Seven new experiments are introduced. The objectives are to provide a better
understanding of the concepts of abstract control systems theory, highlight the
differences and similarities between the digital and analog control modes, and
teach the hardware/software implementation of the mathematical controller
designs for both control modes. The equipment for the new laboratory includes
servo fundamentals training units, function generators, oscilloscopes, and
software for simulation, design and real-time control. All mechanical
engineering students benefit from this project. Some of the experiments can also
be used in motivational presentations to K 12 students. *