* 9751722
* Eletromagnetic Compatibility Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Zorica Pantic-Tanner, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan P. Gosink
* 06/30/1999
* USD 59,983.00

The goal of this project is to enhance the electromagnetics and communications
(EMC) curriculum. This goal is accomplished by incorporating electromagnetic
compatibility concepts and measurement principles more fully into the
undergraduate curriculum; providing students with real-world practical
experience in using state-of-the-art equipment; and providing students with the
opportunity to carry out both individual and group projects that include design,
implementation, simulation, and EMC testing. The project improves three existing
courses (Introduction to Engineering Electromagnetics, Electromagnetic Waves,
and Communication Systems) by incorporating EMC-related experiments. It also
develops a new advanced Electromagnetic Compatibility course. In the laboratory
portion of the course, students conduct the following experiments and
measurements: signal spectra; time- and frequency-domain measurements; surface
and common-mode currents; radiated and conducted emissions; and immunity
testing. An integral part of the course is a design project. Students have the
opportunity to design, simulate, test for EMC compliance, and redesign their
devices, if necessary. To offer hands-on experience to the 80 to 90 students per
year who enroll in these courses, the project requests a G-TEM cell, a spectrum
analyzer, a signal generator, a power amplifier, a line impedance stabilization
network, and an EM modeling software package. Results of this project can be
disseminated through the publication of a laboratory manual, presentation at EMC
symposiums, and technical papers in IEEE Transaction in Education and
Transactions of American Society of Engineering Education. *