* 9752226
* Interactive Fractals and Chaos Unit for Undergraduate       Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Heinz-Otto Peitgen, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2000
* USD 99,925.00

An integrated mathematics and science course and accompanying pilot
technological enhancements are being developed that use fractals and chaos to
build a conceptual understanding of scientific principles in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, and biology for undergraduate students training to be pre-
college teachers. The course uses fractals and chaos to develop concepts in
science. Units that are most successful in the course, will be implemented in
technological form that can be disseminated and used in similar integrated
courses, or as separate units in other introductory college level science and
mathematics courses. The technological enhancements consist of: 1) interactive
exercises based on spreadsheets, 2) Java applets, and 3) hypertext curricula and
evaluation material. The spreadsheet and Java exercises emphasize active
learning. The students vary the parameters of the systems to discover how their
properties depend on the parameters. The use of spreadsheets give students real-
world technological skills by providing experience in a media used throughout
the academic and business worlds. The hypertext curricula material provides
reference information on the content area, support the interactive spreadsheets
and Java applets, and include performance based assessment of these pilot
technological enhancements. Specific examples of the content areas: 1) SYMMETRY:
the mathematical properties of translational, rotational, and self-similarity
symmetries are used to provide a basis for understanding the concept of
invariants, that is, the consistency of physical properties under
transformations in the conservation of energy, momentum, and electromagnetism.
2) PATTERN FORMATION PROCESSES: the mechanisms of processes that generate tree
structures are used to understand the vascular and pulmonary branching patterns
in biological systems; and the spatial patterns generated by diffusion in
chemical systems and their resultant time dependencies. 3) PREDICTABILITY: the
mathematical prope rties of nonlinear, chaotic systems, such as sensitivity to
initial conditions, bifurcations, and attractors in phase space are used to
develop the concepts of stability and instability in physical systems such as
fluid flow, in chemical systems systems such as biochemical reactions, and in
biological systems such as predatory-prey relationships. A central goal of this
project is to develop course curricula and technological enhancements that reach
students who have math/science anxiety. This is being accomplished by
integrating the math and science, using specific applications as examples,
covering few topics in depth rather than many topics superficially, and by
fostering feedback and active participation by the students in the learning and
evaluation processes. This project builds on the previous K-12 project,
Mathematics and Science Teacher Enhancement through Chaos and Fractals
(ESI-95550052), by transforming the previously developed materials into new
forms, technological enhancements in spreadsheet programs and hypertext
curricula, and orienting them towards a different audience of college
undergraduates training to be teachers. It will uses the knowledge and skills
developed by the previously trained lead teachers to develop, use, and evaluate
the effectiveness of the technological enhancements.