* 9752504
* CCD:  Development of an Interdisciplinary Biocomputing      Course at the Introductory Level
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Xiaorong Zhang, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/2000
* USD 49,904.00

Biocomputing is a newly emerging interdisciplinary field which uses
computational methods to analyze the fast-growing biological data. As biological
information continues to increase, there is certainly an increasing demand for
biocomputing experts by industry and academia at all levels, from senior
scientists with a Ph. D. degree to laboratory scientists with MS or B.S.
degrees. Currently, however, there are too few scientists who possess such
cross-disciplinary skills in both biology and computer science to meet such
demand. Therefore, this project is proposed to address this urgent problem. The
overall goal of this project is to introduce biocomputing into the first two
years of the undergraduate curriculum and to prepare undergraduate students for
pursuing biocomputing-related careers. To help accomplish this goal, a new
course entitled Introduction to Biocomputing is being developed. The course
format consists of core lectures, laboratory practices, group discussion, and a
course project. These components of the new course are carefully designed to
promote student academic interest and success in the field of biocomputing. A
textbook and laboratory manual needed for the course, are also being prepared.
The effort is being evaluated by an independent evaluator. To aid dissemination,
a virtual on-line course is being designed and provided on the World Wide Web.