* 9752402
* A New General-Education Biology Course: An Integrated       Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Margaret Ewing, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

This introductory biology course is designed to serve both majors and non-
majors, with particular attention to those students preparing to be teachers.
Students are involved in collaborative and investigative work in both lecture
and laboratory. Students are introduced to concepts in context through seven to
fifteen scenarios based on popular issues or current research conducted at OSU.
In lecture, students work collaboratively, making observations, formulating
hypotheses, answering questions, and solving problems stemming from the
scenarios. An extensive set of multimedia materials and demonstrations present
and define the scenarios for the students. Newly developed laboratories help
students solve or explain the scenarios presented in lecture. Students conduct
pre-laboratory activities in a Learning Resources Center and on the WWW allowing
the full use of laboratory time for designing and conducting experiments.
Computers are used to collect and analyze data and produce team reports in each
laboratory. Approximately 900 students will be affected each year, including
150-200 lower division K-12 education majors and a dozen upper-division science-
education majors acting as group facilitators. The impact of the course is being
examined via the use of test scores, attitude surveys, direct observation of
students, and interviews with students and faculty. Data is collected at the
beginning, during, and at the end of each semester and about students taking
subsequent courses.