* 9752299
* An Undergraduate Curriculum for Cognitive and Information   Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Robert Goldstone, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/2002
* USD 249,996.00

The Cognitive and Information Sciences (CIS) program offers a model
undergraduate curriculum designed to expose students to the study of intelligent
systems. It is intended as a model for the development of similar programs at
other institutions as they begin to move into this emerging field. The core of
the newly proposed major concerns formal theories of mind and information that
integrate computer science, psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, and
mathematics. The curriculum gives students training in the basic skills of this
new field (writing, mathematics, experimentation, and computer programming), but
also fosters the development of expertise in particular sub-fields such as human
cognition, learning and instruction, logic, and computation. Newly designed
courses will expose students to both basic scientific theories and to
applications of these theories to education, system design, and database
retrieval. The program will be assessed internally by pre/post exams within
courses and exit interviews upon graduation, and externally by quarterly site
visits by expert consultants and a comprehensive third-year review by
consultants from Indiana University's School of Education. The tangible products
of this proposal will include general information on the CIS degree and its
requirements and materials for specific courses in the form of syllabi, lecture
notes, slides, bibliographies, assignments, and exams. Most important will be
the course software and laboratory software developed for all four of the core
CIS courses, and several others; this courseware will emphasize interactive,
hands on learning through doing, and will be in a form easily usable by other
programs that are beginning or being planned in this area. These products will
be disseminated through our existing technical report series and newsletter,
through electronic media, web sites, and contacts at other universities, and
will be provided upon request of other institutions starting such programs.