* 9752409
* "Experimental and Investigative Laboratory Courses in       Evolutionary Biology"
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1998,09/29/1999
* Alexander Motten, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gordon E. Uno
* 09/29/1999
* USD 120,000.00

Over the past twenty years, evolutionary biology has developed in to a vibrant,
investigative science with a potent relevance to societal issues such as origins
of infectious disease and biotechnology. The emerging role of evolutionary
biology as a scientific discipline is in stark contrast to the continuing
efforts to limit teaching evolution in high-schools, or to question evolutionary
ideas as a valid province of science. While the teaching of evolutionary biology
at both high school and college levels is now struggling to emerge from such
censoring and neglect, evolution is still largely taught as a theoretical,
dialectical discipline that often seems only to impact on theoretical ideas and
broad conceptual landscapes. Rarely is it taught as an experimental, analytical
science of applied relevance on a par with, say, physiology or molecular
biology. We propose to rectify this situation in two ways. First, we will
develop an experimental investigative laboratory in evolutionary biology that
can serve as a "flagship" for illustrating how evolution can be taught at the
college level as an experimental and investigative science that is societally
relevant. We also illustrate how such an investigative course could be run with
minimal resources and using a wide range of possible materials. Second,
recognizing that curricula and colleges will vary in terms of their ability or
desire to commit to such a focused laboratory course, we will also stimulate the
teaching evolution as a hands-on science by additionally developing a web-site
for distribution via the internet of laboratory exercises in evolutionary
biology. Currently, such a resource is not available, and we only know of one
manual on teaching evolution as a laboratory course. We will therefore gather,
collate, and distribute materials that can be used to enrich discussion sections
and laboratory classes.