* 9752603
* Virtual Courseware for Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Gary Novak, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 225,000.00

The goal of this project is to increase the opportunities for the inquiry-based
learning of science at the national level. This proposal is a plan for the
development of a library of "virtual courseware"--interactive web-based software
that engages students in active learning of important scientific concepts. The
virtual courseware library will be designed and implemented by a group of 13
faculty from the California State University system and California Community
Colleges. Fifteen virtual courseware applications will be developed: six for
biology and three each for chemistry, earth science and physics/astronomy. Each
"virtual application" will: (I) be Webbased and easily accessible, (2) be
appropriate for introductory science courses, (3) reinforce scientific
methodology, (4) be interactive, intuitive, and inquiry-based, (5) be vertically
scalable so that it can be used by college majors and nonmajors, and (6) be
modular and self-contained. Two prototypes, Virtual FlyLab and Virtual
Earthquake, developed by the principle investigators are already be used by
thousands of students at over 200 of the nation's colleges and universities. The
California State University system recognizes the potential of the virtual
courseware paradigm and has committed to matching funds to this project. Project
evaluation will be conducted by the Center for Usability in Design and
Assessment at California State University, Long Beach. A capstone conference
will be organized to encourage the use of the virtual courseware library in the
natural science curriculum. Because of the web-based nature of the project,
dissemination will be widespread, with the potential to affect many thousands of
students. The products of this project will make science education more
accessible, promote learning, and provide the possibility for reducing the costs
of education. Those three features of virtual courseware are also objectives of
the nation's colleges and universities and the National Science Foundation .