* 9752947
* POWRE:  The Contribution of Parental Effects to Life History Evolution in Campanula americana
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9752947 Galloway An individual's phenotype may be influenced by its parents'
genes and environment, in addition to its own. In the herbaceous plant Campanula
americana, timing of germination determines whether an individual will be an
annual or a biennial. The proposed research will evaluate the potential for
parental effects, both genetic and environmental, to influence germination time
and hence life history variation in this species. In this POWRE proposal, Laura
Galloway will evaluate the potential for parental environments to influence
patterns of seed germination by growing seeds produced under a range of maternal
and paternal environments (light and nutrient) under both controlled and natural
conditions. She will also determine the potential for specific maternal
characters to influence germination patterns. In particular, maternal flowering
time is likely to influence fruiting phenology, and that in turn may affect
patterns of offspring germination. And, she will measure the association between
germination time and fitness in a natural population to evaluate the importance
of parental effects for individual success. This work will help determine
whether it is necessary to follow populations for more than one generation to
predict patterns of response to selection. This POWRE award permits Dr. Galloway
to expand her research program by exploring new questions (evolutionary
consequences of maternal effects) in a new model system (Campanula americana).
It will help establish her in a tenure-track position, in a discipline of field-
oriented population biological research previously represented only by men at
her institution.