* 9752693
* Hands-on Laboratory Projects for Non-Engineers: Learning    Scientific Principles in the Context of Everyday Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1998,12/31/2000
* John Krupczak, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Robert K. Boggess
* 12/31/2000
* USD 68,210.00

This project develops, evaluates, and disseminates, hands-on laboratory
exercises specifically designed for undergraduates who are not majoring in SMET
disciplines. A portion of the project focuses on teacher prepartation with a
significant number of the target audience being future K-12 teachers. Exercises
explore both the technological and the scientific aspects of familiar
technological devices and demonstrate how technology incorporates a scientific
understanding of nature. Familiar technological devices such as the automobile,
the radio, and the telephone are used to engage the interest of students in
learning about technology and science. All exercises are designed to result in
tangible evidence of accomplishment on the part of the student such as
construction of a simple working radio. Approximately half of the projects are
made from inexpensive and simple materials so that each student can take home
the working device. Other exercises stress an uncommonly high degree of contact
with the workings of technology such as construction of an uncommonly high
degree of contact with the workings of technology such as construction of a
diode laser light source or construction of a 4-bit binary adder from basic
logic circuits. Exercises are optimized for non-engineering and non-science
students with little prior technical background. All laboratories are
inexpensive, do not require any specialized equipment or facilities, and are
capable of being modified to suit different institutional circumstances. A
semester-long series of approximately twelve exercises are developed within this
project. Both a student and instructor's laboratory manual are included. The
proposed work is based on the "Science and Technology of Everyday Life," taught
a Hope College since 1995. Dissemination includes approaching a commercial
publisher for possible publication.