* 9752803
* Teaching Mathematics, Science and Technology on the         Internet: Strategies, Resources and Guidance Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Marion Ben-Jacob, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2000
* USD 92,361.00

There is evidence that the context for learning is undergoing a metamorphosis,
and that distance learning is becoming a viable option for furthering one's
higher education. Advances in technology, academic research, pedagogical
innovation, the increase in the chronological age, maturity level and personal
commitments of the average college student, and geography and demography have
led to a substantial alteration in the structure of the learning environment.
The purpose of this workshop is to aid the participants and their institutions
to deliver better online courses from the points of view of the institutions,
the professors, and the students. By familiarizing the faculty primarily from
smaller institutions who might not have the opportunity to readily share
research about the issues and concerns of distance learning with others, we will
also be providing a network for future research for our participants. The
workshop will include the following with respect to online education:
discussions and projects of how to teach mathematics and science courses, and of
associated generic issues, and a substantial component of lab time, both guided
and open. Mercy's successful online educational system, MerLIN, will be used as
a working example throughout the duration of the project. Our follow-through
activities will include a reconnoitering of the participants to share results of
how they integrated the information provided into their courses, a dissemination
package consisting of a sixty-minute edited video tape of the workshop, two
study papers, and information of where to find resources on the Internet with
regard to the virtual university. In addition we will establish a repository of
information regarding the teaching of online courses that will be available on
the Internet. The second year of this workshop series will be taught using
distance learning giving participants the added advantage of experiencing this
instructional mode from the student's perspective.