* 9752384
* The Creation of Networked Interactive Tools for Teaching    Astronomy and Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1998,09/30/2002
* Gregory Bothun, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2002
* USD 234,030.00

The project, operated as a collaborative grant between the University of Oregon
and the University of Arizona, is developing interactive experiments and
delivering them over the Internet. Most of these experiments are executed using
the JAVA programming language extension to HTML document structure. Others use
the VRML extension to HTML, which allows 3D representations of complex spatial
relationships. These tools will be integrated into a fully-featured World Wide
Web site which will act as a virtual classroom for about 5400 students per year
at the University of Oregon and the University of Arizona. The Web site will
have an electronic textbook, research databases, supercomputer simulations, and
animations. There is a critical need to engage introductory science students in
an experimentation mode that will lead to student-driven inquiry. This project
aims (1) to allow students to use active experimentation to learn abstract
topics, (2) to incorporate scientifically realistic modes of inquiry into
instructional technology, (3) to build a library of experiments that is
adaptable to any curriculum, and (4) to construct a Web site that can be
customized for use by any instructor. Instructional technology can be a very
cost-effective means of achieving our main pedagogical goal: teaching science as
a discovery process that relies heavily on experimental results, not memorized
facts and figures. The project also has distance education dimensions, involves
the cooperation of institutions for curriculum development, and uses emerging
technologies to engage the students in this new learning mode. The potential
audience for these tools extends to the 500,000 physics and astronomy students
at two and four year colleges nationwide and more students at the high school
level. The work builds on an already highly successful implementation of
hypertext based course material, in which professional data, scientific
animation, and links to other resources are all organized into a network
textbook that beco mes the lecture and learning tool that students see in class
and access out of class. Building more interactivity into this curriculum is
both the next logical and most critical step.