* 9752755
* Institute in the History of Mathematics and its Use in      Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Victor Katz, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2001
* USD 149,992.00

In the mathematics reform of the past decade, there has been growing recognition
that the history of mathematics should be an integral part of the teaching and
learning of mathematics at all levels. Mathematicians who teach the history of
mathematics and who use this history to improve their teaching are in need of
more knowledge and resources to prepare to teach their students. The
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) will continue the successful Institute
in the History of Mathematics and its Use in Teaching (IHMT) the goal of which
is to increase the presence of history in the undergraduate mathematics
curriculum. At the same time the IHMT will target teacher preparation programs
developing materials for use in K-12 classrooms and materials for use in teacher
preparation programs. Faculty involved in teacher preparation will be important
participants in the IHMT. Through an ongoing year-round program of activities
which include intensive two-week programs in one summer with a follow-up week in
the successive summer for mathematics faculty new to the use of history; a two-
week program each summer for faculty with experience in the use of history; a
vigorous email discussion group together with the 80 participants in the
original institute; supervised research by IHMT alumni; new participants will be
prepared to teach courses in the history of mathematics and to use history to
improve their teaching of standard undergraduate mathematics courses, especially
teacher preparation courses; experienced faculty will publish materials to
assist all faculty in introducing history. Fifteen historians of mathematics,
all of whom are known to be excellent teachers, will lead explorations of the
history of mathematics from antiquity through the twentieth-century, stressing
applications and links between different areas of mathematics. Specific
techniques for incorporating history into undergraduate mathematics courses will
be a central theme. Through presentations at national and regional ma thematics
meetings, publications, and electronic communications, the information and
techniques of IHMT will be disseminated nationally making changes in the
teaching of mathematics.