* 9752408
* Curriculum Resources in Interactive Multimedia (CRIM)
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Edward Fox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 87,000.00

Curriculum resources in interactive multimedia (CRIM) will be developed to help
meet the chronic shortage for trained workers in the areas of interactive
multimedia applications, education, interfaces, production, programming,
publishing, systems, technologies, and tools. Curriculum guidelines and
courseware will be made available through a digital library accessible through
the WWW, linking back to resources developed at sites around the nation that
will be a part of the CRIM Consortium. With support by ACM (especially SIG
Multimedia), IEEE CS (especially its TC on Multimedia), and AACE (especially
through ED-MEDIA), CRIM curriculum guidelines will be published to facilitate
the spread of new multimedia specializations, courses, and training programs, as
well as small "knowledge modules" (that will fit into existing courses, e.g.,
graphics, HCI, operating systems, networking). This project also will contribute
a new methodology for preparing curricular resources in high technology fields.
First, it will draw upon prior curriculum and courseware developed at Virginia
Tech (VT) and The George Washington University (GW) that will serve as a
strawman for future work. Second, it will couple an in-person decision support
room workshop with other interested parties connected through satellite and
networked videoconferencing, so a first (semester long) round of collaborative
work can proceed along the lines of agreed upon curriculum development
directions. Third, during that round, not only will VT and GW materials be re-
worked, but small travel awards to other consortium members also will lead to
broader preparation of knowledge modules that can be easily disseminated and re-
used. Efforts will be monitored by the project coordination team, to ensure
progress in accord with project guidelines. Server logs will provide
quantitative data on adoption and use that will supplement qualitative
evaluation through surveys and focus groups. Fourth, during the next academic
term (semester), completed modules will be tried at sites other than where
development took place, and carefully evaluated, at the same time as other new
modules are built. Finally, this three-step pipeline of curriculum resource
development, deployment, and evaluation will be institutionalized through the
CRIM Consortium and its support by professional societies, so that periodic
discussions, panels and workshops at multimedia conferences can further improve
CRIM materials.