* 9752778
* Using Remote Sensing, Image Processing and Geographic       Information Systems in Faculty Enhancment and Curriculum    Development
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Roxanne Mendrinos, Foothill College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2000
* USD 110,000.00

With the Community Colleges for Innovative Technology Transfer, Inc. (CCITT),
Foothill College is planning and holding eight regional summer workshops during
two consecutive years for faculty from community colleges and senior
institutions. The workshops are providing faculty with training in four
technologies: remote sensing/image processing (RS/IP) and geographic information
systems/geographic positioning systems (GIS/GPS). The project is serving
approximately 180 individual faculty over the course of the project. The
project's objectives are as follows: To train undergraduate faculty in the use
of RS/IP and GIS/GPS using curriculum modules developed by CCITT. To develop
additional curriculum modules integrating the four technologies into each
participant's instructional area. To instruct faculty in the use of the Internet
and its resources in developing curriculum using the four technologies. To
develop an awareness of leading edge ideas and applications that are reshaping
the disciplines through these technologies. To adapt and disseminate the
curriculum modules developed by the undergraduate faculty participants on the
national, regional and local level. To increase the level of communication and
cooperation among participants while developing curricula at their home
institutions.