* 9752978
* POWRE:  A Genetic Approach to Structure and Function        Analysis of a New Class of Molecular Chaperones
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Elizabeth Vierling, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 4,900.00

9752978 Vierling This is a POWRE Research Enhancement Award. The immediate goal
of this project is to establish a genetic approach, using the cyanobacterium
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, for structure and function analysis of a new class
of molecular chaperone, the small heat shock proteins (sHSPs). These ubiquitous
stress proteins, found in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, accumulate during
heat stress in virtually all organisms, and appear to also have a role in
certain developmental and growth stage transitions in many organisms. While a
working model for the sHSPs exists, there are essentially no data on the
mechanistic details of sHSP action, and very little direct in vivo data to
support the model. Recently, Dr. H. Fukuzawa at Kyoto University discovered that
deletion of the single sHSP gene in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis, HSP16.6,
leads to inability to develop thermotolerance but does not affect normal cell
growth. This is the first demonstration that a prokaryotic sHSP is required for
high temperature tolerance, and is the first phenotype associated with an sHSP
mutant in any organism other than the fungus Neurospora. Since Synechocystis can
be easily manipulated genetically, this discovery affords an excellent
opportunity for detailed analysis of sHSP structure and function. Synechocystis
carries the further advantage that its complete genome has been sequenced. The
project will be carried out in collaboration with H. Fukuzawa at Kyoto
University in Japan. This award provides support toward the acquisition of
equipment necessary for the culture of the cyanobacteria in Dr. Vierling's
laboratory. The acquisition of this equipment is critical to the initiation of
this project. ***