* 9752662
* Modularizing the Core Curriculum of an Applied EnvironmentalScience Program to Enhance Accessibility and Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* John Ritter, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 189,758.00

Our Project addresses the challenges of transfer student recruitment and
retention in the Applied Environmental Sciences program at Oregon Institute of
Technology through developing a more flexible, modularized core curriculum. The
enhanced curriculum will continue to emphasize an integrated, interdisciplinary
approach to environmental science but will also allow students to develop "hands
on" technical skills at their own pace. The Project will uncouple the technical
skill-building components from five core courses to create seven new 1-credit
courses which will be offered several times during the year. The new courses
will teach skills in basic computer applications, spreadsheets, ArcView GIS
(Geographic Information Systems), GPS (Global Positioning System), streamwater
chemistry, riparian assessment and field methods, and simulation modeling using
STELLA software. Three benefits will result from this Project: we will be able
to enhance the learning environment for our students by transforming our
traditional computer labs into interactive multimedia tutorial modules;
secondly, by offering the skill-building modules more frequently than is now
possible, transfer students will be able to catch up on missing skills and
progress more quickly into upper division courses in the Applied Environmental
Sciences program; and, finally, the proposed modules will be able to be exported
to two-year colleges, thus allowing students to acquire technical skills earlier
in their education. Through these outcomes, this Project is expected to improve
recruitment and retention of students into the field of environmental science
where demand for trained professionals will continue to grow into the
foreseeable future.