* 9752243
* World Wide Web-Based Modules for Introduction of Molecular  Simulation into the Chemical Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1998,10/31/2002
* David Kofke, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 10/31/2002
* USD 332,880.00

Design requirements for high-value products and processes by chemical engineers
have shifted recently from the large-scale requirements of traditional
industries to a much finer scale characteristic of today's high-tech
commodities. The current chemical engineering curriculum is not adequately
preparing students to face the emerging challenges accompanying this shift in
scale. There is currently little linkage in the chemical engineering curriculum
between the molecular concepts taught in lower division chemistry courses and
the macroscopic processes taught in the upper-division engineering curriculum.
Introduction of important molecular simulation concepts into the undergraduate
curriculum is important to meet design demands of emerging technologies, but it
is hampered by an already full curriculum and a lack of teaching resources and
undergraduate faculty familiar with molecular concepts. As a major step toward
remedying these curriculum deficiencies and incongruities, we propose the
development of 24 World-Wide-Web modules that would facilitate introduction of
molecular simulation into the chemical engineering undergraduate curriculum.
These teaching modules will be integrated directly into the chemical engineering
core undergraduate courses, supplying for the instructor and the student the
appropriate linkage material between macroscopic concepts and the molecular
simulations. Because the modules are web-based, they can be easily distributed,
can provide direct links to other related materials and topics, and can be
readily used by students and faculty alike. They will provide visual simulations
illustrating key concepts in the core undergraduate courses and they will be
self-contained with instructor materials, fundamental instruction, a tutorial,
computer simulations, student problems, and assessment materials. Because of
their capability for visual and exploratory learning, the modules are designed
to provide learning experiences for students with a variety of learning styles
Harb et al. 1993 . This project is a multi-institutional endeavor involving
eleven chemical engineering faculty from nine different institutions. The goals
of the project are endorsed and support by CACHE corporation, a non-profit
organization that promotes cooperation among universities, industry, and
government to develop and distribute computer-related educational materials for
the chemical engineering profession.