* 9752612
* Science Writing and Revision Interactive Technology         Environment (Science WRITE)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Marie Boyko, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2002
* USD 250,000.00

Science WRITE, a computer-supported learning environment, will offer an
innovative solution to the challenging problem of helping undergraduate science
students to write well, by directly facilitating the complex cognitive processes
that are critical for success. The system's educational foundation is a
technique called procedural facilitation, which fosters independence in high-
level thinking as students develop from novice to expert writers. We will
deliver Science WRITE through World Wide Web technology because it is uniquely
suited for accomplishing these learning goals. We will design, write, program,
test, refine, and disseminate 10 interactive modules containing an array of
learning activities that will help students develop their own independent
processes for planning and revising scientific documents. We will integrate
these modules with each other, with a document annotation system that we
recently developed, with collaborative and knowledge-construction tools, and
with links to other Web resources for disciplinary and discourse knowledge. The
system will be designed for use by the nation's undergraduate students who have
scientific writing projects in kinesiology. Science WRITE will be the first
comprehensive resource (in print or on line) that is grounded in cognitive
research and that supports undergraduate science students through all the
processes involved in planning and revising papers. In addition, the system will
be designed as a research laboratory in which we can continue to investigate and
refine strategies for helping students learn to write in scientific disciplines.
Science WRITE will demonstrate the powerful potential of this educational
approach to improve the quality of undergraduate writing and thinking.