* 9752215
* A Potential Based Electromagnetics Course
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Richard Coren, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 12/31/2000
* USD 139,840.00

The undergraduate Electromagnetism (EM) course has recently been under attack
because 1) there is great curricular pressure to reduce its credit hours make
room for new subject areas that may be more useful to the students, this despite
the intellectual value of EM and its fundamental role in technology; 2) students
complain that EM is perhaps the most complex and difficult course in the
engineering program, frequently being more than they can handle; 3) current
usage involves only a small subset of the several field quantities that are
taught, raising questions about our understanding and presentation. These
problems had no resolution until 1992, when a new theoretical basis was advanced
that leads to the computational technique, that involves simplified pedagogy,
and that enriches the classical theory. It involves the reinterpretation of EM
relations and its novelty is sufficient that its use requires preparation of
notes or a textbook for classroom presentation. Strangely this analysis was that
proposed by J. C. Maxwell but, as historians of science have noted, his work was
transformed through the happenstance of history. Prof. R.L. Coren, with Prof.
C.J. Carpenter, the rediscoverer of this theory, has participated in its
development. Primarily he is preparing the necessary class notes. This proposal
is to expedite this work, to assist in the new course presentations and their
evaluation, and to promote dissemination of the pedagogic method and results.