* 9752349
* Using Technology to Transform Instruction and Improve       Learning in Introductory Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2001
* Ruth Maki, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2001
* USD 349,065.00

The lecture-test method of teaching introductory college courses focuses on the
teacher rather than the learner, encourages passive rather than active learning,
promotes individual more than cooperative learning, and targets short-term
retention at the expense of long-term learning. An alternative course format for
Introduction to Psychology emphasizes active learning using computer-based
laboratories and collaborative groups. The world-wide web is used to deploy
course materials, laboratory experiences, information retrieval and evaluation
exercises, and practice quizzes "any time, anywhere." Nearly 200 students have
been taught during two offerings of this course. Evaluations of student
satisfaction and learning showed that students appreciated the flexibility of
the on-line format, and that they learned as much as students taught in the
traditional lecture-test format. The evaluations also revealed those components
of the course that need improvement. The proposed project aims to improve the
quality of the collaborative group interactions, to increase the amount of
student learning through increased opportunities for active learning enabled by
technology, to identify those students for whom an on-line course is most
appropriate, to conduct a thorough evaluation of the on-line course format to
determine how it can be used to improve both immediate and long-term learning of
content, and to disseminate the findings so that the course may serve as a
national model for the social and behavioral sciences. Additional laboratory
experiences will be created for delivery on the web, and course materials will
be enhanced during Year 01. During the next four semesters, course components
will be developed and evaluated, always comparing the on-line course to
concurrent versions of conventional lecture courses. The project will also
develop four Web based courses in the College of Education using the same set of
principles and tools to allow elementary education majors to take initial
courses in ma thematics teaching and science teaching in this format. It is
hypothesized that this will further sensitize future teachers to the importance
of teaching approaches and to learning how to assess what is working and not
working with their students. Various group activities and different advanced
organizers will be evaluated. Learning styles and personality traits will be
assessed in order to determine the characteristics of those students who benefit
most from the on-line course format.