* 9752410
* CCD: Peer Learning Resource Materials for Introductory      Geoscience Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Dorothy Merritts, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 07/31/1999
* USD 98,588.00

The National Research Council advocates active science learning, stating that
"Learning science is something students do, not something that is done to
them.... Emphasizing active science learning means shifting emphasis away from
teachers presenting information...." The goal of this proposal is to publish a
guidebook and video for teachers who wish to implement innovative teaching
methods to make science learning an active process in introductory geoscience,
Earth systems, and geology courses. The teacher's guide and video will be based
on the method of peer learning developed for introductory physics by Dr. Eric
Mazur at Harvard (Mazur, 1997). In essence, the teacher presents a small amount
of information, then poses a challenging conceptual question for the students to
answer. Students try to convince their peers that their own answers are correct,
hence the phrase peer learning. In the process, students construct explanations
and communicate their ideas to others, making the classroom science experience
an active one, yet providing a sense of routine and structure that is meaningful
and fun for students. Teachers will be able to draw upon the extensive
collection of class-tested, ready-to-use peer learning materials compiled in the
teacher's guide. The video, produced with AudioVisual Instructional Services at
Franklin and Marshall College, will consist of visual examples of how one can
enact this peer learning approach. Because many of the concepts taught in the
geosciences are so visually accessible, peer learning will is combined with in-
class demonstrations. These demonstrations also will be shown in the video.