* 9752186
* Engineering and Technology Literacy for High School Science and Math Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2002
* Mohammed Fadali, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 01/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

In today's world of global economic competition, the US is trying to maintain
its competitive edge among industrial nations by training a sufficient number of
engineers. However, the number of trained individuals graduating from US
colleges does not meet our current and projected needs. In addition, the number
of females and minority graduates with engineering degrees is unacceptably low
and the attrition rate in engineering programs is unacceptably high. The causes
include (i) the inadequate preparation of our high school graduates, (ii)
unfavorable attitudes toward engineering and other science based careers, and
(iii) the absence of continuity in the transition from high school to college.
Some additional preparation for science and math teachers as well as high school
courses that are more friendly to engineering and technology would address the
above perceived causes. To this end, this project will develop a new three
credit hour class to address these problems. This class will be a capstone
course that introduces fourth year pre-service teachers in mathematics and
science education to engineering problem solving through specific practical
applications. The courses will include projects to be completed by teams of
students and lectures by the instructors and guest lecturers. The course will
cover activities performed by practicing engineers and the related ethical,
social and environmental issues within the rubric of Science, Technology and
Society (STS). It will also emphasize science literacy and inquiry learning as
suggested by the new National Science Education Standards. The proposed course
will include an introduction to the practice of engineering rather than its
theory. The course will set up problems, present simplified solutions and avoid
complex theoretical developments. In addition, the business aspects of
engineering, which are a prerequisite for a successful engineering career, will
be introduced. This business aspect fits within the suggested school to work
programs that are becoming a part of Nevada pre-university education. A business
plan or cost analysis will be completed for each project undertaken by the
students.