* 9752771
* PKAL Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshops
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,07/31/2001
* Jeanne Narum, Independent Colleges Office
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2001
* USD 831,009.00

Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) is continuing its series of faculty enhancement
workshops on the reform of science, mathematics, engineering and technology
undergraduate education. During 1998-2000, there will be 26 workshops, one of
which will be a national colloquium. The workshops will provide faculty and
administrators with: 1) promising new ideas about effective pedagogies and
teaching technologies; 2) hands-on experiences with reforms whose success has
been demonstrated; 3) materials that can be adapted to their own settings; 4)
insights into the process of developing, implementing and evaluating reforms; 5)
connections to others who share their commitment to strengthening education for
undergraduates studying science, mathematics, engineering and technology. A.
Goals. The goals of the workshops are consistent with PKAL's continuing mission
-- to equip teams for leadership reform at the local level and assist their
efforts; to build public support for the work of strengthening undergraduate
programs, based on a more educated understanding of how such programs serve the
national interest; and to develop partnerships of institutions working together
to achieve those goals. B. Target Audiences. The workshops are for undergraduate
SME&T faculty members and their administrators at colleges and universities
already participating in PKAL, to consolidate and broaden efforts underway so
that successes confined to one department become system-wide. They will also be
for two-year colleges and research universities who have yet to participate in
the workshops but where interest in reform is growing. C. Project Leaders and
Workshop Topics. The topics for the 1998-2000 series are identified by faculty,
reflective practitioners of what works who serve on the PKAL Workshop Task
Forces and Leadership committees. Representing all types of institutions, they
know first-hand the problems of undergraduate SME&T education, how different
solutions work in various settings, and what it takes to make them work. Topics
for workshops on single disciplines will include new pedagogies (collaborative
learning, inquiry-based learning, etc.), and the new uses of technologies for
teaching and learning. Topics for workshops with a broader focus will include
interdisciplinary programs and teaching, and science for all students, including
underrepresented students. Workshop Task Forces identify major themes of reform
in their area, and challenge participants with a broad spectrum of ideas and
approaches. D. Approach and Structure. Over the past four years, PKAL has
developed a workshop approach and structure that is effective and efficient.
Workshop applicants are asked to identify those questions most pressing for
their institution, and secure the administration's informed endorsement of their
participation, to prepare for the workshop. The sequence of activities at the
workshops, limited to 80 participants, is designed to identify and explore the
right questions, and engage in wide-ranging discussions. Finally, at the end of
the workshop each team plans the steps towards implementing reform they will
take at their home campus. E. Follow-up. It is essential that participating
teams have continuing support as they implement reform. PKAL asks for follow-up
reports on actions taken, on the impact of reforms, on student learning, on
curricular and pedagogical discussions within and between departments, and on
administrative support for reform efforts. PKAL also provides continuing access
to people and ideas changing undergraduate SME&T education, and the opportunity
to use the expertise of the Keck/PKAL consultants for help with specific efforts
to implement significant new initiatives. F. The PKAL Context. The workshops
proposed are central to PKAL's work. They offer the young faculty who form the
PKAL F21 Network the opportunity to take a leadership role in reform; they are
the point from which we focus on institutional reform, they provide significant
materials for the PKAL Web site.