* 9752701
* UFE:  Workshop on Innovative Physics Experiments for        Beginning College Faculty
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1998,02/29/2000
* Deva Sharma, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/29/2000
* USD 50,000.00

A week-long workshop is being held to develop innovative and inexpensive
physics experiments and physics-at-home activities for Freshman level General
Physics courses. Most U.S. universities offer such courses and generally these
courses have large enrollments. In order to reduce the cost of offering such
courses and to provide innovative, hands-on laboratory experiments and home
activities, twenty-five such exercises to twenty-five physics faculty members
from HBCUs in the Southeastern U.S have been developed, tested, evaluated, and
disseminated. Based on the positive feedback from earlier workshops, the present
workshop will develop, test, evaluate, and disseminate about twenty-five more
innovative, hands-on physics experiments and home-activities to twenty-five
beginning physics faculty from other two-year and four-year colleges and
universities. All fifty innovative physics experiments (twenty-five old and
twenty-five new) will be field tested by the participants of the workshop. Each
participant will select at least ten experiments for field testing and
evaluation in his\her courses. The results of field testing and evaluations will
be compiled by the director. All experiments will be refined and ranked by the
participants in numerical order and the top ten experiments will be presented at
AAPT meetings by their originators and developers. All experiments will be
stored on electronic media and compiled into a book format. Each participant
will receive copies of the experiments in both formats.