* 9752416
* On-Line Weather Studies: Introduction to the Atmosphere     Through the Use of Internet-Delivered Meteorological        Information
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* Ira Geer, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* William C. Beston
* 01/31/2001
* USD 125,000.00

The American Meteorological Society (AMS) will develop and nationally implement
a one-semester, introductory college-level, on-line distance-learning course on
the fundamentals of atmospheric science in which students study weather as it
happens. The course addresses the need for innovative and cost-effective science
education opportunities for an increasingly diverse and non-traditional student
population. It is being developed for use with pre-service teachers, giving them
both an understanding of meteorological principles as well as numerous useful
classroom investigations. It will be available to colleges and universities as a
turn-key package with electronic and printed components. The course will contain
learning activities with components written to current meteorological data and
delivered via the Internet. Use of simulations modules and a weather forecasting
module, developed at Iowa State University is an integral component of this
initiative. The experience of real-time study will enable students to negotiate
scientific understanding of the atmosphere and its processes while actually
tracking the ways the atmospheric system behaves. A course Reader, Student Study
Guide, and Instructor's Resource Manual will be developed. On-line delivery of
current meteorological data and related learning materials via an Internet
Homepage will be coordinated with the Reader and Student Study Guide contents.
The AMS project staff will produce the on-line component of the course and be
available to local instructors for assistance. The course will be offered in
spring and fall semesters. It is expected that up to 100 undergraduate
institutions will offer the course through their offices of continuing
education/outreach or academic departments, and approximately 12,000 students
will be enrolled during the two-year development phase. The course is expected
to continue indefinitely on a self-sustaining basis.