* 9752489
* CCD:  Linking Undergraduate Geoscience Research Programs and Teacher Education Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1998,10/31/2003
* John Dickey, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 10/31/2003
* USD 158,219.00

In research universities students who have declared a major in one of the
geosciences are often ineligible to take the education courses necessary for
state certification. In order to enroll in education courses to meet the state's
Department of Education course requirements for a teaching credential, these
students must drop their geoscience major and declare an education major.
Students enrolled in education programs often face a similar program in that
advanced science major course work is not available to them. As a result,
universities too often produce science majors with a weak pedagogical
background, or education majors with a weak geoscience background. Moreover,
there is little collective university faculty attention paid to pre-college
teacher preparation. Spurred on by the National Science Standards, the demand
for earth science teachers in our schools far exceeds the number of available
enormous. In this project, The American Geophysical Union, brings together
geoscience and education faculty, and appropriate administrators, from four
higher education institutions for the purposes of finding and developing a
viable undergraduate curriculum that will lead to teacher certification for
geoscience students. These four institutions, and the programs they develop and
implement, will serve as models for other institutions. This initiative will
present ways in which a four-year, science- based major can effectively
integrate a professional education component. This initiative, an accompanying
report, and special teacher preparation session(s), held at the annual meeting
of the American Geophysical Union, will serve as an important implementation
model for other institutions working to develop similar programs.