* 9752783
* Great Lakes Research Consortium Practicum in Applied        Environmental Problem-Solving: New Approaches and Techniquesfor Undergraduate Teaching Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Ronald Engel, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1999
* USD 75,576.00

The goals of the Great Lakes Consortium Summer Practicum in Applied
Environmental Problem-Solving are to encourage participants to revise or create
new multidisciplinary environmental science courses based on applied
environmental problem solving; and to expose participants to innovative new
theoretical and practical techniques being used in the Great Lakes basin and to
introduce faculty to involved scientists. The project theme--environmental
impact analysis--ties together the methods necessary for analyzing and solving
environmental problems. The project also addresses the gap existing between the
availability of up-to-date information about a major national resource--the
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence ecosystem--and what is currently taught at the
undergraduate level. The practicum is familiarizing participants with related
developments in environmental analysis; cascading trophic dynamics, particle-
size spectrum theory, and endocrine system-disrupting pollutants; and
environmental sampling, analytical methods, and mass balance/bioenergetics
modeling of toxic chemical dynamics in aquatic ecosystems. Scientists with the
Great Lakes Research Consortium who have made significant contributions in these
fields are leading each of the practicum's modules. Although the Great Lakes are
used as an example, the theories, methods and models learned are applicable
anywhere. The three week practicum in June 1998, combines field/lab experience,
classroom instruction and skills development exercises in four course modules:
I) Great Lakes Ecosystem Science/Issues and Lake Ontario Environments; 2)
Techniques for Analyzing Toxic Chemicals Commonly Found in the Great Lakes, 3)
Ecosystem Modeling with Spreadsheets: Mass Balance/Bioenergetics 4) Writing an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and Developing Problem-Solving Curricula
for Undergraduates.