* 9752058
* Computer Simulations of Industrial Statistical              Application for Undergraduates and Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Jill McKenney, Lane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2002
* USD 262,800.00

Advanced technicians in today's high-performance workplace are expected to have
skills in using statistics for continuous process improvement. The proposed
project is: (1) Preparing technicians for high-performance workplaces that
utilize statistical methods for continuous process improvement and quality
control; (2) Providing world-of-work contexts for learning statistics for lower-
division transfer students and for technicians in training: (3) Introducing
students to technical fields, technicians, and workplaces which apply
statistics; and (4) Making the courseware created in the project available to
other schools and training programs. Authentic applications help students
understand important statistical concepts and provide them with knowledge of
actual work environments. The project is developing, piloting, evaluating and
disseminating four multimedia curricular modules which feature computer
simulations of real-world industrial applications to teach problem-solving with
statistics, in particular statistical process control. The activities and
materials are being developed by mathematics faculty with the partnership of
regional manufacturers, a professional statistician, and a quality control
engineer. A version of the modules runs over the world wide web and a final
version is being published on CD-ROM. The modules are appropriate for use in
core statistics courses and for courses to upgrade skills of the technical
workforce.