* 9752316
* Development, Testing and Dissemination of Dynamic Visual    Learning Tools for Solid State Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2002
* Chu Wie, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 12/31/2002
* USD 193,054.00

The goal of this project is to develop, test and disseminate interactive dynamic
and visual simulation software modules in solid state materials. The visual
simulation programs will be developed using the Java programming language. They
are to help students visualize difficult physical processes and to demonstrate
the operating principles of solid state devices. The modules will be designed to
enhance student's learning of difficult material and device concepts. The small
Java applet programs will run in most popular web browsers, which maximizes the
dissemination to the widest possible audience. It also increases the
applicability to a traditional course structure such as lecture, recitation and
student home work assignment. Many applets will be developed for use in design
problems. Some will be used for student oral presentations and for written
reports to develop student communication skills. Most of the simulation programs
will be developed in such a way that both lower level and upper level courses
can utilize the modules in electrical engineering, materials science and
physics. Also, collection of the applets will be sufficient to cover most of the
topics needed in a one-semester junior-level solid state devices course. We will
begin with a comprehensive list of initial topics. This list will continually
improve during the project lifetime so that we can identify important topics and
focus on them while addressing the comments and suggestions from users
(professors and students). Feedbacks from instructors from around the world will
be used as a guideline for selecting new applet topics. Dissemination of this
project will take place in many ways: world wide web, CD-ROM, email broadcast,
journal articles, and conference presentations. Some of our existing applets for
solid state materials and devices are already being used in several
universities. It already helps more than three hundred students annually based
on the informal feedbacks received from various collegies and universities. O
nce a more formal effort is made for development and dissemination, this number
is expected to climb manifold.