* 9752673
* WebLab! A Web- and Java-Based Laboratory for Animated,      Interactive Exploration of Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,03/31/2000
* Rockford Ross, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 03/31/2000
* USD 84,483.00

A substantial body of work by a number of researchers has been done in program
animation, algorithm animation, and computer science concept animation that
could be used as the basis for laboratories in the lower-level undergraduate
computer science curriculum. In spite of the impressive nature of this work,
however, it has been slow to be adopted for one primary reason: the animation
software runs only on specific computer platforms with specific operating system
support. To solve this problem, work has begun by various researchers on
adapting computer science animation systems to the World Wide Web using HTML and
Java. The project of this proposal, called WebLab, will combine work done by the
PI in computer science animation into a model laboratory curriculum that is
animated, dynamic, interactive, and usable by virtually any computer science
program. All that will be needed is a computing environment that supports a
Java-ready browser, such as Netscape. The WebLab project will result in an
infrastructure for introductory computer science laboratories. The Web-based
infrastructure will consist of a set of laboratory exercises along with a user
interface supporting animation that is based on HTML and Java, a Pascal program
animator developed over the past number of years by the PI, an animator for a
more modern programming language (C/C++), and a set of computer science concept
animations (work already in progress by the PI). Algorithm animations developed
by other researchers will also be incorporated into WebLab, making WebLab a
comprehensive laboratory environment. Since WebLab will be developed around HTML
and Java, it will be available incrementally over the Web as the project
progresses. Final versions of WebLab will be available via the Web as well as in
self-contained CD-ROM form for distribution with textbooks and lab manuals. The
universal nature of the World Wide Web will ensure that WebLab is widely
disseminated and used.