* 9752432
* An Innovative Mathematics, Science, and Technology Program  for Pre-Service Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1998,08/31/2003
* Stephen Thornton, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2003
* USD 150,000.00

A model, innovative program to restructure the elementary preservice teacher
preparation program at the University of Virginia involves over twenty
Education, Arts &amp; Sciences, and Engineering faculty. Because Virginia's new
teacher liscensure requires the number of math and science credit hours to be
increased from 12 to 24, sic new math and science content courses stressing
hands-on activities are being developed, and three other courses are being
restructured to be more aligned with National Math and Science Education
standards. After the preservice students have completed the six new math and
science courses, they will take a capstone research/design experience being
developed with the present NSF funding: a six credit hour, two semester course
of integrated math, science, and technology (including engineering and possibly
medicine). The first semester course will include completion of math and science
content not previously taken, especially the integration of material including
data analysis and presentation. The students will also complete several mini-
projects to acclimate them to research problem solving, and prospective faculty
mentors will present possible student projects for the second semester. During
the second semester each group (3-4 students) will complete a research project
under the direction of a faculty mentor. Instructional technology will be
emphasized in all phases of the project. An independent evaluation/advisory
committee will probed guidance and assessment on the project's quality and
impact for both the project staff and for the preservice elementary education
group of the NSF Teacher Preparation program that is supporting this effort.