* 9752327
* Integration of Laboratory and Lecture within an IntroductoryGeology Course:  Combining a Constructivist and Case Study  Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Michael Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* William C. Beston
* 12/31/2000
* USD 90,360.00

The objective of this project is to increase the relevance of science in a
large introductory Physical Geology course by redesigning the course to: 1)
include fewer topics that are covered in greater detail; 2) employ a case-study
approach in lecture that maximizes discussion/debate; 3) employ a constuctivist
approach in lab maximizing discovery based learning; and 4) fully integrate lab
and lecture, so that labs illustrate the geologic principles relating to lecture
discussions. The course will be divided into three main content areas: an
introductory module (minerals, rock cycle and geologic time); an external
processes module (groundwater, rivers/floods, energy from the Earth) and an
internal processes module (volcanoes, earthquakes, plate tectonics). In lecture,
case-studies will form an integral part of the curriculum. Background material
and the "problem statement" for each case-study will be available to all
students through a series of web pages designed for the course. Four groups of
students will do additional research collaboratively and discuss/debate the
issues to the rest of the class. Each student will be involved in one
collaborative group and all students will be responsible for all case studies.
The instructor will serve as quality control for the material presented in these
discussions. Labs will develop the background principles for these case studies
through explorationtype activities as well as analysis and synthesis of
integrated datasets. The impact of this work will be three-fold: 1) the emphasis
on case studies will produce a general student populace that is more aware of
"real" geologic and environmental issues; 2) the focus in lab will shift from
classifying and identifying to critical thinking and problem-solving; and 3) the
exercises and case studies will serve as a model that other institutions can
adopt in whole, or in part.