* 9752165
* A Web-Based Electronic Laboratory for Operating Systems and Computer Networks
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Steven Robbins, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 202,568.00

The geometric increase in computer power and the ubiquitous availability of
network connectivity are revolutionizing computing. A computer science
curriculum based on old teaching techniques may seem dull and irrelevant to the
modern student. Instruction in the undergraduate curriculum for the most part
does not make active use of new technology. A multimedia presentation during a
lecture by an instructor is considered to be a passive use of technology. In
contrast, a student who can control a multimedia visualization is making active
use of such technology. The difference between passive and active use of
technology is similar to the difference between watching a laboratory
demonstration and performing an experiment. Aside from making the learning
experience more interesting, a well-designed experiment can challenge the
student and encourage creativity. A user-controlled animation can have a similar
effect and provide the student with a virtual laboratory environment. A
Colleague and I have already successfully redesigned about half of the
curriculum for an undergraduate operating systems course by constructing a
series of programming projects that enable students to experiment with
congruency and communication. This work has been recently published in a book by
Prentice Hall and is gaining acceptance at prestigious universities. The
remainder of the curriculum in a traditional operating systems course does not
easily lend itself to exploration using programming projects that can be
completed by a student in a short period of time. I will design a curriculum for
this second part of operating systems and for computer networks in which
students perform experiments in a virtual laboratory setting. The laboratory
experiments will use animated simulations written in the Java language allowing
them to be run on virtually any computer connected to the Internet. A framework
for developing active animations will be set up so that these animations can be
efficiently produced. *