* 9752096
* Academy for Creative Technologies (ACT)--an                 Interdisciplinary Interactive Multimedia Studies            Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Michael Bloebaum, Pasadena City College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 08/31/2001
* USD 384,500.00

Pasadena City College (PCC) will develop and implement an associate degree
program to educate multimedia technicians. This program will be built upon a
sound theory base consisting of the sciences, arts, and computer technology to
provide the core curriculum upon which technical skills are developed and will
emphasize twenty-first century workplace skills such as those outlined in the
SCANS recommendations. Program development will be industry driven and involve a
variety of "real world" industry experiences--including an intensive internship
experience and a culminating interdisciplinary project where teams of students
work with faculty in a variety of disciplines to develop a multimedia product
for instructional use. This program will also include articulated curriculum
development with high schools and four-year colleges. Objectives for this
project are to: (I) Improve the quality and quantity of technicians educated for
careers in advanced multimedia technologies; (2) Increase the involvement of the
multimedia industry in preparing multimedia technicians; (3) Increase the use
and development of multimedia as an instructional tool by high school and
college faculty in a variety of disciplines; and (4) Increase the opportunities
for students to experience a seamless articulated multimedia technical education
from high school through community college to four-year colleges and/or the
workplace.