* 9752219
* Integration of Design Project and Aspen Plus Process        Simulator Through 4-Year Undergraduate Chemical Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Larry Bauer, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 08/31/2002
* USD 150,000.00

The main objective of this project is to enhance the undergraduate engineering
curriculum by i) the development of an integrated undergraduate chemical
engineering design project with a strong linkage between the individual courses,
and ii) the integration of AspenPlus simulation software throughout the chemical
engineering curriculum --- from freshman through senior level courses. The early
introduction of a complete and integrated design project will expose freshman to
the "big picture", aiding in their comprehension of the nature of chemical
engineering while helping them to understand why the underlying foundation
courses in mathematics, chemistry, and physics are important. Freshman begin the
project with simple topics. As the students progress through the curriculum they
continue to work on appropriate aspects of the design, continually building on
the concepts taught in previous courses. Augmenting the four year undergraduate
design project is the parallel introduction of the AspenPlus process simulator.
With the early use of this powerful design tool, students will gain increased
knowledge and expertise so that by their senior year they will be able to design
and optimize complex capstone design projects. Students will use AspenPlus to
enhance their integrated design efforts, as well as reinforce learning and
understanding of their engineering course material. A complementary objective of
this project is the encouragement and enhancement of the engineering career
expectations of pre-college, freshman, and disadvantaged groups of people. These
efforts are designed to extend and enhance our previous successful outreach
experiences. Our focus is on enhanced learning experiences for freshman first.
This is coupled with outreach to surrounding secondary schools and tribal
colleges, with the goal of increasing the awareness and participation of
students, especially Native Americans and women, in engineering and science
programs. The successful implementation and completion of this project will be
shared nationwide with other engineering and science universities, through
journal articles and an active World Wide Web site.