* 9752526
* Project Sherlock:  An Interactive Multimedia Program in     Forensic Science to Enhance Introductory Chemistry (Science)Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2002
* Lawrence Kaplan, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2002
* USD 75,000.00

The PI instituted innovative teaching techniques in an elementary chemistry
course called "Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic
Science" for the non-science major. In the lecture hall, this approach involved
stimulating the student's interest in the science topic to be discussed by first
discussing a crime in which the "science" was instrumental in its resolution. In
the laboratory, the same principle manifested itself by stimulating the
student's interest in conducting a series of experiments in a cohesive
investigation rather than simply assigning a collection of unrelated exercises.
The experiments helped the "investigative unit" resolve a crime to which they
had been called and which scene they had processed. The "discovery method" used
in the laboratory has received national attention and many colleagues have
instituted similar innovations. However, many institutions do not have the
resources to develop laboratory programs along these lines and, as times have
changed, are increasingly concerned with exposing the students to situations now
recognized as potentially dangerous. Since the PI has demonstrated that
forensics can be used to spark interest in science and since it is a given that
young people are intrigued by computer graphics, it was decided to use computer
animated simulations to allow extensive, intensive investigation of scientific
evidence collected at simulated crime scenes and studied using simulated
scientific instruments. With support from the NSF, a computer animated crime
scene module and three computer animated instrumentation/procedure modules are
under development. These will be incorporated into an interactive CD-ROM (and
most like linked to the world wide web) based instructional tool. By using these
modules, the student will be able to process the crime scene and collect
physical evidence for later analysis. In the computer simulated crime lab, the
student will be able to use the instrumentation modules to analyze the evidence.
In addition to the data generated by using the instrumentation/procedure
modules, the CD will contain subroutines instructing the users in the necessary
theory and background of both the instrument and the analytical method. While
these modules are intended to be used as a package, they could be used
individually and the animated instrumentation modules will enhance not only the
laboratory program in the forensic science course but also could be used in the
laboratory programs in introductory science courses for majors. The PI will
guide the development of the computer animated modules, develop the story board
and oversee the computer interfacing and the integration of the components into
the curriculum. Additional support will be used for the development of
additional modules for the analysis of other types of physical evidence. It is
anticipated that this multimedia form of computer/world wide web based
instruction, as part of an overall program including actual laboratory
experience, will enhance science education by stimulating interest and
engendering enthusiasm instead of promoting the stereotype that science is
boring and hard. This project is expected to have an impact on undergraduate
education because, in addition to the informative content and its visualization
in space and time, the virtual laboratory components will enhance critical
thinking, quantitative skills, and science writing skills.