* 9752945
* POWRE:  Evolution and Persistence of the T-Haplotype in     Finite Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Marie Dannie Durand, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2000
* USD 70,000.00

9752945 Durand Ultraselfish gene complexes (USGC's), which have been observed in
several species, are chromosomal entities that are both aggressive and
deleterious. They are transmitted to offspring more often than their genetic
counterparts, in violation of Mendel's laws. Yet, they are harmful to the
organism that carries them in that they cause sterility and often carry
recessive lethal mutations. The evolution of USGC's is of interest as an example
of competitive evolution between genetic elements in a single organism. The long
term objective of this work by Marie Dannie Durand is to understand how USGC's
evolve in populations. The goal of the current project is to demonstrate that a
combination of simulation and analytic methods can be an effective research tool
in this area by developing a combined model of a USGC that occurs in mice.
Computer simulations and Markov models will be used to study the behavior of
ultraselfish genes in small populations where stochastic variations in USGC
frequency have a big impact on the ability of such elements to survive. Computer
simulations of mutations in USGC's will show how different aggressive variants
compete under selective pressure. The expected results of the proposed work
include new tools for studying the evolution and population dynamics of USGC's,
hypotheses concerning the basic population genetic mechanisms that mediate their
evolution and characterization of the population conditions under which USGC's
can arise and persist. This POWRE award permits Dr. Durand to expand her
research program by applying her computational skills to model a significant
question in evolutionary biology. This work should increase her prominence in an
interdisciplinary area of the biological sciences, an area in which women are
significantly underrepresented.