* 9752195
* Guided Inquiry Physical Chemistry Labortory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2002
* Karl Illinger, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2002
* USD 220,000.00

In recent years, extensive efforts have been expended to develop open-ended,
inquiry-based, laboratory exercises for introductory, college-level chemistry
courses. A major goal of these efforts is to develop the student's conceptual,
molecular-level picture of chemical interactions. Ironically, it is recent
advances in physical chemistry that have made a major contribution to this
molecular level picture, yet typical physical chemistry laboratory exercises
remain much as they were several decades ago. The cost of the equipment is only
one reason for this dating. Two other significant reasons are a scarcity of
experiments based on cutting edge problems, and a lack of experience with
running an inquiry-based laboratory. The proposed work addresses both of these
national problems. The objective is to restructure physical chemistry laboratory
courses by creating a set of real-world, inquiry-based experiments that reflect
current practice on a less-than-million-dollar budget. Costs are kept modest by
focusing on several areas: materials surface chemistry, biochemistry,
environmental chemistry, and electrochemistry. Materials chemistry might
initially appear to be an unusual choice for this mission since modern surface
experiments are often extreme in utilization of expensive techniques. The
proposed project circumvents the expense issue by featuring quantum dots:
Cutting-edge materials which are examined with spectroscopic techniques such as
adsorption, luminescence, FTIR, photocorrosion, and chemical derivatization. The
courses are completed with groups of experiments highlighting biochemical
experiments to appeal to those with medical interests, environmental experiments
for the environmental studies constituent, and electrochemistry to appeal to
engineers. Since none of the currently available laboratory texts support open-
ended experiments, one deliverable is a text. In order to propagate the results
of this work to other institutions, we propose offering workshops to give
potential faculty concrete experience. These workshops feature follow-up visits
to the home institution by Tufts University faculty. This ongoing contact with
participants is expected to substantially increase the success of dissemination
of this work.