* 9752714
* Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshop:  Introductory   Engineering Design, Engineering Design Graphics (EDG), and  Technical Graphics (TG) Problem Solving
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1998,07/31/2000
* John Nee, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,530.00

The principle objective of the proposed project is to greatly improve the
quality of entry level design, Engineeering Design graphics (EDG), and Technical
Graphics (TG) courses throughout the United sttes. Faculty members teaching at
community colleges, technical institutes, and universities are the target
population. Their students will benefit from the content and process developed
during the project. The project will initiate greater understanding about the
engineering design process that exists in university/college/technical institute
level introductory beginning level (freshman/sophore) design, EDG and TG
classes. The project will bring together educational and industrial leaders with
concerns and responsibilities for introductory design via a national level five
day long workshop. The workshop participants will develop strategies and
curriculum materials suitable for infusing the design process into introductory
level courses. Faculty participants will be drawn from community college,
technical institute, and university ranks. A monograph containing the workshop
outcomes will be developed and disseminated nationally. Twenty-five(25) faculty
participants and a minimum of five(5) consultants will be directly involved in
the preparation of 1800 monographs copies (150) pages each) which will be
disseminated and used by faculty to affect at least 100,000 undergraduate and
1500 pre-college students.