* 9752990
* POWRE:  Introducing Interactive Case Studies in the Advanced Materials Science Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Rochelle Ondracek, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 02/28/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9752990 Interactivity has been introduced to introductory physics courses with
dramatic success. Instead of just reinforcing the students' preconceived ideas
about motion, an interactive physics classroom gives students a deeper and more
conceptual understanding of technical material. This project will introduce
interactivity through real-life case studies in an advanced materials science
laboratory offered through the Mechanical Engineering Department. In addition to
the interactive activities, however, students will also get the opportunity to
develop important job skills such as writing, oral presentation, working on
teams and open-ended problem solving. Specifically, case studies based on real-
life situations will be introduced to the students in an interactive computer
program. After learning about the problem and what is at stake, students will be
asked to place themselves in the case study as engineers or consultants in
industry given the task of resolving a problem. They will collect data using
actual materials testing equipment and interpret the data for the rest of the
class in the form of a written and oral presentation. Pre- and post-tests are
suggested to assess the success of this new format. The new case studies that
are proposed are all fictional, but efforts will be made to find actual case
studies from industry to incorporate into the laboratory exercises. The goals of
this project are two-fold: to design laboratory exercises with case studies so
students can associate laboratory activities with real-world problems and to
develop important job skills in the process of participating in the laboratory.
Students should finish the course with a better appreciation for materials
testing methods and what they mean and improved job skills, which ultimately
makes them more employable and better engineers.