* 9752539
* CCD: Assessing and Disseminating a New Model for            Undergraduate Physics Education at Large Research           Universities
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Gary Gladding, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1999
* USD 133,983.00

The objectives of the project are to (1) assess the effectiveness of the
pedagogical content and instructional methods of the new University physics
sequence under development at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC), (2) to standardize it and supporting materials in modular components,
and (3) to produce and disseminate the model curriculum modules to other large
research universities interested in undertaking physics educational reform. The
project directly addresses widely documented problems in contemporary physics
education, such as its perceived failure to impart conceptual understanding vs.
rote learning and formulae crunching and its lack of support for diverse
learning styles. The project also recognizes the special needs of large research
universities in delivering undergraduate physics service courses--the need to
provide effective instruction to hundreds of students per semester, the need to
promote collaborative learning and teamwork and communication skills, the need
to motivate research faculty to employ new instructional methods and to train
graduate teaching assistants to be effective teachers, and the need to make
successful learning independent of the efforts of one inspired .teacher by
standardizing effective pedagogy. Activities to be undertaken to accomplish the
objectives include (1) professional assessment of the curricular content of the
newly revised UIUC University physics sequence, (2) production of modular course
components, such as lectures, homework sets, laboratories, examinations, and
teaching assistant training materials, with appropriate documentation, and (3)
dissemination of the project materials to peer institutions wishing to undertake
their own University physics course revision.