* 9752688
* GIS Curriculum Development
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1998,10/31/2000
* Jason Steinitz, Erie Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 10/31/2000
* USD 126,000.00

As technology diffuses through local government agencies and industries, the
need for trained Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technicians and analysts
continues to expand, as does the need for individuals in other fields to become
aware of GIS and how it applies to their workplace. This project, developed
jointly by Erie Community College (N.Y.) and the State University of New York at
Buffalo's Geography Department, addresses this need using a two-pronged
approach. First, the GIS Curriculum Development Project will create a GIS
Certificate Program for students to complete as part of their two-year degree
program, or as a stand alone certificate. The project will develop a core of
three (3) GIS-specific courses and a three (3) credit hour internship to provide
students with a field experience component in their GIS Studies. Secondly, this
project will establish a GIS Infusion Program to train faculty in a variety of
curricula to use GIS in their own courses within specific modules or
applications. This will allow ECC students to develop experience and awareness
of GIS and to learn how GIS technology relates to their own field of study. The
GIS Infusion program will also develop a process for supplying GIS output
directly to faculty for use in their classroom. This will allow GIS technology
to reach a broader audience. Two leading GIS educational institutions, the State
University of New York at Buffalo and the University of California at Santa
Barbara have agreed to lend their expertise in GIS technology, GIS curriculum
development and faculty training to this project. The National Center for
Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA) at the University of Buffalo will be
also serve as project site for ECC students enrolled in the newly created GIS
courses.