* 9752428
* A Probability/Activity Approach for Teaching Introductory   Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/1999
* James Albert, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Wattenberg
* 12/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

The problem addressed by this proposal is how to teach an introductory
undergraduate statistics course more effectively. The traditional lecture and
homework format of teaching statistics are not conducive to learning. In
addition, it is hard to communicate the basic classical concepts of sampling
distributions, interval estimation, and hypothesis testing. This project will
develop curriculum materials for a new "probability/activity" statistics course.
This class would be taught using a workshop format in which the students learn
data analysis, probability, and inference material by means of directed
activities. The inferential content of the class will be taught using a Bayesian
perspective. A textbook will be written that contains a collection of classroom
and homework activities for learning concepts of probability and elementary
inference. In addition, an instructor's manual will be developed that gives a
description of the important concepts and advice on how to encourage the
collaborative learning in the classroom. The effectiveness of this new
statistics class will be assessed by the performance of the students on tests
measuring knowledge of basic concepts in statistics and the general attitude of
the students about the discipline of statistics. This new statistics class will
be compared with the traditional class with respect to the success of the course
in reaching particular achievement goals.