* 9752343
* An Integrated Package of Computer-Based Learning Tools for  Teaching Biochemistry in a Studio Format
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Joyce Diwan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2000
* USD 209,970.00

The studio mode of teaching that has been developed at Rensselaer promotes
learning, excites students' interest by involving them directly in knowledge
acquisition, fosters development of communication skills, and allows tailoring
the educational process to varied needs of a diverse student population. This
project in biochemistry is designed to expand and improve computer-based
learning modules, and to create an integrated package of instructional materials
for teaching biochemistry in a studio format. These materials will include: (a)
instructions for in-class studio activities, such as problems to be solved, data
to be analyzed and graphed via spreadsheets, structural motifs to be examined
using molecular modeling software, questions to be researched for in-class
discussion; (b) notes and diagrams in a form allowing computer projection as
well as viewing on a computer screen, for use in short lectures within the
studio context; (c) instructions for accessing and using software; (d) sample
test questions; and (e) interactive multimedia tutorials. The tutorials will use
a mix of text, graphics, audio, videos and animations to illustrate biochemical
principles, facts and mechanisms. The learning modules will be designed for
distribution to students via intranets and/or the World Wide Web. They will be
used to teach Molecular Biochemistry I and II at Rensselaer to a mix of advanced
undergraduate and graduate students. A separate course to be delivered in
summers to high school teachers, will use the same materials. Results of quizzes
and evaluations to be carried out will guide a continuing process of expansion
and improvement of the package of instructional materials.