* 9752288
* Rich Problem Solving Contexts:  Integrating Mathematics and Reading Curricula for Preservice Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/2001
* John Wolfe, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 150,224.00

The importance of mathematical problem solving for all students, including
preservice teachers, has been well documented. The integration of mathematics
and reading is a natural way to explore the actual contexts of problems. The
main goal of this project is to enhance preservice teachers' problem solving and
mathematics learning by integrating the teaching and learning of mathematics and
reading in rich, authentic, contexts. The goal of the proposed project will be
accomplished by focusing on the following primary objectives: (1) coordinate
curriculum offerings in three inter-related courses for preservice elementary
teachers (mathematical content, mathematics methods, and reading methods); (2)
create and field test new curricular materials for use in the targeted courses;
(3) evaluate the completeness and appropriateness of the courses and materials
developed; and (4) disseminate the curriculum materials to teacher education
faculty locally, regionally, and nationally. This development work will be
supported by collaboration with the NSF-funded Oklahoma Collaborative for
Excellence in Teacher Preparation, known as "O-TEC," and the principal
investigator of that project, Dr. Robert Howard. This collaboration will ensure
that the development work in this project is fully aligned with the goals and
needs of O-TEC and will also assist in the dissemination and implementation of
the projects products. Under this proposal, a series of "rich problem solving
contexts" will be developed and field tested under the guidance of an outside
evaluator. Briefly, this will be an inter-related set of mathematical ideas and
educational activities designed to build a full context for meaningful learning.
It is anticipated that the proposed project will provide valuable data which
will have important implications for the design of reading and mathematics
curricula for preservice teachers. The resulting curriculum materials will be
disseminated through a variety of media including paper presen tations, journal
articles, and a professional development conference which will serve as a
vehicle for establishing a network for the exchange of information among teacher
education faculty and other interested individuals locally, regionally, and
nationally.