* 9752801
* Preparing the New Generation of Geoscience Faculty:         Workshops To Shape the Future
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1998,01/31/2003
* Barbara Tewksbury, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 01/31/2003
* USD 30,172.00

Because most graduate programs in the geosciences focus on developing students'
research abilities, most new faculty members are not well prepared to teach
undergraduates and, in addition, tend to teach primarily by lecturing. To
address these problems, we propose to develop a four-day workshop for early
career geoscience faculty that will be offered three times during the three-year
project. The workshop will include plenary sessions, mini-workshops, and break-
out groups on the following topics: the basics of teaching, active learning
strategies, integrating research and research-like experiences into all
geoscience classes, supervision of undergraduate research, grading and
assessment, and life as a new faculty member. In addition, we will provide
examples of syllabi, assignments, and activities for introductory and upper-
level geoscience courses, and participants and presenters will meet to share
ideas and strategies for teaching those courses. Follow-up activities will
include opportunities for continuing electronic discussions, progress reports by
participants, and panel presentations by and for early career faculty at
professional meetings. Resources materials, including information on various
science teaching resources, examples of course-specific activities and
assignments, and an advice column for early career faculty will be placed on a
Resource Website. The audience for this project will include faculty members in
their first four years of teaching. Participants will leave the workshop better
prepared to provide an excellent education to undergraduate students. We
anticipate that these early career faculty can become agents for change in
undergraduate teaching at their home institutions. This proposal is being
submitted in parallel with proposals from the College of William and Mary and
the University of Arizona.