* 9752037
* A Partnership to Develop Advanced Technology Units on       Genomic Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Mark Bloom, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2001
* USD 599,825.00

We propose to develop and disseminate Advanced Technology Units on Genomic
Biology that will further prepare high school and junior college students to
participate in the future of applied biology. The units are based on strong
science content and practical skills that at once encourage students to continue
with formal science training and better prepare them for advanced technical
vocations. The units stress fundamental themes of evolutionary similarity and
individual variation in genetic information. Modern methods of gene
identification and analysis are illustrated by student experiments with human,
insect, and plant DNA polymorphisms (''fingerprints''). Comparative genomics and
evolutionary biology are illustrated by computer manipulations of gene databases
-- including on-line projects using student-generated data, as well as data from
DNA/protein databases. Students also have the opportunity to prepare a key
enzyme (Taq polymerase) and construct a key laboratory instrument (DNA thermal
cycler). Laboratory experiments with human polymorphisms and database
manipulations also lead naturally to discussion of the ethical, legal, and
social issues of genetic testing/databasing. The project is a partnership
between the DNA Learning Center (DNALC) of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, The
Institute for Genomic Research Science Education Foundation ( TIGR SEF), the
Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD), and high school and
junior college faculty. The curriculum materials will be based on key lab and
computer technology developed at the DNALC and the University of Chicago that
makes DNA fingerprinting by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) accessible and
affordable for student use. The high school unit, which focuses on relatively
simple human polymorphisms and statistical analyses, expressly articulates with
CORD's nationally used Applications in Biology/Chemistry (ABC) curriculum. In
this context, the project can upgrade the intellectual content of the ABC
curriculum and fa cilitate coordinated follow-on instruction in higher
education. The college unit extends to more ambitious analysis of sequence
polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA, open-ended experiments in conservation and
evolutionary biology, and advanced statistics for DNA/protein sequence
comparisons between organisms. Advanced exercises will be based on TIGR's
informatics software; an extensive collection of human expressed sequence tags
(ESTs) and complete DNA sequences of the bacteria Haemophilus influenzae,
Mycoplasma genitalium, and Methanococcus janaschii. Included is a novel
Sequencing Service by the partner institutions to generate human mitochondrial
sequence for student classes.