* 9752650
* Linearity I &amp; II: Connected Learning of Differential        Equations, Linear Algebra and Multi-variable Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2003
* James R. Leitzel, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2003
* USD 175,043.00

A year-long integrated course of study organized around the fundamental concept
of linearity and the process of linearization is being developed at the
University of New Hampshire (UNH). The goals of this sequence are: 1) to unify
the learning of the core ideas and techniques normally studied in a separate
fashion in ordinary differential equations, linear algebra, and multivariable
calculus, by captitalizing on the rich interconnections among the three subject
areas, and 2) to maximize student opportunities to engage in contextual learning
of these key concepts. To achieve these goals, mathematical sciences faculty are
collaborating with colleagues from mechanical engineering, electrical
engineering, and physics, to develop "bench-lab experiments" for use in the
classroom. These experiments are drawn from the application areas studied in
many of the courses in which students are concurrently enrolled, and enable the
restructuring of the normally static learning environment into a dynamic one
employing a "studio" or laboratory approach. Teaching and learning materials
based on the set of "bench-lab" experiments are being developed for commercial
publication. Pilot testing will begin with a group of mechanical engineering,
electrical and computer engineering, and applied mathematical sciences students.
Full implementation of this approach is expected to impact all students in the
UNH College of Engineering and Physical Sciences.