* 9752602
* Environmental Literacy for All Students: Development of Environmental Science Courses in a New Core Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2001
* Fredrick Rich, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

A growing body of literature amply documents the low levels of scientific and
environmental literacy among the American public. The main goal of this project
is to provide a framework in which all Georgia Southern undergraduates can
achieve basic environmental literacy while acquiring an understanding of
science. This goal will be pursued through the development of environmental
courses in four science disciplines: biology, chemistry, geology, and physics.
These courses constitute a particular area of GSU's new core curriculum that
will be required of all students, including science majors, non-science majors,
and future K-12 teachers. The new courses will utilize environmental issues to
introduce and discuss relevant scientific concepts, providing in-context
instruction on a "need-to-know" basis. The project has three distinctive
features: 1. An approach that will expand students' awareness of local,
regional, and global environmental problems, 2. A focus on hands-on laboratory
activities based on these issues, and 3. Involvement of advanced science and
science education majors in the laboratories as faculty-mentored interns in the
"Undergraduate Teaching Internship Program" (UTIP). Expected project outcomes
are: graduates who possess the knowledge to engage in environmentally-aware
behavior and informed citizenship, improved scientific and environmental
knowledge of future K-12 teachers, appreciation by students of the connections
between science and real-world problems, and teacher training for UTIP
participants, including student interns and science faculty. The project will
yield laboratory exercises that will be made available for adaptation by other
institutions. Dissemination will be accomplished thorough presentations at
national meetings, faculty development workshops, publication of laboratory
materials and professional articles, and a project web site. This model is a
general one that can be reasonably adapted by other institutions and, therefore,
has excellen t potential for impact outside the university.