* 9752769
* Undergraduate Faculty Workshop for the Integration of       Chemistry and Art into Liberal Arts, Chemistry and Teacher  Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Patricia Hill, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 02/28/2001
* USD 169,983.00

During the summer of 1996 a Chautauqua Short Course entitled "Chemistry and Art:
A Science Course for Non-science Majors" was developed and presented by the
PI's. The short course received highest praise from all 23 undergraduate faculty
participants. This Chautauqua program was based upon two separate laboratory
science courses in chemistry and art for undergraduate non-science majors; one
developed in 1990 at Millersville University of Pennsylvania and the other
developed and offered at Brandeis University in 1992. The Brandeis course has
received development support from NSF (DUE/CCD #92-54291 and #96-53252) and The
Sloan Foundation. The Chautauqua Short Course will be repeated again in June
1997 for 25 science faculty. However, another eight to ten faculty are on the
course waiting list. The course obviously meets a need but it cannot adequately
meet the demand because each year the size of the waiting list grows. Three week
long workshops for undergraduate science, science education, art, art education,
archaeology and anthropology faculty on chemistry and art are being held in the
summers of 1998-99. These workshops offer significant advantages over the three-
day Chautauqua course. They provide a sound foundation for disseminating courses
in chemistry and art by giving participants an intensive, participatory
experience in not only the content of integrated science and art but of
effective pedagogical strategies for teaching the content to diverse student
populations. This project goes beyond the confines of the Chautauqua short
course and allows intensive work with undergraduate faculty to (a) develop
courses for non-science majors in chemistry and art, (b) to develop example
applications in art for the teaching of chemistry to scientists, and (c) to
develop and disseminate curricula in chemistry and art for use in high schools.
These goals will be achieved by holding two different type workshops. The first
workshop, held in the summer of 1998 at Millersville University, brings toge
ther faculty from the physical sciences, technology, art, anthropology, and
archaeology to develop courses in chemistry and art for nonscientists based upon
the model courses. The second and third workshops, held at Millersville in the
summer of 1999 involve science education faculty, art education faculty, and
pre-service or in-service high school teachers to develop the use of chemistry
and art in the high school curriculum. Teaching and learning activities,
lessons, and laboratory experiments generated by faculty as a result of
participation in these workshops are disseminated by a variety of means
including an electronic listserver, a Chemistry and Art website, publications in
professional journals, and symposia on chemistry and art held at national,
regional, and local professional meetings.