* 9752024
* The Southeast Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in         Technological Education (SMARTE):  Advanced Technologies    in Product Design
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Mulchand Rathod, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 08/31/2001
* USD 450,000.00

Alliance Members: There are five community colleges who are part of SMARTE
(Southeastern Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in Technological Education).
The Alliance also represents a major state university, K-12 school systems,
community-based organizations, government agencies, labor, business, and
industry interests in southeastern Michigan. Overall Goal of the project: To
assist community colleges, school districts, and universities to prepare skilled
technicians in product design by offering programs and delivery systems which
are partnered with business and industry. Re-engineering Initiatives: 1) To
develop regional product design curricula based upon skill standards, math and
science applications, information technologies, and work-based learning. 2) To
develop programs and delivery systems for the recruitment, retention and
placement of non-traditional students in a learning communities setting.
Objectives to Accomplish Initiatives: Develop or enhance regional product design
programs incorporating knowledge areas which are based on skills using the
industry standards and criteria (SCANS, ABET, NAIT, Advanced Manufacturing)
established during the first phase of this project and resulted in the core
competencies for product design. Implement work-based learning experiences as
part of technical programs. Incorporate/integrate information technologies for
instructional delivery. Develop simulation programs which incorporate skills
needed by the advanced manufacturing industry. Conduct enrichment programs for
students to increase competencies in math, science, computers, and product
design. Develop and deliver an enrichment program for middle school teachers in
product design. Work with faculty and teachers to share training resources on
technological skills, core competencies, and recruitment and retention programs
for non-traditional students.