* 9752511
* Embedded Learning Modules (ELMO'S):  A New Approach for     Teaching SME&T to Non-Science Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1998,09/30/2004
* Malcolm Hill, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 09/30/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Northeastern University has developed a concept - known as ELMOs (for Embedded
Learning Modules) program - for naturally integrating progressive learning
experiences in science and technology throughout non-science curricula. We are
developing, implementing, and evaluating a set of integrated laboratory and
field experiences that will be naturally embedded within required major courses
in non-science curricula. Our ELMO model explicitly uses reinforcement learning
in which students experience an integrated set of progressive, cumulative
experiences in order to develop a coherent understanding of key concepts,
methodologies, and principles. Each set of experiences are designed by cross-
disciplinary teams of science, engineering, and non-science faculty members to
mesh seamlessly with study within a particular non-science 'client' major so
that students will recognize the direct relevance of science and technology to
their disciplinary interests. For example, music students are introduced to wave
phenomena through physics and engineering experiments in their music courses as
they study such topics as the production of sound by various instruments, and
the acoustical design of auditoriums for optimal sound effects. These laboratory
experiments are supplemented by field experiences in which students interact
with professionals in their disciplines to understand the direct applications of
science and technology in their work - e.g., in the form of visits to local
symphony halls and theaters for the study and evaluation of various acoustical
designs and through joint interviews with performers and acoustical engineers.
We contend that students only retain knowledge and skills that they want to
retain; if science and technology seem irrelevant to their academic and career
interests, they will simply complete whatever introductory required courses in
these areas that they must - and promptly forget the principles and concepts
that they learned. Thus, it is critical that non-science majors r ecognize the
relevance of science, mathematics, engineering, and technology SME&T in their
lives. The ELMO project embeds pertinent SME&T coursework in selected required
and sequential courses in non-science curricula, thereby achieving this
objective. An ELMO Science and Engineering Laboratory Clinic is being
constructed and staffed for this project, representing a substantial financial
investment by the university and reflecting its long-term commitment to this
project. We are convinced that students will acquire and retain both broader and
deeper understanding of concepts and principles in science and technology
through the ELMO program than they do under the traditional general education
formats currently in place at most undergraduate institutions.