* 9752101
* Image Processing for Teaching in Advanced Technological     Education:  Faculty and Teacher Development and Curriculum  Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Robert Kolvoord, Center for Image Processing in Education
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/1999
* USD 708,968.00

The federal initiative of the past decade to reform science and mathematics
education at the K-12 levels has resulted in greater emphasis on inquiry, active
learning and new uses of technology at pre-college levels. It has become
imperative that current students be more engaged in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology education. Educators are being challenged to develop
teaching tools that engage students' imaginations and provide a platform for
integrating technology into technical and non-technical undergraduate curricula.
This project is a two year renewal of a successful project started in l995 by
the Center for Image Processing in Education. The current project introduces
digital image processing as a learning tool for educators serving students
studying for careers as technicians. The project was designed to accomplish
three activities: conduct professional development for technological education
faculty at the high school and community college levels; build on the work of
the University of Arizona's Image Processing for Teaching project to develop
instructional materials for technological education; and establish a linking
infrastructure to deliver the workshops and materials, provide strong follow-up
support, and reach out to potential users. Objectives for the renewal period
include: 1. Continuing to provide high quality professional development
opportunities tailored to the needs of educators involved in technology oriented
fields such as biotechnology, environmental technology, and agricultural
technology at the high school and community college levels. 2. Continuing
development of instructional materials for technology education, both completing
materials begun during the first period of funding and developing new materials
in areas identified by educators and the project's Advisory Board. 3.
Maintaining and expanding the effective infrastructure for disseminating
workshops and materials, and continuing to provide strong follow-up support and
reach out t o potential users. 4. Developing a strong summative evaluation
program that effectively employs quantitative and qualitative analyses.