* 9752004
* Advanced Technology Education Program in Manufacturing      Information Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Nabil Ibrahim, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/1999
* USD 199,944.00

This program is creating and delivering appropriately designed curriculum to
enable students of diverse educational background to enter either the workforce
or a Community College program in manufacturing information systems engineering.
The program is refining curriculum, delivering faculty enhancement workshops,
providing student industry experiences, and establishing itself as a model for
replication. The manufacturing information systems program emphasizes system
integration. The curricula being developed leads first to a Certificate in
Information Technology (CIT) at the high school level, and then to an Associate
of Science degree in Manufacturing Information Systems Technology (MIST) at the
community college level. Both curricula can proceed seamlessly to an existing
BS-Engineering degree in Manufacturing Information Systems Engineering (MISE).
The project also includes the development of a certificate of Technical
Preparation in Information Technology (TPIT) for working technicians. These
curricula are being designed and delivered by an alliance of high schools,
community colleges, a four-year university and several high-tech companies in
the Silicon Valley. The program tracks are designed to provide seamless
transitions among curricula. This ATE project has four components: 1. curriculum
and instructional materials development, 2. student transition and articulation
3. faculty development, and 4. industry internship program for students.
Participating companies play an active role in defining customer requirements,
curriculum design, development of case studies, faculty internships, students
apprenticeship/training, state of the art laboratory equipment, industry-based
team projects and commitment of matching funds. The project aims to serve NSF's
ATE program through contribution of products (curricula, laboratory manuals,
instructional materials, experience with cooperative learning workshops for
faculty) that are being disseminated nationally through pu blications, annual
workshops, and Internet for use by other institutions.