* 9752353
* Bringing Theory and Practice Together in Engineering        Classrooms: A Research Project to Develop Cost-Effective    Instructional Material
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* P. Raju, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joan P. Gosink
* 12/31/2000
* USD 212,500.00

American industries are increasingly emphasizing that a successful engineer
must, in addition to possessing strong technical capabilities, understand the
non-technical forces that profoundly affect engineering decisions. The current
engineering teaching methodologies do not adequately develop these capabilities
and understandings of the students. This multi-disciplinary project is being
proposed to address this problem. The goals of this project are to develop and
test instructional material for a sophomore course that will bring theory and
practice together in engineering classrooms, develop the higher-level cognitive
skills of the students, and be cost effective. A review of instructional
methodologies and results from a pilot project showed that the case study method
of instruction is the most suitable for achieving these goals. During the first
year of this project, six engineering case studies along with background
competency materials, instructor's manuals, WWW sites, and videos will be
developed in partnership with industries. During the second year, the
instructional materials will be tested at Auburn University during three
quarters. The reusability of the material will be tested by running this course
at Alabama A&amp;M, a minority institution. The effectiveness of using this
instructional methodology will be evaluated by an outcomes-based model and also
with an experimental and comparison group research design. Throughout,
quantitative and qualitative data from the students and faculty will be used in
the ongoing formative evaluation of the materials and methods. Outcome measures
related to project goals will be analyzed in the summative evaluation. The
dissemination aspect of this project will involve publishing the instructional
materials, updating the WWW site, and publishing papers in academic and
practitioner journals. This project, built around active learning methods, has
the potential to make a revolutionary change in engineering education, thereby
fulfilling the demand s of industry to bring theory and practice into
classrooms.