* 9752494
* The Effective Use of Web-Based Scientific Resources in      Teaching &amp; Teacher Training:  A Collaborative Pilot Program Using Real Data Sets to Explore Oceanography &amp; Globa
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2001
* Luis Martinez-Perez, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 04/30/2001
* USD 207,253.00

The availability of real scientific data via the World Wide Web (WWW) affords a
unique opportunity for educators to teach science in authentic and engaging
ways. This project is exploring ways in which educators can most effectively use
the scientific resources available via the World Wide Web in their curriculum
development and teaching. The project is linking scientists and data at the
Bermuda Biological Station for Research (BBSR) with prospective science teachers
in the College of Education at Florida International University (FIU). This link
is mediated via an existing virtual campus operated by the College of
Exploration (TCOE). The content emphasizes global environmental change as it
relates to the oceanographic data in BBSR's Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study
(BATS). The resulting learning environment provides opportunities for
prospective science teachers in a high-minority area to use web-based data sets
to conduct inquiry-based learning. The objective is to help prospective teachers
gain the skills needed to design additional web-based curricula for use in
grades 6 to 12 classrooms. Curricula developed during this course will be shared
with teachers everywhere through a web database. The project is also documenting
the most effective design process for creating a web-enabled learning
environment by identifying the components, pedagogies, personnel, and
technologies needed to make the distance-learning environment effective.