* 9752892
* A Project to Adapt and Adopt Workshop Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1998,04/30/2001
* Joseph Wilson, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/2001
* USD 160,000.00

A coalition of four institutions, the University of Montana, American
University, Clark Atlanta University, and the University of Kentucky, are
adopting and adapting the core project Workshop Chemistry (centered at CUNY City
College), currently supported by the Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate
Chemistry Curriculum initiative. Workshop Chemistry is a flexible curriculum
model that involves students in active participation in the learning process
under the facilitation of a peer group leader. The traditional "question and
quiz" recitation section format is replaced by a cooperative learning, peer-led
workshop. We are addressing the problem of the high drop and fail rate in
general and organic chemistry courses by changing the social dynamics of the
course format. Specifically, we are promoting (1) a collegial network of
learners among students, (2) a recognition of differences in learning styles,
(3) the development of mentoring relationships, and (4) active group study that
develops interpersonal verbal communication skills. We also address the problem
of improved conceptual understanding through a collaborative learning process
that is specifically focused on chemistry concepts and problem-solving
techniques. Our objectives are being accomplished by restructuring our courses
to utilize the Workshop Chemistry format. Workbooks for both General and Organic
Chemistry courses are also being developed as part of the project.