* 9752535
* A Low Cost Open-Ended CBL Based Approach to General         Chemistry Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Diane Wolff, Ferrum College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 67,300.00

This innovative general chemistry laboratory development project seeks to
transform the traditional approach to laboratory. Open-ended labs covering
multiple weeks are conducted with methodology created by the students as the
labs proceed. Environmental and biological applications are used to enhance the
interest of the students. Data is collected on each student's Texas Instrument
TI-83 calculator using the lab's calculator based laboratory (CBL) system and
instrument probes. Real-time data analysis determines the quality of the data
and the need for further analyses. Four laboratory investigations are conducted
each semester. Each involves a variety of topics included in the traditional
single-week lab approach so that all of the important concepts generally
included in first year labs are addressed. The topics for this project include:
a) Internet and Web searches, b) chemical and physical properties of ten
environmentally important chemicals, c) water, water everywhere, d) properties
of liquids and gases, e) properties of solutions, f) vitamin chemistry, g) a
kinetics study, and h) a four week research project. The emphasis on
non-"cookbook" chemistry should stimulate the student's creativity and ability
to formulate and carry out self-designed scientific investigations. A final
research project involving concepts learned in the beginning labs is used to
investigate a problem that is of interest to the student. The goal of this
project is to create interesting, relevant laboratories that will lead to a
better understanding of chemistry as well as the methodology of science.