* 9752726
* Team-Oriented, Project-Based Collaborative Learning Workshop for Engineering Faculty Development
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Stephen Batill, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/1999
* USD 62,502.00

This proposal is for the development of a week-long faculty workshop which is
intended to assist mechanical, electrical and computer engineering faculty in
the development of project-based, collaborative learning exercises. The goal is
to present a workshop in which faculty will actually participate in a "hands-on"
project in order to assist them in developing a understanding of how fundamental
topics in the engineering curriculum can be applied in engineering practice - to
make a distinction between "academic problem solving" and "engineering decision
making". The workshop will group faculty in small "design-build" teams, provide
them with a "statement of opportunity", a schedule, computing, fabrication and
material resources and "technical" support. Each faculty team will define,
design, fabricate and demonstrate an autonomous, computercontrolled electro-
mechanical system. The purpose of the project is to provide these faculty with
the opportunity to apply their own discipline expertise to team-based decision
making in the product development process . This experience can then be used by
participating faculty in developing similar experiences for their own
curriculum. Part of the workshop will include the topics of establishing
specific project goals, identifying deliverables, such as written or oral
reports and prototypes, appropriating resources and developing effective project
schedules. The unique feature of this two-year project is that in these
workshops the faculty will actually be engaged in the "team-based" product and
process development process, so they can then carry their own experience, not
those from a book or lecture, back to their classroom.