* 9752241
* Beyond Formulas:  Utilizing Workplace Application Modules toEnhance Introductory Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Shai Neumann, Eastern Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2000
* USD 74,976.00

This project Beyond Formulas is developing holistic, interdisciplinary
Workplace Application Modules as enhancements to existing mathematics curricular
materials. By presenting students with challenging, work-based problems, these
modules demonstrate the relevance of abstract concepts to the real-world,
thereby helping students improve both their understanding of and attitude toward
mathematics. In turn, by making mathematics real to students through meaningful
examples and engaging activities, the project is increasing critical-thinking
and intuitive abilities - beyond rote memorization of formulas - to help
students more effectively solve problems and make decisions as future employees
in a highly technological workplace. Modules comprise five areas of study:
algebra, statistics, trigonometry, precalculus, and calculus. Each module is
exposing students to workplace-relevant scenarios and case studies that engage
the students in abstract reasoning and the process of inquiry, provide overviews
of industries on which case studies relate, and integrate mathematical theory
within the industrial context. Module activities include cooperative learning;
mathematical problem-solving; utilization of technology; use of data,
measurement, models, and cause and effect diagrams; written assignments; and
presentations. Modules are being pilot-tested, evaluated and revised by College
mathematics faculty from other two-year colleges and an external evaluator from
Manatee Community College. Student attainment of learning objectives, improved
performance, and changes in attitudes and perceptions are being used as
indicators of project effectiveness. Qualitative evaluations by faculty are also
being conducted. Developed materials and results are being disseminated locally,
statewide and nationally to maximize project impact.