* 9752340
* Infusion of Laser Technology in Science Courses:  An        Interdisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1998,08/31/2000
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 149,985.00

The proposed project addresses the well-documented need to incorporate modern
technology and various learning approaches in undergraduate education. Despite
reports citing the importance of lasers in chemical and physical research, it
remains unclear where and how undergraduate students begin to learn and explore
creative ideas using lasers. This proposal describes the development of an
interdisciplinary Lasers, Optics, and Spectroscopy course and relevant materials
for chemistry and physics students. This course will utilize non-traditional
pedagogical approaches to help capture the genuine interest and excitement of
scientific exploration and discovery. It will provide a means for introducing
modern equipment and technology into the undergraduate curriculum, while using
an investigative approach designed to enhance the learning experience. A key
element to these approaches will be laboratory-based activities involving
situations encountered in real scientific endeavors and real-world situations.
This learning experience is also designed to help students build connections
between disciplines, theory and experiments, and basic scientific principles and
applications. In addition, new experiments based upon lasers and related
technology will be developed for introductory science and mathematics courses,
and for an interdisciplinary science course for non-science majors. Finally, the
proposed effort would include a workshop for science and mathematics teachers in
order to provide similar materials for use in K-12 classrooms. All of the course
materials developed will be interdisciplinary (involving physics, chemistry, and
mathematics), thus demonstrating the students the need to retain, transfer,
apply, and evaluate basic concepts presented in their core courses. As a result,
students should be better prepared to use science and technology in addressing
future issues of society.