* 9752032
* Measure Up! Dimensional Metrology and ISO 9001
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Soren Bisgaard, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 08/31/2000
* USD 299,900.00

To provide opportunities for lifelong learning to machine tool and metrology
technicians so they can develop and maintain skills to meet the needs of
industry. To achieve this goal, the partnership among Madison Area Technical
College, the University of Wisconsin Center for Quality and Productivity
Improvement and the Madison Metropolitan School District will collaborate with a
network of industry and education representatives who have a stake in highly
skilled metrology technicians and qualified teachers. This proposal will
actively pursue the following objectives: (1) Establish and maintain active
collaborations with representatives from education, business/industry, and
government. (2) Incorporate employer needs, math and science standards, and
quality standards into a metrology curriculum for middle school, high school,
and undergraduate students as well as employees. (3) Develop and implement
faculty and industry professional development. (4) Adopt and develop strategies
to: increase the enrollment and success of students, particularly those from
under-represented groups; increase work experiences for students and faculty;
enhance professional status of technician careers; and provide lifelong learning
opportunities for technicians. (5) Facilitate exchange of ideas among students,
educators, employees, employers, and manufacturers. (6) Evaluate project
implementation through proactive third-party evaluators. Stakeholders will
exchange ideas and collaboratively develop metrology curriculum for secondary
and undergraduate students as well as employees at Metrology Institutes. They
will also develop strategies as prescribed in Objective 4. Finally, they will
gain work and hands-on laboratory experiences at the MATC Metrology Laboratory
and on the proposed Mobile Metrology Laboratory. *