* 9752974
* POWRE:  Molecular Genetic Approaches to Study Organellar    Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1998
* Sabeeha Merchant, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,900.00

9752974 Merchant This is a POWRE Visiting Professor award. The broad, long-term
objective of the PI's research program is the understanding of the process of
assembly of the chloroplast energy transducing membrane, with particular
emphasis on how the cofactors and polypeptides are assembled to yield a specific
functional arrangement in vivo. A recently-developed project deals with the
c-type cytochromes, soluble c6 and membrane-anchored f of the b6/f complex, and
cyt b6, an integral membrane subunit of the b6/f complex. This complex is not
essential for heterotrophic growth in the experimental model organism
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which allows exploitation of classical, molecular
genetic, and biochemical approaches of the study of its assembly. Genetic
analysis of C. reinhardtii cyt b6/f-deficient mutants has led to the definition
of multiple loci which are required for chloroplast c-type cytochrome maturation
(ccsA in the plastid genome, and CCS1 through CCS5 in the nuclear genome).
Biochemical analysis of ccs strains indicates that the products of the CCS loci
are required for conversion of apocytochromes to holocytochromes in the
thylakoid lumen. The ccsA and Ccs1 genes have been cloned; their products encode
low abundance thylakoid membrane proteins. A prime objective now is to undertake
functional studies of these two newly-identified components of a putative
thylakoid membrane-associated cytochrome c assembly complex. Of interest are the
topology and orientation of these novel proteins, and the identification of
other components of the complex. In the case of cyt b6, the products of at least
four loci (CCB1-CCB4) are required specifically for post-translational heme
insertion into one of the two heme binding sites. These are also envisioned to
be thylakoid membrane proteins, since cyt b6 synthesis and assembly is entirely
a membrane-associated process. The objective of this POWRE project is to access
approaches and methodologies employed for the functional character ization of
multi-component organellar membrane-protein complexes so that they may be
applied to the study of products of the CCS and CCB loci. The experimental
strategies employed for the definition of the mitochondrial protein translocases
serve as precedents for the development of methods for the study of the
thylakoid membrane c-type cytochrome synthesis complex. The PI will therefore
engage in a 6-month collaboration with Dr. Carla Koehler in the laboratory of
Dr. Gottfried Schatz at the Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland. During
this visit, the PI will participate in the functional analysis of genetically-
identified components of a mitochondrial translocase required for the import of
carrier proteins into the inner membrane. Direct involvement in this project
will facilitate the acquisition of the expertise the PI needs to move her
project on chloroplast cytochrome biogenesis beyond gene identification to the
definition of the biochemistry of the gene products. ***