* 9752190
* A Digital Computer Science Teaching Center
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1998,02/28/2001
* Edward Fox, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/28/2001
* USD 278,752.00

The digital Computer Science Teaching Center (CSTC) is an internet-based
repository of peer reviewed reusable teaching resources for computer science
educators. It will be implemented as a compelling web site with intuitive
navigation and powerful search capabilities. This clearinghouse of teaching
resources is endorsed by the Association of Computing Machinery and will provide
a trusted avenue for the dissemination of quality materials. The CSTC will
foster collaborative efforts as faculty are brought together by their common
interests. Outcomes will include a framework for developing and distributing
peer reviewed reusable teaching resources. This framework can be used for a
variety of resource centers that specialize in teaching resources such as
curriculum development, test banks, lecture notes, and syllabi. However, the
first three Resource Centers will be for visualization tools, computing
laboratories, and NSF Education Innovation (EI) projects. The Visualization
Resource Center contains tools and techniques to use visualizations in the
classroom. The Computing Laboratories Resource Center contains peer reviewed
laboratory materials designed for reuse. The EI Resource Center contains
courseware, tools, and other educational resources resulting from NSF EI
projects. An open solicitation and peer review process will be developed to
collect, critique, rate and refine submissions. By preserving traditional
standards from an Editorial Board and peer review, the CSTC provides an avenue
for professional recognition and reward for the scholarly contribution of
reusable teaching materials. Accepted materials will be available to download
from the CSTC. User profiles and survey results on the adoption of materials
will be used to enhance the value of the CSTC. The mission and existence of the
CSTC will be disseminated widely. This project is supported in part by the ACM
Education Board.