* 9752519
* HBCU Inter-Disciplinary Project-Based College Algebra       Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1998,12/31/2002
* Donald Small, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2002
* USD 188,089.00

A consortium of nine Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in
Texas and Louisiana is engaged in a four-year innovative initiative to develop a
new inter-disciplinary, project based College Algebra program and to change the
culture surrounding the present College Algebra courses. The Consortium,
headquartered at Texas Southern University in Houston, Texas, comprises three
universities, five four-year colleges, and a community college. The Consortium
schools are Texas Southern University, Prairie View A &amp; M University,
Grambling State University, Huston-Tillotson College, Jarvis Christian College,
Paul Quinn College, Texas College, Wiley College, and Central College of the
Houston Community College System. Each school's involvement is under the
direction of a Local Coordinator. College Algebra is the basic mathematics
course in these schools in the sense that it is the first mathematics course to
carry college or university credit. It is a prerequisite for the large majority
of majors and programs and it has an enrollment that is three to four times as
large as all other credit mathematics courses combined. The two goals of the
consortium are to: (1) Develop a new course that will (a) be project-based-small
group projects developed by inter-disciplinary teams of faculty members; (b)
incorporate a strong technology component; (c) develop communication skills; and
(d) develop students' mathematical self-esteem and confidence as problem
solvers. (2) Change the culture surrounding the present College Algebra program.
This will involve (a) developing a sense of ownership and pride in the College
Algebra program in each member of the full-time mathematics faculty teaching
College Algebra in the consortium schools; (b) energizing faculty to develop
modes of instruction that actively engage students in their own learning; (c)
developing a sense of involvement and responsibility for the College Algebra
program on the part of faculty in disciplines that require College Alge bra for
their majors; and (d) developing administrative support for the new program in
terms of reduced class size, equipment purchase, and technical computer
assistance. The project evaluation focuses on changes in the culture associated
with the College Algebra Program and in the College Algebra course.