* 9752894
* Reforming the Undergraduate Curriculum:  Adapting Fruits of the ModularChem Consortium and ChemLinks Coalition at       Minority  Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1998,07/31/2000
* Andres Trujillo, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Robert K. Boggess
* 07/31/2000
* USD 140,000.00

The goal of this project is to make a sweeping reform in the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum by adapting the fruits of the two systemic reform projects
ModularChem Consortium at University of California, Berkeley, and Chemlinks
Coalition at Beloit College, Wisconsin. Materials and methods from these two
projects are being adapted for general chemistry and analytical chemistry
courses. These changes emphasize the relevance of chemistry in modern society
and it application to real problems. Some non-science majors who take general
chemistry as part of their graduation requirements will also be impacted.
Pertinent, locally produced, low-cost equipment are incorporated in the
laboratory activities. This approach emphasizes the investigative nature of
science through chemical applications. The following approaches are being used:
(1) adopting and adapting the interdisciplinary modular approach in the teaching
of general, chemistry, analytical courses; (2) making the laboratory more
active, facilitating collaborative learning and the centerpiece of the student
learning experience; (3) providing students with a more accurate picture of
scientific processes by which scientists organize data, share their data and
design experiments; (4) aquatinting the faculty with the tools in current
teaching methods incorporating contemporary information technology.
Concentrating on the first two years of the chemistry curriculum, impacts the
largest number of students, including those who major in chemistry. In this
process, advanced chemistry courses will also be modified and affected in an
important way.