* 9752606
* The Internet Science Institute: A Web-Based Method of       Involving Students in Scientific Inquiry
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Robert Shelton, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,932.00

The advisory committee for NSF's education activities recently called for all
students to learn science by participating in the methods of science. This
project is a pilot demonstration of the Web as a platform for achieving that
goal in an affordable and attractive manner. During the last five years, Loyola
College has upgraded many of its science courses for majors based on modern
information processing and networking techniques with assistance of a series of
grants. This project will extend the benefits of these investments to the
introductory science courses for nonmajors via an Internet/intranet system that
will serve as a site for highly-interactive multimedia courseware, both locally
developed and downloaded from other sites. The user interface will be structured
as a virtual Internet Science Institute (ISI) with one building and two wings:
Physics and Computer Science, each with classrooms with courseware, laboratories
with virtual experiments, departmental libraries with other teaching materials,
and a faculty seminar room for exchange of ideas in science teaching. The newly
available Java network programming standard and an intranet structure will
greatly speed access, making high bandwidth media and true user interactivity
feasible. A special effort will be made to encourage development of interactive
science courseware via organization of peer review panels to validate its
quality and monthly recognition of the best courseware submitted. Courseware
will be developed at Loyola to teach science by involving physics students in
the scientific method, and students of computer science and engineering in the
design of hardware and software. Initially the material will be tested in
specific courses for non-majors, targeting those for education majors intending
to teach science where possible. ISI will also be available for other Loyola
students and as an Internet site for public use.