* 9752192
* The Rio Grande River Project: An Interdisciplinary Math/    Science Curriculum for College Freshmen and Sophomores
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2001
* James Earhart, Laredo Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2001
* USD 110,000.00

Through its Rio Grande River Project, Laredo Community College is developing a
two-course undergraduate interdisciplinary program of studies focusing on the
Rio Grande River. The program will integrate biology, algebra, trigonometry and
the physical sciences using problem-posing, discovery learning, river monitoring
and exploration, teleconferencing, microcomputers, and a student-led mini-
science symposium, as the culminating activity. The immediate beneficiaries of
the project are 100 freshmen and sophomores who will take the courses in
fulfillment of their associate degree math and science requirements. The courses
are designed for pre-service teachers, and science and math majors, as well as
for students pursuing other majors and careers. The major objectives of the
project are: 1) Train faculty to design interdisciplinary math/science courses;
2) Design a two-course sequence which will provide the required foundations in
four areas of college math and science; 3) Maintain high level of academic
achievement for participating students; 4) Increase career knowledge in math,
science and math/science education, especially for female and Hispanic students;
5) Expedite institutionalization of the courses; 6) Manage the project
effectively. The major contribution which the project will make to the field of
math/science education is its focus on a major national resource at risk (the
Rio Grande River) as a means of integrating the four disciplines and the
emphasis on developing approaches which are effective with students,
specifically Hispanic students for whom English is a second language. This
interdisciplinary approach will be particularly valuable as a model for those
students who will pursue K-12 science teaching as a career.