* 9752619
* Development and Evaluation of Computer-Assisted Instruction in the Methods of Scientific Sociology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1998,06/30/2001
* Charles Cappell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 160,815.00

This project proposes the development of approximately ten computer programs
utilizing new features of multi-media, interactive, instructional design. The
programs will reinforce the conceptual learning of the basic elements of
quantitative/statistical reasoning in the social sciences: critical thinking
skills, probability, conceptual modeling and hypotheses construction,
statistical modeling, sampling, and inference. Instructional design techniques
are used to improve student learning: interactive feedback, learner control,
active learning, conceptual mapping, and performance tracking. The modules will
be written using AUTHORWARE, an application development tool that creates
programs executable as both resident software and over an INTRANET using
AUTHORWARE's browser plug-in, SHOCKWAVE. The development of these applications
addresses a major problem encountered in teaching quantitative statistical
reasoning - how to improve students' understanding of basic concepts used in
statistical reasoning, the linkage between concepts, and their role in solving
real world problems, especially among students under educated in mathematics.
The modules will be used in a course sited in a laboratory known as the
Sociology Quantitative Research Laboratory, which was equipped with the aid of
an NSF ILI grant. These modules will add the "conceptual learning" tools to
existing "computational learning" lab tools. An experimental design using
students in an introductory methods course will evaluate the improvement in
student learning. The learning modules will have a general social science
context relevant for nearly all sociology and social science research courses.
We plan to distribute the modules commercially.