* 9752367
* Virtual Science Evironment for an Oceanography Course
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1998,03/31/2000
* William Prothero, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 03/31/2000
* USD 100,048.00

This project addresses science literacy and knowledge transfer from research to
the classroom. This initiative allows students to participate in the work of
science by collecting real Earth data, making authentic observations on the sea-
floor, and analyzing and interpreting obtained results. Interactive, multimedia
modules for a general education class and also for preservice teacher use in
their classrooms is being developed. The emphasis is on teaching students both
content and the process of doing science. Many of the investigations are
automatically graded and posted to the students' records, thereby allowing
instructors to help students in higher cognitive levels of understanding. The
project develops a "Virtual Science Workshop", and "Virtual Reality Field Trip
to the Mid-Ocean Ridges", both of which build on, and integrate with, the
recently developed "Our Dynamic Planet" CD-ROM, created by the PI, with support
from NSF. The interactive "Virtual Science Workshop" will be modeled after a
real science workshop. It will address the issues of providing students with
background information in an engaging way, modeling how scientists argue from
evidence, and helping students to pose their own experimental problem. The
"Virtual Reality Field Trip" to the mid-ocean ridges will use the latest
research data from ongoing ridge and vent studies to create a dynamic field
laboratory where students can explore, gather data, and analyze their findings.