* 9752583
* Visualizing and Animating Proofs in the Mathematical        Foundations of Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1998,08/31/2002
* Susan Rodger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 48,075.00

Proving theorems is uninteresting to many computer science undergraduates as it
usually involves mathematical notation, a pencil and paper working environment
and no immediate feedback. In the automata theory course, theorems are a large
part of understanding the relationships of languages, automata and grammars, yet
undergraduates obtain only a superficial understanding of many of the proofs of
these theorems. We will develop instructional software to aid in the
understanding of specific theorems, namely those whose proofs convert one form
to another form. For example, converting the definition of a context-free
grammar (CFG) to the definition of an equivalent pushdown automaton (PDA). As an
aid in understanding this proof, our software will allow the user to enter a CFG
and convert it to the equivalent PDA through several steps. We have already
designed several interactive and visual software tools that allow students to
experiment with grammars and automata, receiving immediate feedback. For
example, with our tool FLAP, students can build and test nondeterministic
versions of automata, pushdown automata and Turing machines. The new tools we
develop will have interfaces similar to our existing tools, for example the PDA
constructed above will be similar to the PDA in FLAP. Tools will be developed
during summers and integrated into the automata theory course. All tools and
course materials developed will be made available via anonymous ftp for others
to use.