* 9752756
* Coalition for the Mathematical Preparation of Elementary    Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1998,06/30/2000
* Gregory Foley, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

This 18 month project is extending an existing coalition formed among Sam
Houston State University, North Harris College, and Tomball College. The
original coalition was formed to implement changes in the mathematics content
courses for prospective elementary school teachers. These changes were given
impetus by the Guidelines for Mathematics Courses for Prospective Elementary
School Teachers, a document developed and disseminated in 1996 by the Texas
Statewide Systemic Initiative (SSI) and consistent with nationally-known
standards. The original coalition (SSI Coalition) is expanding to a network of
two-year colleges and universities seeking to revitalize their mathematics
courses for elementary teachers. The extended coalition is growing from
institutes and is being fostered by mentoring, electronic mail, a web page,
follow-through workshops, and a newsletter. The expanded coalition is using the
student projects manual and instructor's guide of the SSI Coalition project and
Ohio State short course materials. The materials developed by both programs
integrate substantial mathematical tasks with cooperative learning,
manipulatives, technology, and writing that challenge students while improving
their confidence and appreciation of mathematics. Four members of the SSI
Coalition faculty and one additional faculty are serving as senior personnel.
They are leading 24 other faculty participants who are experiencing the SSI
Coalition approach and are mentoring participants as they plan for the ensuing
year by crafting a new course or restructuring an existing course consistent
with the Guidelines. The project is employing an instructional consultant and an
outside evaluator as well as an advisory board to guide the project's progress.
Evaluation is being used to refine the instructional approach, to customize it
to local site conditions, and to measure the success of the project.