* 9752425
* Internet Based Interactive Construction Management Learning System
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Anil Sawhney, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

Growth and the replacement of people leaving the labor force will add more than
68,000 new positions for civil engineers by the year 2005, according to a recent
forecast of employment trends (ASCE, 1996). Attracting talented high school
graduates and imparting the best possible civil engineering education is
critical to the future of the U.S. construction industry. Studies conducted by
researchers reveal that civil and construction engineering education should
include practicality and feel for construction, creative thinking and problem
solving, engineering judgment, and practitioner involvement. In reality, civil
and construction engineering undergraduate curriculums are inadequate in
providing students with the necessary construction management skills and
experience. The goal of this project is to incorporate practical content in the
civil and construction engineering thus bridging the gap between the classroom
and the construction site. The project seeks to accomplish this important goal
through the development of an integrated educational framework for the civil and
construction engineering curricula that will serve as a national model. The two
main activities of the project are: 1) to develop an Internet-based Interactive
Construction Management Learning System; and 2) to develop an advising and
mentorship program that will enhance practitioner involvement. The Interactive
Learning System will focus on using interactive and adaptive learning
environment to train students in the area of planning of construction processes.
Tools that will be used in the development of the system will include
multimedia, internet based computing, relational databases, simulation, and
gaming. It will provide a real world environment requiring the use of multiple
tools. The Interactive Learning System will be incorporated into the
construction engineering and management curricula at Western Michigan
University. The computer package, course material, and findings of the project
will also be disseminated to unive rsities offering civil and construction
engineering curricula at the national level. Evaluation instruments will be
utilized to evaluate the learning and cost effectiveness of the proposed
educational framework. This project provides an innovative methodology that
utilizes the knowledge and guidance of industry experts, state-of-the art active
learning paradigms, advanced computing tools, and skills of the university
faculty to enrich the undergraduate engineering education.