* 9752028
* MATE - Marine Advanced Technology Education Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Kam Matray, Monterey Peninsula College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/28/2001
* USD 3,086,970.00

The MATE Center is coordinating and facilitating the development of a modern,
national program for marine technology education and training involving high
schools, community colleges, technical schools, and four-year colleges. The
Center, focusing on program development at the community colleges, emphasizes
intensive interactions between educational institutions and industry, military,
government, and labor organizations. The Center focuses on the areas of marine
technology in which the current and future needs of the Nation and employers are
unlikely to be met by the existing educational system. The goals of the Center
include : (1) Development of a national consortium of the major stakeholders in
marine technology and marine technology education; (2) Development of National
standards and an assessment of job and educational needs for major branches of
marine technology; (3)Development and distribution of new and existing curricula
and instructional materials; (4) Provision of unique educational opportunities
for students and technicians; (5) Provision of professional development
opportunities for faculty; and (6) development of ongoing funding and in-kind
support to sustain the Center beyond the period of NSF funding. The major
products of the MATE Center include: (1) A national MATE Center and regional
MATE Centers composed of a consortium of school districts, community colleges
and technical schools, universities, and industrial, scientific, and government
partners; (2) Curriculum materials for specific marine technician job
categories; (3) Assessment of skill requirements and development of standards
for specific marine technician categories leading to standardized certificates
and degree programs for marine technicians; (4) An accreditation mechanism for
marine technology educational programs; (5) Summer institutes and internships in
marine technology for students, faculty, and technicians (6) Models for student
recruitment and retention; (7) A clearinghouse for dissemination of c urricula
and information on certificate and degree programs, faculty development
opportunities, and technician job placement; (8) A directory of information
about existing marine technology education programs and their articulation
strategies with high schools and universities; (9) Newsletters to disseminate
MATE Center products and announce MATE Center activities. The MATE Center is
having a major impact on the education of marine technicians in the Unites
States. In doing so, the Center contributes to the nation's national security
needs and its economic competitiveness.