* 9752689
* Interactive Biochemistry-An Interactive Web Course in       Biochemistry Using JAVA-Based Problem Solving and Chime-    Based Molecular Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Charles Grisham, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/2001
* USD 100,000.00

The long-range objective of this project is to develop a comprehensive, highly-
interactive course in biochemistry that will be widely accessible on the World
Wide Web. This course is designed for use with a conventional instructor and
textbook, and it does not attempt to duplicate either of these roles on the Web.
Rather, it consists of interactive learning devices that actively engage the
student in going well beyond the limits of textbook- blackboards, overhead
transparencies and text-and-graphics Web pages. The fundamental motivation of
this project is to create a learning environment which leads the student through
problem-solving exercises and which provides a richer, more three-dimensional
and more animated vision of biological molecules, models and concepts. The
pedagogical elements of this course include: a) JAVA applets that lead students
through calculations, graphing exercises, problem-solving and modeling of
fundamental and advanced topics in biochemistry, including amino acid titrations
and chemistry, enzyme kinetics, enzyme mechanisms, metabolic pathways, protein
structure analysis, etc., and b) tutorial and modeling exercises on protein,
nucleic acid and carbohydrate structural analysis using the free CHIME~ plug-in.
A variety of applets that demonstrate the potential of JAVA for this project and
the pedagogical possibilities for teaching and learning biochemistry have been
produced. These efforts have also produced tutorial exercises that demonstrate
the power of CHIME~' as a teaching and learning tool in biochemistry. This
project may be viewed on the Web with the URL: http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/~cmg.
(The user's computer must be JAVA-capable and must have the CHIME~ plug-in
installed.) The programming efforts described in this proposal include: 1.
Expansion of current modules to include many new examples. 2. Development of an
interactive, menu-driven protein modeling package based on CHIME~ and Javascript
(a language loosely related to JAVA). This package permits stu dents to select
proteins, model and study them, write scripts to save and redisplay their work,
and print their results, all within the Web environment. 3. Virtual-reality-
animation of figures, biochemical events and processes. This pedagogical element
presents spatially complex and time-dependent phenomena such as the motions of
peptide chains, the replication of DNA and binding equilibria to students in
three-dimensional animations which the student will be able to view from a
variety of perspectives. 4. Virtual reality-modeling of biochemical 'thought-
experiments', including development of protein purification schemes, elucidation
of the functions of signal-transduction factors, modulators of vesicle transport
and transcription factors. These models employ JavaScript and JAVA to lead
student users from hypothesis to logically-chosen experiments, to results
(generated by JAVA applets), followed by re-evaluation of the hypothesis and
further experimentation. Biochemical knowledge is expanding at an explosive
pace. Teachers in this field need new and better tools to manage and communicate
this knowledge to students. This project provides a package of such tools for
teachers and students. Its Web-based nature make it available either for
classroom use or for study by students outside of class from any Internet access
point. Its interactive design engages students more effectively in comprehension
and learning. The broader significance of this project lies in the fact that the
underlying nature and structure of the proposed JAVA applets are applicable to
nearly any field of knowledge. These applets can be readily adapted to the
teaching (and learning) of mathematics, physics, economics, and many other
fields. They can also be adapted to other levels of education, including
elementary and secondary education.