* 9752882
* Chemistry ConcepTests Linked to Course Learning Objectives
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1998,12/31/2000
* Carl Wamser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 151,455.00

Presentation of sophisticated course material to chemistry students has become
easier, richer, and broadly available, significantly enhancing or sometimes
replacing the traditional lecture mode of information delivery. This impressive
progress comes with the risk of overwhelming students with information. Students
need the ability to determine whether they are on track towards meeting the
learning objectives that are expected of them. Similarly, faculty need to
recognize whether their teaching methods are effectively bringing students to
success in the course learning objectives. As chemists have always recognized,
it is the working with information, whether in the lab or in problem-solving,
that generates real understanding and capability. This project will primarily
work with the ConceptTests database, which is part of the University of
Wisconsin New traditions Project. The primary outcome will be a collection of
web-based questions intended to be useful to students for self-assessment and to
faculty for immediate feedback in class. This project will add to the size and
diversity of the ConcepTests database, and it will extend its usefulness by
correlating the questions to specific learning objectives for general chemistry
and organic chemistry classes. We will class-test the questions in large lecture
classes of general chemistry and organic chemistry, and we will integrate the
questions with the web-based course materials that we have already developed for
these classes. We will also evaluate whether these ConcepTests will be useful to
judge student readiness for different levels of chemistry in general education
coursework. We will initiate a "Chemistry Commons," where students will have
access to the web-based materials in an exciting, interactive environment. We
will collaborate with the Oregon Collaborative for Excellence in Preparation of
Teachers (OCEPT) in statewide programs that address improvement of science
teaching and learning for all students. In collaboration with OCEPT initiatives,
we will work to develop support systems for the two mainstream chemistry courses
and a seminar on teaching/learning that will help to draw students into
recognizing the values and rewards of teaching as a profession.