* 9752776
* Project to Reconnect Two and Four Year College Faculty to   the Mathematical Sciences Enterprise
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2000
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2000
* USD 174,999.00

This project seeks to "reconnect" to the mathematical sciences enterprise two
and four year college faculty who lack the time to keep up with research
developments. The workshops expose them to current research topics in discrete
mathematics and theoretical computer science that are relevant to their teaching
by involving them in a research center where much of the relevant research is
being carried out. The project aims to enhance the ability of faculty to
transform their classrooms into places that connect up to modern uses of
mathematics and computer science and to help them produce classroom materials
that reflect current research. Both summer conferences and a sequence of two-day
conferences are taking place. The summer conferences, national in scope and
directed at two and four-year college faculty with some prior exposure to
discrete mathematics and theoretical computer science, present recent research
results in topics such as computational molecular biology, network
visualization, clustering, and visibility in geometry, and divide the
participants into writing groups. The two-day conferences, regional in scope and
directed at two year college faculty with little prior exposure to discrete
mathematics and theoretical computer science, present an introduction to these
fields, with connection to topics of current research interest, and also involve
the participants in writing materials in a six month period between two two-day
conferences. Participants in both the two-day and two-week conferences are
expected to use the materials they have written as vehicles to bring discrete
mathematics and theoretical computer science into their classrooms. Participants
are encouraged to make their materials available to a broader audience through
developing and publishing them in the DIMACS Undergraduate Module Series. *