* 9752985
* POWRE:  Interactive Technologies for Chemistry Websites:    Educational Materials for Organic Chemistry (EMOC)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,01/20/1999
* Abby Parrill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/20/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9752985 This project will result in a set of high-quality, interactive learning
tools for organic chemistry. It has three main components: the designing and
writing interactive materials for the EMOC website, developing tools for
facilitating alternative methods of assessment, and evaluating existing and
future materials as they become available on the EMOC website. The materials are
being developed using hypertext markup language (HTML) with interactivity
provided by common gateway interface (CGI) scripts written in the Perl scripting
language. Database interface tools will be developed for the Oracle Database
Server using the OraPerl add-on's to Perl. This combination of technologies
provides flexibility while serving the intended audience through commonly
available software interfaces. Evaluation will be highly interactive and consist
of free- response student surveys as well as individual interviews and focus
group meetings. Student attitude towards both the interactive technologies and
the learning impact of the materials will be surveyed. The development of
interactive database tools removes the 'bookkeeping' related with authentic,
process-oriented assessment of large introductory undergraduate courses. This
project advanced the development of learning environments for undergraduate
organic chemistry courses involving large numbers of students.