* 9752244
* Teaching Multithreaded Programming to Computer Science      Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1998,05/31/1999
* Ching-Kuang Shene, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 05/31/1999
* USD 50,002.00

With the continuing emergence of multithreaded computation as a powerful vehicle
for science and engineering, the need for an introduction to multithreaded
programming for scientists and engineers is high. All popular operating systems
already support multithreaded programming and the popular POSIX Pthreads
standard has just been approved. It is the right time to teach students this new
technology. In so doing, students will be able to carry the skills over to their
jobs and increase this nation's competitiveness. The primary goal of the project
is to design a set of comprehensive and flexible course materials for teaching
multithreaded programming to sophomore and junior students so that it can be
used across several courses or in a dedicated one. A secondary goal is to
develop pedagogical programming aids for the students to visualize and
experiment with various concepts in multithreaded programming. These concepts
include program behavior and execution visualization, deadlock and race
condition detection, and software metrics for measuring the complexity of
students' programs. By consolidating many potential uses in a single place, this
proposed project will improve students' understanding of multithreaded
programming so that it can be used in several courses and applications. A basic
understanding of the technology will help non-CS students to enhance their level
of competence and allow them to use multithreaded programming with confidence in
their respective fields. The impact of this project may also include an improved
retention rate of students and an increased employability of graduates in
multithreaded application and system software development.