* 9752712
* Molecular Genetic Analysis Applied to Evolution, Ecology,   and Systemic Biology:  An Extended Laboratory Course
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Eric Routman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2000
* USD 155,982.00

This Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement (UFE) project provides for each of the
next two years: an intense fourteen-day laboratory short course, Molecular
Genetics & Evolutionary Biology, in the summer; a 4-day follow-up session the
following summer; and on-going technical and material support. The format
evolved from prior national Chautauqua and UFE courses. Twenty-two faculty are
selected each year from a national applicant pool comprised of faculty from
community colleges, 4-year liberal arts colleges and universities, comprehensive
universities, and research universities. Four pre-service teachers are selected
from SFSU. Participants learn the fundamentals of molecular biology through
lectures and demonstrations, and conduct a series of experiments to develop
skill in PCR amplification, restriction enzyme analysis, and various gel
separation techniques. Participants investigate "thematic" research projects in
research groups of six composed of a mix of a pre-service teacher, a mentor
teacher and faculty from community colleges and four-year institutions. Seminar
topics include the use of molecular techniques to investigate procaryote,
vertebrate, invertebrate, and plant systems, the incorporation of these
techniques into the undergraduate laboratory, and examples of effective teaching
practices. As a final exercise, each of the preservice teachers and faculty
create teaching modules incorporating the new laboratory and teaching techniques
developed during the workshop. Following the course the SFSU faculty is
available via telephone and email to help participants incorporate molecular
techniques and analysis into their research projects and their undergraduate
courses. The instructional materials developed in prior courses as well as
materials developed by new UFE participants are being placed on an SFSU/UFE web
site.