* 9752671
* Incorporating Research and Theory into the Undergraduate    Computer Science Curriculum through Practical Case Study    Projects
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,10/31/1999
* Joan Krone, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Denise Martin
* 10/31/1999
* USD 81,725.00

The project is to develop a pilot, senior level course that uses a combination
of methods proposed by the PI's to address 6 points of need in undergraduate
Computer Science education that have arisen in several recent reports. These
reports have dealt with the interaction of theory and practice as well as
academia and industry within the context of Computer Science education and
research. The eventual aim is to introduce the proposed methods into lower level
CS courses. For this purpose, it is expected that the experience gained and
problems encountered during the proposed project - involving the more
controlled, but representative, senior-level student population at 3
institutions - would be crucial, if not indispensable. The course to be
developed will be based entirely on case-studies. These are not artificially
contrived or token exercises, but are to be obtained from raw case-study
material collected (in consultation with industrial partners) from past and
ongoing projects in industry. These case-studies are carefully chosen and
designed (i) to expose students to a broad variety of large, prototypical, real-
world projects, (ii) to apply, in a noncompartmentalized manner, a combination
of formal and theoretical concepts, techniques and results in real situations,
(iii) to illustrate recent theoretical research results in the context of a
chain of applications leading to the solution of a real-world problem, and (iv)
to involve the student in significant software implementation while being
conscious of its role in the larger context of an industrial case-study project.
The main results of the project will be twofold: (1) Industrial case-study
material in a uniform format, usable also by schools with no industrial
contacts, along with supplementary formal and conceptual material, teaching tips
etc. (2) Pilot methodology to be used by schools who are interested in
developing their own bank of case studies. These methodologies will be
documented and also conveyed via a conference pape r, as well as a one day
workshop, possibly at DIMACS.