* 9752015
* Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in Science, Mathematics   and Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Russell Marcks, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 07/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

This Advanced Technological Education Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Project
is a cooperative effort of Sinclair Community College (Dayton, OH), General
Motors Delphi Chassis (a leading manufacturer of automotive and light truck
chassis in Dayton, OH), KMC Controls (a leading manufacturer of process control
equipment in New Paris, IN) and Stratasys, Inc. (a leading manufacturer of rapid
prototyping systems in Eden Prairie, MN). Sinclair Community College, Delphi
Chassis, KMC Controls, and Stratasys is sponsoring a series of one-week
comprehensive professional development programs for two-year college engineering
technology, science, and mathematics faculty during the summers of 1998 and
1999. Participating faculty are attending courses and are working hand-in-hand
with their colleagues from industry and universities while learning about the
latest technology in the areas of: 1. Rapid Prototyping Course at Sinclair
Community College at the Advanced Integrated Manufacturing Center (Dayton, OH)
in cooperation with Stratasys. 2. Workcell Simulation Course at Sinclair
Community College at the Advanced Integrated Manufacturing Center (Dayton, OH)
in cooperation with General Motors Delphi Chassis. 3. Process Control Course at
KMC Controls (New Paris, IN). The target audience is 20 engineering technology,
science, and mathematics faculty each year from two-year colleges across the
country for a total of 40.