* 9752082
* TECH SPAN: Fulfilling Lifelong Learning Through Flexible    Manufacturing Technical Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* G.E.O. Widera, Waukesha County Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 07/31/2001
* USD 700,000.00

Work requires that schools prepare the workforce with certain basic and
technical competencies. Business, industry and its workers are demanding that
these competencies be made available in easily accessible learning formats in
order to accommodate the pace of technological change. Schools, however, are
faced with rising costs and the service needs of changing student groups. The
mission of the TECH SPAN Program is to develop applied manufacturing curriculum
which provides for the flexible delivery of technical education to first time
and returning students, and workers in an internationally competitive
environment. TECH SPAN will develop manufacturing curriculum in technology-
supported instructional packages. TECH SPAN will create a framework on which to
base a sustainable system of curriculum development and delivery at the
undergraduate and secondary school levels, especially for technicians being
educated for the high performance workplace. This project will result in major
improvements in advanced technological education in manufacturing, serve as a
model for other institutions and states, assure that secondary and postsecondary
students acquire strong foundations in mathematics and science, and produce
nationally-usable educational products. The TECH SPAN Program will a) develop 11
manufacturing technical core competencies into modules and instructional
materials using the Wisconsin Instructional Design System (a computerized,
performance-based instructional design system); b) research the most effective
delivery method/materials for providing manufacturing technician training in
multiple delivery formats (i.e., traditional, audio, visual, digitized, CD-ROM,
Internet, etc.); c) produce computerbased, self-paced, multi-media manufacturing
curriculum, d) develop educational professionals in traditional and non-
traditional educational delivery systems; and e) disseminate information on the
process and the educational products developed.