* 9752559
* Probability by Surprise:  Animations and Simulations
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1998,04/12/1999
* Susan Holmes, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Frank Wattenberg
* 04/12/1999
* USD 99,970.00

Students begin their study of probability and statistics with strong and often
misleading intuitive ideas. This project seeks to confront students'
preconceptions and at the same time use them as a source of motivation. Our
approach uses the counter-intuitive side of probability to "rope students in" -
to capture their imagination and force them to think. We are developing a Web
site with interactive, Java-based, material that can be used in introductory
probability and statistics classes for both specialists and non-specialists,
from AP courses through upper level college courses. The site will include:
simulations; animated scenarios; links to background material in mathematics;
interactive Venn diagrams, probability trees, and densities as limits of
histograms; historical material related to probability and statistics; and
graphical animations. But the heart of the site will be a collection of modules
that surprise and engage students - the "Gotcha!" of probability. We exploit the
observation of Laplace -- "The Mind, like the sense of sight, has its illusions;
and just as touch corrects those of the latter, so thought and calculations
correct the former. Recent work of cognitive psychologists informs this project
in two ways. First, it identifies students' preconceptions and the barriers they
create for understanding probability. Second, it will guide the development of
effective educational uses of the rich array of multimedia and interactive
technologies available via the Web.