* 9752789
* A Multidisciplinary Workshop on Novel Process Science and   Engineering Principles for College Faculty
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Robert Hesketh, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2000
* USD 83,948.00

Process engineering is critical to virtually all modem products used by society.
In addition, process engineering spans many disciplines including chemical,
petroleum, biochemical, environmental, food, materials production and
manufacturing. Society is requiring these products to be produced in an
environmentally benign manner which necessitates the infusion of new and
emerging process engineering concepts. Many faculty do not have the experience
in novel process engineering required to teach this information to students. For
example many new faculty from engineering, science, mathematics and technology
are hired with no industry experience and only have a highly specialized
knowledge of one particular field. Faculty should have experience in emerging
process engineering technologies such as environmental processing, hazard
evaluation. materials engineering, particle processing, bioprocessing and novel
unit operations. The thrust of this proposal is to conduct two hands-on,
industry integrated workshops that have a major impact on lower level
engineering, technology and science instruction as well as having a secondary
impact in the preparation of future teachers. Two workshops are planned for
Summer 1998 and 1999 with participants actively recruited from underrepresented
groups in science and engineering. Participants in these workshops will gain
experience in process engineering through hands-on laboratories, industry
experts, site visits and interactive demonstrations. Through industry
involvement, faculty are given an initial networking base for process
engineering. Participants are required to use the given methodology to integrate
novel processing into their curricula and develop an action plan for their home
institution. Active learning methods is employed in the workshop and
participants are encouraged to incorporate this experience into their teaching
style. This state-of-the-art workshop in process engineering facilitates the
integration of engineering practice into the undergraduat e curriculum.