* 9752185
* Integrating Pedagogical and Curriculum Theory with Teaching Practice Throughout all Mathematics and Science Courses in  the College of Arts &amp; Sciences and Evaluating and....
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1998,08/31/1999
* H. Fred Henneike, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

Since World War II, it has become increasingly clear that the goals for teaching
and learning mathematics and the sciences are not being met. Graduates emerge
with at best an ability to manipulate formulas, and at worst attitudes that
reject these subjects and their applications. Often, computing science graduates
are ill-prepared for even entry-level positions because of deficiencies in
general problem-solving, oral and written communication, and working in teams.
In this project, Georgia State University (GSU) is beginning the process to
design, implement, and report on the results of systemic change in pedagogy in
collegiate-level mathematics, statistics, computer science, and physical
sciences courses, especially for pre-service teachers in keeping with MAA and
AMATYC recommendations. One goal of the project is to change the basic modus
operandi of how courses are taught. The initial focus is on the first two years
of college mathematics, statistics, and computer science while planning for
extending the efforts into the physical sciences. The project is being conducted
in three phases. First, faculty in Mathematics and Computer Science, which also
includes statistics, and Learning Support Programs are collaborating with
faculty from the GSU College of Education to coordinate pedagogy taught in
education courses with that experienced in content courses. Second, faculty from
Chemistry and Geology departments will begin participating. Thirdly,
representative faculty from other schools will be encouraged and supported to
plan programs for their institutions. Products include: an ethnographic study of
the entire program; a model for colleges interested in such systemic change; and
guidelines/practical suggestions on ways in which mathematics and science
departments can spur joint effort among faculty to ensure that innovative
curriculum development and pedagogical change has a sustained impact. Lastly, a
national advisory board of prominent professionals is being formed representing
the mat hematical and physical sciences, education, and other schools.