* 9752084
* The Minnesota LCI Program:  Enhancing Scientific Conceptual Learning and Techonological Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Aaron Wenger, Minnesota State Colleges & Universities
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 06/30/2001
* USD 445,961.00

The Minnesota Laboratory Centered Instruction (LCI) Program is enhancing
scientific conceptual mastery and technological literacy through the classroom-
scale implementation of a hands-on, inquiry driven teaching technique known as
LCI. This implementation requires changes in the institutional practices and
administrative structures of Minnesota high schools and community colleges. To
address this issue the project is being aided by The Center For School Change.
During its 31-month duration, the program is reaching a minimum of 24 existing
or future high school instructors, 1,440 high school students, 9,000 community
college students, and 10 community college instructors. Specific strategies for
success include: 1. Development of three community college LCI learning centers
and eight high school LCI model classrooms to serve as examples of classroom-
scale LCI teaching with strong administrative support. 2.) Creation of a
supportive, self-sustaining network of science instructors to offer support to
other interested instructors and demonstrate the ability of the program to
effect real and substantive change. 3.) Creation of a substantial video and
multimedia library of classroom-scale LCI curricular modules and workplace
internship experiences to assist instructors nationwide in their efforts to
implement LCI at a classroom-scale.