* 9752632
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Teaching Mathematics and   Composition Through a Course Cluster
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2000
* Pau-San Haruta, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/2000
* USD 125,221.00

This project is designed to strengthen mathematical and writing skills among
first-year college students who indicate that they will not major in a field
with specific mathematical requirements. The project is developing an integrated
teaching approach, where the same students are enrolled in both an introductory
level mathematics and writing class. The mathematics class is providing students
with the skills necessary (basic number theory, vectors, functions,
permutations, and some basic group theory) to understand and create check digit
schemes. Not only is the single topic of check digit schemes being explored in
depth, but the uses of mathematics in other academic disciplines are also being
investigated by students in the course. Applications to cryptography, finance,
art, and science are being explicitly explored. In the writing course, the
students are guided in the writing process and compose six formal essays, whose
content come from the mathematics class. As a result, the students are learning
the value of writing to research and to express an understanding of a
mathematical topic. Electronic resources are also being developed to support
this approach. This project supports first-year students at Marist College for
years to come as it is associated with the Cluster Program, a program vigorously
supported by the College. It also has national implications as a number of
selected institutions are testing this approach and the material generated by
this project. The project is resulting in a book that supports the approach as
well as two publications, one on the pedagogical methods developed and one on
the evaluative designs used. Formative and summative evaluations of the project
are being performed by a national advisory board, a materials evaluation
consultant, and a Marist College evaluation team. To more fully address students
enrolled in the teacher education program at Marist and to use the project as an
avenue to enhance K-12 education in the future, Marist is dedicated to the
following two preservice teacher education initiatives associated with this
project. They are (a) enrolling a number of teacher education freshmen in the
cluster each year, and (b) using education students who have completed the
cluster to serve as mentors or undergraduate teaching assistants. 8