* 9752713
* Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching Through   Field Stations
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Lynda Shapiro, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2001
* USD 299,999.00

Field stations and marine laboratories (FSMLs) offer an exceptional opportunity
to teach biology in ways that truly enhance student learning. FSMLs are
particularly well suited to inquiry-based learning called for in science
education reform as their unique natural settings foster learning communities
and cooperative activities that are not always evident on main campus locations.
However, the majority of faculty based at FSMLs, and those faculty that bring
students to FSMLs from universities and colleges, have limited experience with
effective instructional strategies to teach science through inquiry. Faculty
Institutes For Reforming Science Teaching Through Field Stations (Project FIRST)
is designed to prepare communities of faculty associated with field stations
throughout the United States to utilize inquiry-based, active learning
approaches for reforming undergraduate biology courses and curriculum. During
FIRST, new faculty, senior faculty and post-doctoral students who are either
based at, or associated with, a field station or marine laboratory will form a
Field Station team (the FSML team) to work together to expand their knowledge of
inquiry-based learning at FSMLs, ideal active learning settings. Six FSML teams
will recruit one hundred eighty biology faculty from universities, and four-year
and community colleges in their region to form a regional network centered at
the field station or marine laboratory. The faculty will come from both science
and education departments at these institutions. FSML teams will work with the
regional faculty to translate and make connections between active learning
models designed at field stations, and similar innovative teaching methods or
strategies that would work for courses and curriculum within departments to
enhance student learning. These techniques will also serve as models for the
prospective K-12 teachers enrolled in the science and education courses of
participating faculty. By providing these opportunities, all students should
have opp ortunities to gain scientific understanding through direct experiences
with methods and processes of scientific inquiry.