* 9752962
* POWRE:  Mechanisms of Organelle Autophagy in the Yeast      S. cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2000
* Jane Robinson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9752962 Robinson This is a POWRE Research Enhancement Award. During cellular
remodeling, a process known as autophagy plays a role in transporting
superfluous cytoplasmic proteins and organelles to the lysosome for degradation.
Such cellular remodeling occurs during differentiation, nutrient deprivation,
metamorphosis, aging and transformation; autophagy also removes abnormal
organelles that may accumulate for various reasons. Thus, autophagy is a vitally
important process. During autophagy, a double membrane structure surrounds or
engulfs a region of cytosol containing the material to be degraded, creating a
double membrane bound organelle, the autophagosome. Autophagosomes deliver their
contents for degradation by fusing the outer membrane with the lysosomal or
vacuolar membrane. The objective of this project is to unravel the molecular and
cellular mechanisms involved in organelle autophagy. The experiments will be
performed in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This organism is commonly used
as a model for cell biological studies because of the advantages it offers for
genetic, cell biological, and molecular analyses. The experimental approach will
be to label the peroxisomes of the yeast cells with green fluorescent protein
(GFP) and use digital time-lapse fluorescent microscopy as well as quantitative
fluorimetry to observe and measure peroxisome autophagy. Some of the planned
experiments will test whether autophagy can be a selective process where
specific superfluous structures are selectively targeted to the autophagic
pathway. To do this, rates of peroxisome and mitochondrial degradation will be
simultaneously measured under conditions where one organelle, but not the other,
is required for cell viability. A second hypothesis that will be tested is that
general membrane trafficking components as well as key components of the cell's
cytoskeleton play a role in the formation, transport or function of the
autophagosomes in yeast. These experiments will combine assa ys for organelle
autophagy with methods available in yeast to specifically inhibit specific
protein functions. The experiments will specifically assess potential roles in
autophagy of two proteins involved in membrane fusion, NSF and Kar2p, and two
components of the yeast cytoskeletal system, microtubules and actin. Finally,
genetic screens will be carried out to identify new molecules involved in
autophagy. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting will be used to enrich for mutant
cells that retain GFP-labeled peroxisomes due to delayed or abolished autophagy.
The characterization of mutants collected by this screen is part of the longer
term goal of understanding the molecular mechanisms of autophagy but is beyond
the scope of the present award. This project represents a return to active cell
biological research for the Principal Investigator, after a major hiatus in her
career. The support from a POWRE award will allow the Principal Investigator to
develop the necessary preliminary results for a novel and promising avenue of
research. ***