* 9752268
* Intergration of Collaborative Case-Based Learning into      Undergraduate Biology Curricula via Molecular Computer      Simulations and Nationwide Internet Conferencing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1998,06/30/2003
* Mark Bergland, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2003
* USD 299,912.00

This project addresses the need to engage introductory biology students in
critical thinking and problem-solving by making topics in molecular biology more
interesting and relevant to all students. Open-ended software simulations
integrated with Internet conferencing are facilitating collaborative case-based
learning among teams of students at a variety of educational institutions across
the nation and the world. Simulation modules share a user-friendly interface and
generate realistic output in a format understandable to introductory biology
students. The modules work with any DNA, RNA, or protein sequence and also give
students the option of using simulated laboratory equipment to generate data.
Students analyze pre-designed cases or else develop their own cases using
molecular sequences obtained via the Internet. Preservice K-12 science teachers
involved in case development and evaluation are gaining experience with research
methodology applicable to their own classrooms. Educators can download modules,
cases, and resource manuals at no cost from an Internet site at the University
of Wisconsin-River Falls. Project results are being widely disseminated at
local, regional, and national professional meetings, and also are published
annually on the BioQUEST Library CD-ROM. The editorial staff of BioQUEST are
assisting in the evaluation and dissemination of project results.