* 9752885
* Consortium to Improve Chemistry: Linking Nine Community     Colleges with the National Science Foundation's             Undergraduate Chemistry Systemic Reform Initiative
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1998,12/31/2003
* Marie Wolff, Oakton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2003
* USD 238,230.00

Chemistry faculty from nine Illinois community colleges have formed a consortium
that serves an annual credit enrollment of over 157,000 students and an annual
chemistry enrollment of over 6,000 students. The consortium is composed of
community colleges from urban, suburban, and rural communities: Oakton Community
College, The City Colleges of Chicago, College of DuPage, College of Lake
County, Triton College, William Rainey Harper College, McHenry County College,
Illinois Eastern--Olney Central, and Joliet Junior College. This consortium is
reforming first-year chemistry curricula on member campuses by adapting and
adopting the materials produced by the Modular Chemistry Consortium and the
ChemLinks Coalition to meet the needs of students enrolled in community
colleges. These materials were developed by two of the projects funded by the
current National Science Foundation (NSF) chemistry initiative. The new
chemistry curriculum is active and inquiry-based, flexible enough to address the
many learning styles represented by a diverse student population, and more
relevant to the lives of the students. The process of adapting and adopting
involves an active collaboration between the consortium faculty and
representatives of ModularChemistry and ChemLinks. The process also includes
partnerships with industry and professional organizations. This project extends
the impact of the current NSF systemic chemistry initiative by serving as a
model for other community colleges considering the modular approach to reform of
the first-year chemistry curriculum. Because nearly half of the nation's college
students are enrolled in community colleges and a large portion of future
teachers receive their science education at a community college, the potential
impact of this project is significant.