* 9752548
* A Shared Developmental Environment for Science-Based        Courseware
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Phillip McClean, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 155,000.00

Courseware tools are typically developed by an individual faculty member for a
single course. These tools are often designed to deliver content and are not
learning based. Consequently it is difficult to assess how effectively these
tools increase student learning. The goal of this project is to create a
software-development environment in which science-based courseware tools with
dynamic learning spaces are produced. This environment will involve an
interdisciplinary team of faculty who will emphasize shared learning objectives,
common assessment tools, and mutual software. The first step of the development
process is for the team to determine which principles and intellectual
approaches are shared by multiple scientific disciplines. Those team members
teaching similar scientific principles and approaches will develop common design
techniques in their courseware tools. Assessment tools will be developed to
determine if a shared software design effectively teaches these principles and
approaches in multiple disciplines. Assessment data will be collected
continually as these tools are developed and released. The assessment results
will allow the development group to determine which specific pedagogical methods
span multiple disciplines and may have broad application. Therefore, the
development of new module to enhance a courseware tool will benefit from the
entire team's experience. The team has identified three innovative approaches
that have promise in terms of improving active student learning ---
visualization, interface and simulation. Underlying each of these approaches
will be student interactivity with the course content. Many scientific concepts
can be presented both spatially and graphically. To facilitate learning of these
concepts, one development approach will emphasize Visualizing Course Content.
Specific tools to be developed that emphasize interactive visualization include
the 3D Virtual Cell, the Visual Computer Program, and 3D Water Chemistry.
Simulating Course Concepts wil l allow the student to travel to places they
would never ordinarily experience by interacting and modifying the environment.
The Geology Explorer is a tool that will designed to simulate interactive
exploration at a geologic site. Finally, Interfacing with Course Content
requires more efficient ways of presenting information, supporting navigation,
and delivering course content. The development of Java/MOO Virtual Worlds will
define interactive environments broadly applicable to different scientific
disciplines. To ensure usability, design and components of the tools will be
continually evaluated throughout the development process. By combining
assessment and evaluation with innovative learning approaches, the team will
produce courseware tools rich in discipline-based content that teach principles
and approaches common to many scientific fields. Collaborations with other
universities will provide multiple course/multiple location assessment and
evaluation data that will strengthen the products as they are designed. Because
these courseware tools will have application in large enrollment general
biology, geosciences and computer science courses, a broad range of students
will be affected. Therefore, the developmental environment can serve as a model
to define effective pedagogical approaches to teach science principles and
content by using innovative courseware tools.