* 9752083
* Advanced Technological Education:  Curriculum Development   and Faculty Enhancement Synthesizing Technological and      Business Management Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Ronald Meier, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2000
* USD 450,000.00

Illnois State University, in partnership with Des Moines Area Community College
and a business/industry advisory council, is directing a curriculum and
materials development project designed to infuse business knowledge, skills, and
attitudes into community college advanced technological education programs. This
project addresses the need for preparing a multi-skilled, technically competent
workforce with teamwork skills and an understanding of business competitiveness
issues. The intent of the project curriculum is to enhance student school-to-
work experiences and then ensure greater lateral and upward mobility within
their advanced technical occupational arenas. The curriculum uses a modular
design and allows the instructor flexibility in using the modules as stand-alone
units or together as an articulated sequence with existing programs. The
methodology encompasses a best-practice curricular content review, industry-led
curriculum content analysis and development, module development, multiple pilot
tests, and project evaluation by an external consultant. The main deliverable
will be a set of three cross-disciplinary modules with content determined by an
industry/business advisory council. An activity-based instructional learning
cycle is used employing constructivist views of learning. The curriculum
emphasizes problem solving, real-world applications, and connections among the
disciplines. Each module is highly interactive and experiential in nature to
provide a variety of experiences to enhance student learning. Instructional
materials employ and integrate the latest advances in computerized role-plays
and simulations, interpersonal role-plays, interactive CD ROM, video
conferencing, Internet and world-wide web applications, cases for analysis,
strategy formulation, and decision making. In year two, industry-led curriculum
development and pilot test data on student learning enhancement are being
disseminated via publications, workshops, and seminars. The primary goal of this
p roject is to develop curricula, instructional materials, and faculty
enhancement activities base upon input from an industry/business advisory
council. This industry input is used to create and develop cross-functional
curriculum content that reflects the real world interconnections among business
and advanced technological education. This integrated and synthesized, activity-
oriented curriculum is congruent with emerging business and industry trends. The
goals of this project also include investigation of research questions which can
be grouped according to whether they relate to integrated knowledge, skills, and
attitudes, or problem solving, or staff development.