* 9752081
* Validation &amp; Implementation of a Coordinated Precision      Agricultural Curriculum with K-12, Community Colleges,      Universities and Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Terry Brase, Hawkeye Community College
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2000
* USD 700,000.00

Precision agriculture is defined as all aspects of the new emerging
technologies, such as biotechnology, computers/telecommunications, animal
technology, and precision farming that allow an agriculturalist to organize and
maintain data for maiing decisions about precise production units. A two year
Associate of Applied Science Degree in Agriculture and Food Technology was
achieved by Hawkeye Community College as a Phase I project funded by a National
Science Foundation (NSF) grant. Hawkeye Community College along with Kirkwood
Community College and Lansing Community College is currently validating and
implementing a coordinated precision agriculture curriculum in the Midwest. This
precision agriculture model design incorporates modules and courses in precision
farming, environmental science, and geographic information systems with a core
of applied mathematics and science courses to augment the Agriculture and Food
Technology curriculum. Thus, this increases the flexibility of the Agriculture
and Food Technology curriculum for use by other community colleges in the
Midwest. Five additional participating Midwestern community colleges each are
developing a certificate program, implementing the current program, or
integrating the agriculture technology program into current agricultural
programs. Each of the participating community colleges is forming a linkage with
K - 12 school(s) and a university. By expanding the use of this curriculum to K
- 12 schools, mathematics and science skills can be enhanced through application
of precision agriculture. Preservice teachers and current teachers are being
offered workshops in precision agriculture technology and conferences to
coordinate discussion on articulation between educational levels. An outcome of
this effort is a coordinated Precision Agriculture curriculum that provides a
seamless career pathway while providing mathematics and science skills necessary
for technological advanced careers.