* 9752285
* Integrating Mathematics and the Sciences in Teacher         Education Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2003
* Henry Shipman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

A committed group of thirteen people from thirteen institutions if reforming our
own teacher preparation courses, making them student-centered, inquiry based,
and aligned with the national K-12 science standards. The team includes
mathematicians, science educators, and scientists, all developing and giving
courses for pre-service teachers. The three institutions (a research university,
a technical/community college, and a historically black university) include
students from a variety of SES's (socio-economic starting points). We integrate
the pre-service courses for elementary teachers with each other and with
mathematics. We progress towards our goals through specific initiatives targeted
to the needs of each campus, course, and faculty member. Big Projects, where
students design and conduct their own investigations over a period of weeks, are
becoming self-sustaining and are exported to other courses and other campuses.
One pair of physical science and biology courses is being thoroughly integrated
in content and pedagogy, with instructors in one course teaching in the other,
and with joint staff meetings. A summer retreat and some cross-disciplinary
teaching will facilitate integration of mathematics and science at all three
campuses. Our research on the successful treatment of the Nature of Science in
one of our courses will support curriculum development in other courses. A
laboratory manual is under contract with a commercial publisher, and we are
seriously negotiating with another for a full textbook package. We will also
disseminate our findings through workshops and publications, addressed to
scientists, science educators, and university faculty in other disciplines.