* 9753084
* Detection-oriented Identification of Nonlinear              Systems Using The NARMAX Model in Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Fahmida Chowdhury, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 11/30/2000
* USD 74,938.00

This proposal is for the enhancement of research/education al activities of the
PI who is moving from Michigan Technological University (MTU) to the University
of Southwestern Louisiana (USL) due to family reasons. The major educational
activity will be the development of interdisciplinary courses. The first step
toward this has already been taken: the PI developed and taught a graduate-level
interdisciplinary course on Neural Networks at MTU. The next plan is to: (1)
develop an undergraduate version of this course, (2) create a web-based tutorial
for this course, (3) share the tutorial and the course outline and other
materials with students and faculty nationwide. The undergraduate course on
Neural Networks would be developed for a broad spectrum of students (all
engineering and computer science majors). After the initial experimental phase
with this course is over, the PI has the long-term plan to write an appropriate
textbook for it. The technical research will involve a graduate student and an
undergraduate student, and focus on the use of neural networks for the
implementation of NARMAX a models for nonlinear system identification. Neural
networks have been used for modeling and system identification by other
researchers, but usually with the goal of control rather than fault detection.
The main goal of the proposed research is to use recurrent neural networks (with
successive degrees of refinement) to carry out system identification of the
specific purpose of generating residuals that can be used to design efficient
schemes for detection, isolation, and diagnosis of faults.