* 9753001
* POWRE: Metabolism of the Plant Hormone Indole-3-Acetic Acid During Somatic Embryogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Elaine Shea, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2000
* USD 74,024.00

Carrot cells in culture can be induced to form somatic embryos (no fertilization
involved) by pre-treatment with auxin. When somatic embryogenesis occurs,
cellular levels of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) drop at least 10-fold and IAA
synthesis switches to the non-tryptophan pathway. The amount of IAA in older
embryos, its form (free or bound), its location in the embryo, and how these
changes occur during development, are unknown. Understanding somatic
embryogenesis is important for the propagation of rare plants and for genetic
manipulation of plants for crop improvement. The aims of Dr. Shea's research
project are to measure the levels of auxin in late stages of somatic embryo
development, to examine the pathway of IAA biosynthesis in late stages of
somatic embryo development, and to study the influence of exogenous auxin
sources on embryogenesis. Dr. Shea is returning to active research after a long
absence and is currently in a non-tenure-track teaching position while doing
research voluntarily off-campus. Her goal is to obtain a tenure-track position
with research opportunities. This POWRE grant will allow her to establish an
active research program on campus that will include students, provide
opportunities to attend scientific meetings and network with other scientists,
and show potential employers that such plant research can attract extramural
funding.