* 9753111
* POWRE: A Computer-Assisted Approach to Ethnohistorical      Analysis in Polynesia
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Cathy Small, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

This project pursues a novel direction in cultural analysis. The investigator
proposes to build a computer model of a Polynesian social system, and then apply
it to an ethnographic problem concerning the historical articulation of gender,
warfare, and stratification. It is an exploratory approach that seeks to specify
the rules by which a Polynesian chiefdom (Tonga) operates, including its
conventions concerning marriage, production, redistribution, tribute, expansion,
warfare, etc., and then to simulate them over time so that system dynamics and
relationships can be observed and recorded. The outcomes of simulations produce
a `virtual history` that can then be used to trace the effects of changing
warfare and stratification patterns on customary institutions related to gender.
The significance of this project is not in `replaying` real history but rather
in being able to explore the logical constraints and implications of social
dynamics. In so doing, computer simulations can be used to develop fruitful
hypotheses about how social forces and institutions articulate and therefore
what impels or impedes their change. In this project, computer modeling and
simulation are used to assist the ethnographer in building and testing middle-
level anthropological theory about how gender, warfare, and stratification
operated and interacted over time in the Tongan social system. Results will
directly contribute to important debates in the literature concerning how gender
relates to the reproduction and transformation of chiefdoms. In its broader
application, this project is a step in the development of an agent-based
computer modeling approach to the study of culture, and promises to offer a
powerful descriptive tool for the study of social process and change. The
investigator is a traditional ethnographer who is moving, in mid-career, toward
combining computer modeling approaches to represent culture with descriptive
ethnography. This POWRE award affords her the opportunity to build significantly
on her preliminary modeling work, bringing three years of exploratory work to
fruition. Her ultimate goal is to develop the potential of simulation research
in anthropology in order to enable more powerful analyses of social change,
namely one that combines a commitment to the rich tradition of narrative
ethnography with the precision and scope that computer analysis can offer. This
is both a new career direction and new venue for anthropology.