* 9753126
* POWRE: Nonlinear Modeling for Political Data Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1999
* Langche Zeng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/1999
* USD 82,173.00

This research explores the application of artificial neural network models to
empirical research in political science. There are two main objectives. The
first is to conduct comparative studies of neural network models and a variety
of novel and standard models used in political science to assess the utility of
neural network models to the field. This will be done through both computer
simulation and application to substantively important political data, including
the unique and comprehensive ROAD (Record of American Democracy) database at the
Harvard-MIT Data Center. The second objective is to adapt neural network models
to apply to the special problems in political science. In particular, the
investigator plans to develop and implement methods of interpretation and
inference from neural network modeling, results to facilitate the use of these
models. This will be of importance to nonlinear models in general, where
interpretation of estimation results and significance tests are more complicated
than in the linear models. Other related methodological issues of general
importance, such as data fitting vs. generalizations, noise level and model
performance, will also be examined. This work will contribute significantly to
the field of political methodology in the increasingly important area of
nonlinear, flexible modeling of political data. Political and social
relationships are generally characterized by nonlinearity and complexity, and
their exact functional forms are rarely known or implied by substantive/formal
theories. The standard models in political science research such as the linear
regression, logit, and probit models assume known functional forms for the data
generating process, and are usually linear with or without a nonlinear link
function. Artificial neural network models are able to approximate unknown
functional relationships and allow for arbitrary patterns of nonlinearity. The
planned work will therefore significantly contribute to the improvement of the
quality of empirical research in political science. This POWRE Visiting
Professorship award will allow the investigator to expand her own methodological
and teaching skills as well as afford her the opportunity to develop numerous
substantive applications for her methodological innovations. This will give her
an important research and educational experience that will contribute to her
visibility in her field and her subsequent academic advancement.