* 9753137
* POWRE:  Behavioral Investigations of Nouns and Verbs
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Joan Sereno, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 12/31/1999
* USD 49,981.00

The broad objective of this project is to gain a more thorough understanding of
word recognition processes. The investigator approaches this goal by
investigating an often-ignored variable in language comprehension studies-
namely, grammatical class membership. Recent research examining neurologically
damaged populations reveals notable dissociations in the processing of nouns and
verbs. Research by the investigator has extended the finding of a noun/verb
contrast to an unimpaired population. These data indicate a greater left
hemispheric involvement in the processing of verbs relative to nouns. The
present proposal expands this study to investigate localization issues in the
brain. Four experiments will be conducted. The first two represent experimental
modifications, using different tasks and extending the investigation to the
grammatical class categories of adjective and adverb. The last two experiments
introduce a new methodology to test the claim of grammatical class organization
in the brain. These experiments contrast the simultaneous and successive
presentation of pairs of visually-presented stimuli to trace the origin of
interference effects in comprehension across the lexical spectrum. The time
course of activation for noun and verb stimuli will be explored by delaying
input of one relative to the other. Investigations of grammatical category
issues are critical to the refinement of psychologically and linguistically
valid theories of word processing. The research contributes to this discussion
by examing the interrelationship of lexical representations and processes in the
brain. Its goal is to test recent claims made in the neuropsychological
literature-namely, that there exist separate subsystems for the processing of
nouns and verbs. If noun and verb locations are distinct, it is feasible that
behavioral effects can be uncovered. The POWRE grant will provide the necessary
funds for career advancement for the investigator. She is a non-tenure track
Assistant Professor, a position she has held for the past five years. The grant
will allow her to concentrate on her own research and delineate a long-term
research program. It will also allow her to pursue a new methodological approach
to the study of language processing. In turn, the pursuit of a new experimental
technique and subsequent publication of the results could aid the investigator
in obtaining a tenure-track position.