* 9753009
* POWRE: Combined fMRI and Psychophysics to Study Functional  Plasticity in the Human System
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,06/30/2001
* Lucia Vaina, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 55,000.00

The goals of the POWRE grant are two-fold: first, to assist the investigator in
acquiring expertise in the newly emerging technology of functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), and second, to combine that expertise with her
background and strength in visual psychophysics and computation modeling to
study mechanisms underlying visual motion perception and their modulation by
learning. The major training components of the grant include the investigator's
participation in tutorials, seminars, NMR training sessions and course work, and
collaborative research and developing skills in fMRI data analysis, developing
fMRI specific activation paradigms, and methods of representation of fMRI
activations. The broad scope of the research component of this proposal, to be
carried out at the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center at Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH-NMR), is on combining fMRI and psychophysics to study functional
plasticity in the normal adult human visual system, specifically the mechanisms
and neural circuitry underlying learning motion discrimination in humans.
Cortical fMRI signal changes (in both the cerebral and cerbellar cortices) can
be reliably measured, and will be used to ask specific questions about practice
and stimulus attributes-related changes in human brain functional anatomy. The
approach of the proposed experiments will also serve as validation for the
learning technique as a powerful psychophysical tool to investigate specificity
and dynamics of the neural circuitry underlying visual perception and its
modulation by attentional mechanisms. The POWRE funding mechanism will provide
the investigator, already a senior scientist and educator specialized in human
vision, the opportunity to bring that knowledge to bear in the design and
interpretation of neurobiologically relevant imaging experiments. It will also
give her the opportunity to become proficient in fMRI techniques and to gain
additional knowledge that she will subsequently apply in her research and
teaching. The MGH-NMR is a superb training site for accomplishment of these
goals. The results of this training will significantly increase the candidate's
visibility in the neuroscience and human brain mapping community. Also, it will
allow her to play a key role in the efforts of the Biomedical Engineering
Department at her home institution to develop a strong neurosciences track in
the graduate program in biomedical engineering.