* 9753048
* POWRE:  Ultrafast Pseudorandom Sequence Generations and     Their Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Agnes Chan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/1999
* USD 72,461.00

9753048 Chan, Agnes Hui Northeastern POWRE: Ultrafast Pseudorandom Sequence
Generations and their Applications This proposal addresses the design of
ultrafast pseudorandom sequence generators for high speed networks and outlines
the approaches to analyze those sequences. As the technology for 100 Gbps
local/metropolitan area Time Division Multiplexing optical networks is evolving,
transfer of very large files become a reality. Security for many of these data
transfers is of utmost importance. Current prototype high speed encryption
systems only operate with throughputs on the order of 2.5Gbps. Nonlinear optics
can enable ultrafast generations with data rates much faster than electronic
speed. However, due to the fact that ultrafast optical technology can only
support circuits with a small gate count, the classical design of an electronic
sequence generator cannot be directly translated to the optical domain. This
work presents a new design, reconfigurable Feedback Shift Register, for an
ultrafast sequence generator based on both optical, as well as electronic
technologies. The design makes use of an electronic sequence generator to
control the choice of feedback functions to be configured at the optical shift
register at a slower electronic speed, leveraging the speed of the optical
generator while exploiting the complexity of the electronic controller. This
project supports the research activities of the PI as a Visiting Researcher at
the Laboratory of Information and Decision Systems at MIT during her sabbatical
leave in 1997-1998. The PI, in collaboration with both theorists and system
designers at MIT and MIT Lincoln Laboratory, will consider Reconfigurable
Feedback Shift Registers as the design of an ultrafast sequence generator. This
design makes use of an electronic sequence generator to control the choice of
feedback functions to be configured at the optical seedback shift register at a
slower electronic speed. The design leverages the speed of the optical
Generator, whil e the latter exploits the complexity of the electronic
controller. Research will be conducted in studying and analyzing in detail the
pseudorandom properties of these sequences and their resilience to the known
cryptanalytic attacks. Proven good design can be implemented later on in the
laboratory. The realization of such an ultrafast sequence generator not only can
serve as an encryption scheme to ensure data security and integrity, but also
has other applications in coding. Moreover, these design principles can be
readily applied to a hybrid of complex yet slower and simple but faster
electronic sequence generators.