* 9753170
* POWRE: An Arctic Ocean Time-Series of Dissolved             Inorganic Carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,09/01/1998
* Patricia Yager, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/01/1998
* USD 74,980.00

POWRE: An Arctic Ocean time-series of dissolved inorganic carbon The goal of
this research project is to evaluate seasonal patterns of biological production
and respiration in the central Arctic Ocean with an emphasis on predicting the
direction and extent of air-sea carbon exchange. This research would complement
funded research at a year-long field-station (SHEBA) established in the
perennial ice pack along the eastern edge of the Beaufort Sea. For the first
time ever with modern methods, oceanographers will observe nearly all major
components of the central Arctic marine carbon cycle with at least weekly
resolution over an entire year. Funded Principle Investigators, Wheeler et al.
and Welch et al., will measure dissolved oxygen and nutrients, particulate and
dissolved organic carbon, autotrophic and heterotrophic biomass (ranging from
picoplankton to polar bears), and primary and secondary production and
respiration rates. These measurements will be made in the context of a larger
surface heat budget experiment (NSF-SHEBA, DOE-ARM, NASA-FIRE, ONR-HLP) where
many biogeochemically-relevant physical parameters will be monitored throughout
the year. Two key parameters, total dissolved inorganic carbon (CT) and
alkalinity (AT), needed to complete the carbon budget and link the Arctic Ocean
ecosystem to the global carbon cycle, are as yet missing from the funded plan.
This proposal is designed to provide these missing links. I propose to use
weekly depth profiles of CT and AT in Arctic surface waters to detect the
biological transformations of carbon between the dissolved inorganic (DIC) and
organic carbon (OC) pools, specifically the extent of net primary production
during the photic period, respiration rates during the dark wintertime, and the
effect of springtime ice algae on near-surface DIC concentration. By measuring
both CT and AT, we can calculate pCO2, needed to estimate gas exchange, and also
use alkalinity as a tracer for contributions from rivers, sea-ice, and other
water masses. While perennially ice-covered seas have been historically
considered `net heterotrophic` ecosystems, these estimates have typically relied
on summertime measurements. With a data set covering an entire annual cycle, we
(myself and my collaborators) propose to test the following hypotheses: that 1)
autotrophy exceeds heterotrophy during parts of the year, 2) a seasonal offset
exists between autotrophic and heterotrophic production, 3) wintertime
heterotrophy is supported by DOC produced locally during the spring and early
summer, and 4) local production and respiration balance on an annual basis. By
providing the link between biological processes and pCO2, my data would allow us
to test additionally whether this region of perennially-ice covered Arctic seas
(net heterotrophic, net autotrophic, or balanced) is, on an annual basis, a
source or sink for atmospheric CO2. The POWRE award would have a significant
impact on the career of Dr. Yager. As a new investigator, this award will
provide an opportunity to enhance her research activities through access to
state-of-the-art oceanographic field equipment and the opportunity to
collaborate with an internationally known team of oceanographers.