* 9753157
* POWRE:  Rheology and Microstructure of Dilute Surfactant    Systems in Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Lynn Walker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1999
* USD 80,247.00

Surfactants, or surface active agents, pervade almost every aspect of our daily
lives. Biological functions, healthcare products, cleaning materials, paints and
many other products and processes rely on the unique properties of these
molecules. Many of these solution properties arise from the fact that
surfactants aggregate in solution, forming a myriad of structures with different
properties. The ability to control aggregate structure requires a fundamental
knowledge of the influence of system parameters. Although this understanding
exists for equilibrium situations, the changes in structure caused by external
forces, such as flow, are not well studied. Flow is a pertinent variable as most
surfactant-based systems are subject to flow in application, transport and
processing. Thread-like micelles, or one-dimensional aggregates, form in a
number of surfactant solutions. In the case of dilute solutions of rod-like
(stiff) micelles with low levels of added salt, a transition to a shear-
thickened state has been observed and fairly well characterized. A qualitative
understanding of the shear-induced transition exists both at a macroscopic and
structural level and this understanding is becoming more quantitative. Most
studies have focused on simple shear fields and Couette rheometry. The influence
of flow fields other than shear has not been studied, yet information from these
types of studies are required for a complete understanding of the phenomenon. In
this proposed research, the intent if to simultaneously probe macroscopic flow
behavior and microstructural changes in more complex flow fields. Initial
thrusts will involve inhomogeneous shear flow. The study will then extend to
flow fields with increasing levels of elongation to begin to understand the
influence of strong flows. Long term goals include the study of elongational
flows, both at the macroscopic and microstructural levels. Results from this
research will provide information necessary for the development of struct ure
based constitutive equations for these micellar solutions, verify the potential
of these fluids n specific engineering applications (such as drag reduction) and
answer specific questions about the nature of the shear-induced transition which
cannot be elucidated with shear alone.