* 9753128
* POWRE: Microgram to Nanogram: A Study to Reduce the Sample  Size of Graphitic Carbon Targets for AMS Radiocarbon Dating
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1998,09/30/2003
* Donna Kirner, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 09/30/2003
* USD 49,993.00

Currently, accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) technology provides the
radiocarbon researcher with the ability to routinely measure samples of 500
micrograms to one milligram of graphitic carbon. Radiocarbon age determinations
using AMS technology reduces the carbon requirement by several orders of
magnitude from decay counting methods. This reduction in the required carbon
sample size has allowed researchers access to samples previously not practical
to measure. This study will focus on two methods to reduce the required amount
of carbon for AMS radiocarbon dating in the ultra small sample range. This
project has two pivotal objectives. The first objective is to optimize the
processing of microgram to nanogram-sized samples of catalytically-reduced
graphitic carbon for AMS radiocarbon age determinations. The second goal is to
determine the most accurate way to correct 14C/13C ratios for contaminant
contribution to the measured ratios of these ultra small samples. The ability to
utilize AMS technology that reduces the required amount of a graphitic carbon
sample to the levels of ultra small samples on a routine basis would provide the
archaeological researcher with the opportunity to seek new areas of scientific
inquiry. These include but are not limited to organic residues on potsherds,
rock art, pollen, phytoliths, sherd temper, plant amino acids, amino acids from
bone, seeds, charcoal smudges, and organic residues on tools. All of these
materials are candidates for radiocarbon age determinations but the limiting
factor is the extremely small amounts of organic material. Critical data from
these sources could provide clues to help answer a variety of questions about
human origins and prehistoric cultures. Paleontology, environmental and
paleoclimatic studies and oceanography would also benefit from this research.
Material that may be used for ultra small samples include amino acids in fossil
bone and teeth that fall within the range of radiocarbon, chemical compounds in
atmospheric aerosols, marine dissolved organic carbon and foraminifera. Each of
these research areas could utilize ultra small sample technology to gather
critical data and develop new areas of inquiry. The funding provided by the
POWRE program opens up new avenues of research that will allow career
enhancement and substantively further professional standing with the research
community. Since the investigator is in a non-tenured research associate
position, POWRE support may assist in her academic advancement as well. This
project could provide the scientific community with a useful new tool and offers
the researcher a chance to contribute in an area not ordinarily available
through regular research grants.