* 9753542
* Texas Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher  Preparation
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2000
* Diana Marinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2000
* USD 470,000.00

9753542&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation
(TCETP) is a 10 university partnership committed to joint development and common
implementation of comprehensive improvements in the preparation of K-12 teachers
in mathematics, science, and technology. Fifteen Collaborative Fawlty from the
departments of mathematics, science, and education at eight universities in The
Texas A&amp;M University System and from Texas Woman's University and Angelo
State University are leading this effort. This 10 university partnership
prepares over 25% of Texas teachers Keg and 25% of the mathematics and science
teachers certified annually in Texas, typically over 3,700 Texas CETP teachers
certified each year. Importantly, this CETP is well positioned through its
partnership with the NSF Texas Statewide Systemic Initiative (TSSI), 47 of
Texas' Presidential Awardees (TPA) for Excellence in Science and Mathematics
Teaching (NSF), and major industry committed to preservice and novice teacher
internships to implement common systemic improvements and disseminate them in
Texas and nationally. The five project goals of the Collaborative Faculty are
Core Course and Curriculum Redesign, Recruitment to Teaching, University Faculty
Professional Development and Instructional Modeling, Industry Internships for
Preservice and Novice Teachers, and Partnership with the Texas SSI and Texas
Presidential Awardees. Leadership of the effort comes from principal
investigator Dr. Mauro Castro, Chair of Chemistry, and co-principal investigator
Dr. Francisco Hidalgo, Dean of Education, Texas A&amp;M University--Kingsville,
the lead CETP institution with 65% Hispanic enrollment. The CETP includes 3
Hispanic serving universities, 1 historically Black university, 4 rural serving
universities, 1 research university, and 1 comprehensive women's university. The
Texas CETP will fundamentally restructures the core mathematics and science
education experience of preservice teachers at 10 universities serving every
geographic region of the state. The Texas CETP has committed $1 million in
matching funds to the project and $156,250 additional funding for Collaborative
Faculty interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;