* 9753138
* POWRE:  Parsing Attitudinal Responses and Change
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1998,05/31/2000
* Wendi Gardner, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 31,838.00

Why do some persuasive techniques change attitudes only briefly, whereas others
may change attitudes on a long-term basis? Past research has demonstrated that
attitude change induced through the thoughtful consideration of a persuasive
message (called central route persuasion) seems to endure across time, whereas
attitude change induced by other, less thoughtful means (called peripheral route
persuasion) appears relatively impermanent. The purpose of the proposed body of
research is to investigate the mechanisms underlying persistent attitude change
by examining at which stage in attitudinal processing central versus peripheral
route messages have their greatest effect. An electrophysiological paradigm will
be used to separate an early stage of attitudinal processing, evaluative
categorization, from later stages in attitudinal processing. This paradigm is
applied in two studies designed to tease apart the conditions in which
persuasion causes lasting versus transient attitude change. It is hypothesized
that central and peripheral route persuasive techniques impact different stages
of attitudinal processing, and further, that the most enduring types of attitude
change are those that change the evaluative categorization itself. The
understanding of how persuasive techniques result in lasting attitude change is
important for both practical and theoretical reasons. For example, persuasive
messages are often used in the domain of public health to reduce destructive
behaviors (e.g. smoking during pregnancy) or promote protective behaviors (e.g.
safer sex); the efficacy of these messages depends on their ability to produce
long-term attitude change. Although the need to examine the way in which a
message is processed has been recognized for the past decade, the separation of
attitudinal processing stages has been difficult using traditional measurement
techniques. The utilization of event related brain potentials in the current
proposal represents an advance in measurement that will allow for the parsing
and assessment of the stages of attitudinal processing. It is hoped that the
examination of the stages of attitudinal processing that are affected by
different persuasive strategies will ultimately increase understanding and
prediction of successful and enduring attitude change. The principal
investigator of this POWRE proposal is an assistant professor in the early
stages of her career. The studies in the current proposal represent exploratory
work in a new line of inquiry. This award will increase her productivity,
visibility, and likelihood of achieving leadership in her field.