* 9753145
* POWRE:  Structural Constraints on Demographic Heterogeneity in Personal Networks
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Pamela Popielarz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 09/30/1999
* USD 57,235.00

This project concerns personal social relationships between people of different
demographic backgrounds, such as friendships between African-Americans and
whites. The investigator presents a partial theory of the social structural
constraints on demographic heterogeneity in personal networks. She will
undertake a visiting professorship at Northwestern University to enable her to
refine the theory, develop specific hypotheses, and do preliminary data analysis
in preparation for a full-scale empirical test of the resulting theory. The
project broadly addresses one striking regularity about personal networks:
almost all of our close personal contacts are demographically similar to us.
Present theory stresses that a person's involvement in a homogeneous
organizational setting increases the propensity to form network connections with
demographically similar others. A more comprehensive theory of heterogeneity in
personal networks will take into account organizational membership dynamics and
people's participation in multiple organizational settings. The investigator
lays out this theory, pointing out new hypotheses that will be tested. The
scientific implications of the theory to be developed range widely because
personal networks are a crucial part of the social landscape surrounding
individuals. Networks affect individual outcomes ranging from labor market
position to mental health. Personal networks also affect diversity within and
across organizations, as well as organizational survival. As a result, a theory
of personal network formation helps to explain basic stratification processes.
Furthermore, this project and its results are extremely important to a society
whose members differ by race, religion, sex, age, and education. We need a
deeper understanding of heterogeneous personal networks because the
relationships in them cross-cut these cleavages, providing the stable foundation
for an integrated society. Network connections between, for example, African-
Americans and whites, or people with high and low levels of education, can
ensure that our society, although differentiated by race and education, is not
divided by them. This POWRE award will assist the investigator in her primary
research goal for the next few years. Taking a position as Visiting Assistant
Professor will allow her to interact with organizational scholars and social
network researchers in a new setting. The theoretical and empirical results of
this larger project will not only contribute to the existing research literature
and thus the investigator's visibility in her field, but will also assist her in
her teaching and mentoring roles.