* 9753091
* POWRE:  Experimental Investigation of a Biological          Ultrasonic Sensory System
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Mardi Hastings, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 01/31/1999
* USD 21,235.00

9753091 Hastings Recently, fisheries biologists, using ultrasound to count the
number of fish impinging on power plant intakes, serendipitously discovered that
several species of clupeid fish respond to pulsed acoustic signals at
frequencies from 80 to 140 kHz. The mechanism for such detection is not known,
however, the auditory bullae, special air-filled structures in the inner ear of
this family of fish are believed to play a major role. Understanding the
mechanics of this unique biological system would serve two purposes. First,
knowledge of the mechanics for detection of ultrasonic signals could provide the
key to the development of new and improved transducers for biomedical
applications. Second, since rather high power ultrasonic signals are being used
both to find clupeids and to divert them from power plant intakes and dams,
results of this research will provide information on what sounds would be more
readily detected by clupeids and sound pressure levels that would be adequate to
modify behavior without harming their inner ear. The objective of this study is
to examine the mechanics of the inner ear of a clupeid fish known to respond
behaviorally to ultrasonic signals, the American shad (Alosa sapidissima). This
species will be experimentally evaluated by measuring the frequency response of
the swimbladder, bullae membrane, and utricular otolith to both pulsed and
continuous wave ultrasound using a noninvasive, noncontact vibration measurement
system that has been used successfully to measure frequency responses of the
peripheral auditory organs in the goldfish (Carassiiis auratus) and oscar
(Astronotus ocellatus). Results of this study will be used to develop a
mathematical model for the dynamic response of the clupeid auditory system to
ultrasonic signals. Such a model is the first step in duplicating
characteristics of this unique biological system for biomedical engineering
applications. ***