* 9753000
* POWRE:  Palynological Survey of Sirius Group and Related    Neogene Sediments, Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Rosemary Askin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/2001
* USD 60,000.00

9753000 Askin This award supports a palynological survey of previously collected
Neogene sediments from the Transantarctic Mountains and Ross Sea margin. Because
terrestrial vegetation history is intimately linked to climatic and tectonic
history, this survey will provide valuable information for tracing environmental
trends through this important interval of geologic time. The survey will include
many of the Sirius Group strata cropping out in the Transantarctic Mountains,
and subsurface sediments encountered in drillholes from McMurdo Sound and the
McMurdo Dry Valleys. These Neogene sediments (Miocene through Pliocene) include
glacial, fluvioglacial, glaciolacustrine, and glaciomarine facies. Age control
is from marine microfossil assemblages (mainly diatoms) and radiometric dates.
Palynomorphs, and wood and leaves at one locality (Oliver Bluffs) have been
reported from the Sirius Group. Although relatively rare, the previously
recovered spores and pollen illustrate the potential for useful
paleoenvironmental information from a broader survey. Specific objectives
include a palynological survey of Sirius and other Neogene sediments to
determine presence or absence of spores and pollen and any other plant remains
derived from contemporaneous vegetation. If sufficient spores and pollen can be
recovered from independently dated samples, trends in vegetation composition,
diversity, distribution and extinction, might be identifiable. Patterns of
presence vs. absence, composition and diversity will be used to help interpret
Antarctic climatic, cryospheric and tectonic evolution. If present, recycled
palynomorphs from older sediments will be used to help identify provenance of
the sediments. Some marine units will be sampled, and search for marine
palynomorphs (dinoflagellate cysts and acritarchs) will be included in the
survey, as these have great biostratigraphic and paleoenvironmental potential.
This award is supported by the Office of Polar Programs under the National
Science Foundation program entitled Professional Opportunities for Women in
Research and Education (POWRE). This POWRE award affords the investigator an
opportunity to broaden her research career to include a significantly different
interval of geologic time.