* 9753125
* POWRE: Individual Motives For Giving
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1998,09/30/2000
* Susan Laury, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 09/30/2000
* USD 49,930.00

This project consists of a series of controlled laboratory experiments designed
to examine individual contributions to the provision of public goods, such as
parks, playgrounds, clean air, or national defense. Economists have observed
that on average people contribute more to these public goods than predicted for
purely self-interested individuals maximizing their own single-round monetary
earnings. The analysis of this phenomenon has focused almost exclusively on
aggregate behavior, using as its predominant measure the average contributions
by groups ranging in size from four through 100. While this has yielded
important insights into contribution behavior, it ignores the richness and
diversity of the individual behavior within these groups. The purpose of this
project is to design experiments that allow one to better analyze this
individual contribution behavior. Recent theoretical work has pointed toward the
effects that experimental treatments (such as the value of the public good, the
cost of contributing, group size and individual resource endowment) are
predicted to have on contributions when other motives for giving (altruism,
errors, and signaling for example) are considered. In this project the
investigator will design and run experiments in which these factors are varied
for individuals during a single session. The effects of these treatments on
individuals' contribution behavior are then studied, and compared with the
predictions of several models of contribution behavior. A model of intertemporal
signaling behavior will also be developed: an individual may contribute in the
current round in order to signal a willingness to `cooperate` in future rounds.
Traditional economic theory assumes that individuals are purely self-interested
and rational: they maximize their own earnings and ignore the impact of their
decisions on others' welfare. Public goods, however, provide an additional
benefit to others. If an individual ignores this additional benefit (as
traditional theory predicts) then too little of the public good will be provided
from society's point of view. In the most extreme situation, the public good
will not be provided at all, even when it is in everyone's best interest to
provide the good. This is one justification for government provision of some
public goods: the market will fail to provide (or will provide inefficiently low
levels of) a public good and thus outside intervention is mandated. Previous
research has demonstrated that such a complete market failure does not occur:
public goods are provided both in naturally-occurring settings (contributions to
charity are widely observed, for example) and in controlled laboratory
experiments. However, the amount of the good provided is typically less than the
social optimum. This research has implications for agencies and organizations
that rely upon private donations for their support. By focusing on those factors
that foster or inhibit cooperation, and identifying the prevalence of various
motives for contributing among individuals, this may allow non-profits and other
organizations to better target their fund-raising efforts. Alternatives to
direct government provision of some public goods may also be assessed. This
POWRE research grant will allow the investigator to plan her research agenda,
conduct pilot experiments, develop a new theoretical model, and analyze the
results of pilot experiments. She currently hold a joint position at the
University of South Carolina: half-time with a tenure track position in the
department of economics and a half-time research position managing the South
Carolina economic forecasting service for the College of Business
Administration. Her duties for the research position take away from the time and
attention she can pay to her academic research on the public goods provision
problem. The support of the National Science Foundation will be invaluable in
helping her to focus on her tenure track research objectives and thus will
advance her academic career.