* 9753013
* POWRE:  Spatial Cognition in Primates
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Carol Colby, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2000
* USD 74,858.00

As we move our eyes, new images are constantly presented to the brain, yet we
perceive the world as remaining still. This perceptual stability is thought to
depend on a convergence of visual signals and corollary discharges reflecting
the generation of voluntary eye movements. Visual and motor signals together
construct an internal representation of space that is constantly updated. The
neural mechanisms underlying this process are beginning to be understood at the
level of single neurons, through single-unit recording in monkeys. Dr. Colby's
research goal is to extend these observations to humans. She will use functional
magnetic-resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine activity in the human brain during
spatial updating. She expects that multiple brain regions will be involved in
updating of visual memory traces. The most exciting outcome of these imaging
experiments will be the delineation of the complete set of brain regions
involved in spatial memory and cognition. To accomplish this goal by single-unit
recording alone would take several years. The promise of functional imaging is
that activity throughout the brain can be observed simultaneously, allowing one
to see the entire network in action. In accord with the goals of the POWRE
program, this new research program will significantly enhance Dr. Colby's
research capabilities by providing access to unique technological resources.