* 9753142
* POWRE:  Anti-Manipulation Regulations, Bank Powers and the  Use of Internet in Public Security Offerings
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Manju Puri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 12/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

This research proposal consists of three projects that examine issues relating
to the regulation of public security offerings. Project one proposes a novel
rationale for allowing price support in initial public offerings (IPOs). The
project argues that engaging in price support is like giving investors a put
option, and that underwriters will minimize the cost of the put by bringing less
risky issues to the market, resulting in reduced underpricing. The project finds
empirical support for this reasoning. This project also develops a new method
for separating the effect of price support from that of deliberate underpricing
in explaining the sizable positive initial returns in IPOs. Project two will
empirically examine theories of financial intermediation through an analysis of
direct public offerings (DPOs) over the internet, via two sets of tests. One set
of tests will examine stock prices of different types of financial
intermediaries around the DPO dates, to assess the manner in which different
intermediaries are affected by this new mechanism of security issue. A second
set of tests will examine prices at which DPOs are sold and the after-market
prices at which they trade. Project three examines how securities markets are
affected if banks are allowed to enter these markets. In Japan (as in the U.S.)
banks were prohibited by law from underwriting corporate securities, but
recently these restrictions have been relaxed. Using the Japanese institutional
environment, this project will test the impact of banks entering debt markets on
underwriting fees and market concentration. Vast amounts of capital are raised
through public security issues (over $500 billion in 1996), and the process of
issuing securities is one of the most tightly regulated aspects of capital
markets. Yet, the literature provides surprisingly little guidance on the
appropriate framework for setting regulations concerning the security issuance
process. This research contributes in this direction. The first project focuses
on the economic impact of price support regulations on the security issue
process. This study is motivated by the fact that while the law allows
underwriters to engage in price support -- and thereby cause securities to trade
at artificially inflated prices in the after-market following a security issue -
very little is understood about the economic impact of this provision on the
security issue process. The second project studies a new phenomenon, that of
direct public offerings (DPOs) made over the internet. DPOs are unique in that
no intermediaries are involved at any stage in the offering, and therefore allow
one to directly test alternative theories of financial intermediaries' role in
the capital raising process and suggest a framework for regulating internet
based security offerings. The third project examines the implications of
allowing banks to enter the securities market using data from Japan. Such a
study has policy implications for the continuing debate of the repeal of Glass-
Steagall in the U.S. The POWRE grant, with its accelerated sanctions and
flexibility will enable the investigator to actively pursue and complete these
projects in a timely manner. These issues are important in today's environment
since the regulation of securities market are currently being debated by
regulators and academicians alike. It is hoped that these projects will
contribute significantly to our understanding of the regulation of public
security markets and financial intermediaries, and will also be relevant to
policy makers. It is likely that these projects will significantly enhance this
young investigator's professional standing as a researcher in the field of
financial economics, and add to the contribution made by women to finance
literature.