* 9753205
* POWRE:  Forward and Inverse Analysis of Hydrologic Optics to Measure Aspects of Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2000
* Mary Perry, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2000
* USD 99,947.00

POWRE: Forward and inverse analysis of hydrologic optics to measure aspects of
marine phytoplankton The research focuses on the close coupling that exists
between phytoplankton and light in the upper ocean. Marine phytoplankton, the
one-celled plants responsible for 99% of marine carbon fixation, play a dominant
role in determining the optical characteristics of most ocean waters. As
photosynthetic plants, phytoplankton selectively absorb specific wavelengths of
light and, as single-celled organisms, they efficiently scatter light.
Wavelength-dependent absorption and scattering by phytoplankton directly modify
the in-water light field, as well as modify the light that emanates from the sea
surface and that can be detected by remote sensing. Accurate determination of
the absorption of light by phytoplankton is essential for understanding rates of
photosynthesis (the `forward` component in the interaction of phytoplankton and
light). Two key elements necessary for modeling photosynthesis are the spectral
phytoplankton absorption coefficient and the spectral irradiance. A new series
of in-water instruments recently have been developed for measuring the optical
properties of seawater. This research will take advantage of the high spectral
resolution and the rapid data acquisition rate of these new instruments to study
in-situ variability in the optical properties of marine phytoplankton. The POWRE
award is critical to my re-entry into academia after a prolonged illness.
POWRE's Visiting Researcher program will provide release time from teaching to
allow me to re-establish my research program and allow me to be, once again,
fully competitive for funding. In addition, this research opportunity will
directly improve my future teaching capability and will strengthen my case for
promotion to full professor.