* 9753237
* An Interactive, Web-Based Materials Characterization        Project for Undergraduate Education in Analytical Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1998,08/31/2001
* Jeanne Pemberton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

Much recent attention in chemical education has been focused on the need for
"problem-based" learning strategies, particularly in the laboratory environment.
No place is the need for the development of problem-solving skills more evident
than in young scientists who function as analytical chemists in industrial,
government, and academic laboratories. This need has become so acute that
industry has recently called upon the academic community to reexamine their
training of chemistry students, particularly in the quantitative and
instrumental analysis laboratories. One particular concern expressed by industry
and government laboratory analytical chemists is that students emerging with
undergraduate degrees today have only a technique-based perspective on chemical
analysis instead of viewing chemical analysis as an integrated process based on
problem solving. Thus, in academia's zeal to provide hands-on exposure to every
new instrumental analysis method that is developed, education of students in the
integrated concept of the "analytical process" has been lost. To remedy this
curricular deficiency nationwide necessitates a broader recommitment to a
pedagogy based on the development of critical thinking and problem-solving
skills in our students. While the desirability of achieving this goal through
increased emphasis on hands-on laboratory problem-solving experiences is
obvious, the reality for many institutions today, particularly small four-year
colleges, is that they lack the necessary complement of analytical
instrumentation for effective solution of modern real-world problems in their
undergraduate analytical chemistry laboratories. The recent explosion in new
electronic technology affords, as a supplement to the central hands-on component
of the laboratory curriculum, the opportunity to enhance the problem solving
skills of students through interactive computer-based experiences. This project
is designed to take advantage of recent developments in the analytical
curriculum at the Unive rsity of Arizona to demonstrate the feasibility of
production of an interactive, prototype, hypermedia-based Materials
Characterization Project on the World Wide Web in which the student undertakes a
comprehensive analysis, with both qualitative and quantitative aspects, of a
commercial product, device, or formulation. This computer-based experience is
intended as a supplement to the more conventional laboratory-based training in
undergraduate analytical chemistry. This experience will require the student to
chemically analyze several major components of a common commercial product by
defining the analysis approach, selecting the analysis method(s) required,
designing the measurement experiments, "collecting" the data, interpreting the
data, and arriving at conclusions about chemical composition and content based
on the data. The prototype Materials Characterization Project to be developed is
based on analysis of the components of a solar electronic calculator.