* 9753139
* POWRE:  Topics in Economic Theory:  The Timing of           Transactions and Firm Formation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Beth Allen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 03/31/2000
* USD 50,000.00

This research focuses on two distinct topics in economic theory: the timing of
transactions and firm formation. Both will be approached theoretically,
primarily using the framework of general competitive equilibrium, although the
formation of firms also involves the combination of cooperative and
noncooperative game theory. For the first topic, the economic question is to
explain, in a consistent and fully specified model, how both the precise times
of transactions or payments and the intervals between successive transactions or
payments are determined endogenously. The second topic addresses the question of
how firms arise in an economy, where the concept of firm includes sole
proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations. Economic theory lacks an
explanation of when purchases of goods and services are made, including when
contracts committing to such transactions are signed and when payments occur.
Yet these timing issues are becoming increasingly important as our financial
intermediation technology changes. Likewise, microeconomic theory does not
explain the formation of firms. Little consideration has been given to the
question of why firms form, the process by which formation decisions are made,
and the actual creation of the firm. This research promises significant insights
regarding these questions. This POWRE award will support a completely new line
of research for the investigator involving different substantive questions in
economic theory and different techniques. The investigator, who is one of the
top female academic economists in the country, will learn new skills and methods
which will enable her to move her research in a new direction. The topics
proposed and the directions she intends to take are path-breaking in nature.
Successful completion of this research will move her further along the path to
academic leadership.