* 9753074
* POWRE:  Water Supply in Groundwater Systems:  Facing        Constraints of Regulations, Risk, and Reality
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Janet Hering, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9753074 Hering The "provision of safe, palatable, and ample public water
supplies", a core mandate of the environmental engineering profession, has
always been particularly challenging in the arid southwestern United States. In
contrast to the past focus on delivery of water, which has been manifested in
the western U.S. in massive hydraulics works, the present regulatory climate
emphasizes water quality. Increasingly stringent drinking water standards place
an increased burden on municipalities and water suppliers; this problem can be
particularly severe for groundwater systems, which have traditionally required
minimal treatment of source waters. A specific example of this problem is
provided by the City of Hanford, CA population ca. 39,000), which relies on
groundwater for its municipal water supply. Elevated concentrations of arsenic
occur naturally in the groundwater at Hanford. Arsenic concentrations in local
wells frequently exceed the current drinking water standard (50 g/L); compliance
with the standard is achieved, in the average, by dilution within the
distribution system. The proposed project will focus on the Hanford groundwater
supply system as a case study of the issues that are likely to become
increasingly prevalent in the future of water supply in the U.S. Specifically,
the project will emphasize the issues of risk estimation and compliance options
within the framework of both the regulatory drivers and the physical constraints
of the local hydrogeology and the existing distribution system. ***