* 9753243
* Atomistic Theory and Computer Simulation of Grain           Boundary Structure and Diffusion
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1998,04/30/2002
* Yuri Mishin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9753243 Farkas This project is aimed at theoretical investigations and computer
simulations of point defects and grain boundaries, as well as diffusion in the
lattice and along grain boundaries in ordered compounds. The focus of research
will be the intermetallic compound NiAl. The project includes collaborations
with groups working on ab initio calculations and on diffusion experiments.
Atomic structure and diffusion along grain boundaries in intermetallic compounds
are of great interest in connection with their limited ductility and high-
temperature creep resistance. Grain boundary diffusion in NiAl has never been
studied experimentally or theoretically. Moreover, correct atomistic
calculations of grain boundary diffusion coefficients have only become possible
recently due to work done by the proposers on the jump correlation theory and
the development of the respective simulation methods. These theory and
simulation techniques will be further improved and applied to grain boundaries
in NiAl. Angular-dependent semi-empirical potentials of the embedded- atom type
will be developed for NiAl by fitting to both experimental properties and to the
results of ab initio calculations. The atomic structure for 001 and 011
symmetrical tilt grain boundaries will be calculated using molecular statics and
dynamics. The formation energies and equilibrium concentrations of point defects
in the lattice and in the grain boundaries will be calculated. The atomic
migration energies by different mechanisms in the lattice and in the grain
boundary cores will also be calculated. The point defect concentrations and
migration energies obtained will be used for the calculation of lattice and
grain boundary diffusion coefficients of Ni and Al using novel methods of jump
correlation theory and the Monte Carlo method. The diffusion coefficients
obtained will be compared with the experimental data obtained from experimental
collaborators. NiAl will thus become the first ordered system, probably even the
first binary system, where diffusion of both species in the lattice and along
the grain boundaries will be studied by both experimental and theoretical
methods. %%% This project is aimed at theoretical investigations and computer
simulations of point defects and grain boundaries, as well as diffusion in the
lattice and along grain boundaries in ordered compounds. The focus of research
will be the intermetallic compound NiAl. The project includes collaborations
with groups working on ab initio calculations and on diffusion experiments. NiAl
will thus become the first ordered system, probably even the first binary
system, where diffusion of both species in the lattice and along the grain
boundaries will be studied by both experimental and theoretical methods. ***