* 9753220
* POWRE:  Spectral Geometry of Nilmanifolds and Kleinian      Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Ruth Gornet, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1999
* USD 79,620.00

This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research
and Education (POWRE) program as a Visiting Professorship Activity. In 1966,
Mark Kac popularized the question, "Can one hear the shape of a drum?" Viewing a
drumhead as a plane domain, the frequencies produced when the drum vibrates
correspond to the eigenvalues of the Laplace operator. Thus the mathematical
formulation of the question posed by Kac is: "Does the spectrum of a plane
domain determine its geometry?" Inverse spectral geometry studies the
generalization of this question to Riemannian manifolds. This proposal addresses
three topics in inverse spectral geometry: (1) the classical trace formula and
the length spectrum, (2) spectral rigidity and the Laplace spectrum on
1-forms,and (3) spectral analysis of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The first two
topics concern Riemannian nilmanifolds, which have played a vital role in
demonstrating properties not determined by the spectrum. In the first project,
wave invariants, constructed using the trace formula, motivate a new notion of
length spectrum, which will be studied toward proving a necessary condition that
closed geodesics on isospectral manifolds must satisfy. In the second project,
one-dimensional invariant subspaces of the Laplacian will be examined to show
that the 1-form spectrum detects the Sunada method. In the third topic, the
tools of hyperbolic geometry and topology are brought in to elucidate the
relationship between spectrum and geometry, particularly on geometrically
infinite hyperbolic 3-manifolds that are realized as limits of geometrically
finite ones.