* 9753175
* POWRE: An Experimental Investigation of Abiotic Synthesis   of Organic Compounds Under Hyrdothermal Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Jennifer Blank, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2001
* USD 111,000.00

9753175 Blank The questions surrounding the origin of life are the most
fundamental ones facing scientists, philosophers, and theologians. Since the
recognition that species evolve from earlier forms, two of the key questions
have been: One hypothetical model is the generation of primitive life from an
organic molecule-rich substrate. Abiotic synthesis of organic compounds has been
proposed as a possible mechanism for the formation of this substrate. Two early
earth environments have been postulated as potential sites for this synthesis:
at the atmosphere-ocean interface, and in hydrothermal systems. This award will
address the synthesis and stability of key organic compounds under hydrothermal
conditions. The hydrothermal diamond anvil cell technique provides a unique
opportunity to conduct dynamic experiments where reaction products, pathways,
and rates can all be monitored via continuous in situ measurements. The
combination of research institutions in the San Francisco Bay Area provides a
unique environment well-suited to the interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
research. There is a remarkable concentration of potentially relevant expertise
and interest at U.C. Berkeley, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory, Stanford University, NASA/Ames Research Center,
and the USGS-Menlo Park. The collection of institutions and people in this
region is ideally suited to bringing new ideas, observations, and expertise to
bear on the problems of prebiotic chemistry. This POWRE award will have a
critical impact on the P.I.'s academic career. This award will formally mark her
transition from a postdoctoral researcher to a more autonomous position. One of
the main attractions of a career in academia is the freedom to design and pursue
independent and collaborative research projects. The financial support from this
award would allow her to extend her expertise in experimental geochemistry, to
the realm of abiotic organic chemistry. She will be able to contribute
geological/geochemical perspectives to this interdisciplinary, exciting field of
study. Finally, her spouse works in the Bay Area and has been situated there
while she has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at the Geophysical
Laboratory in Washington, D.C. They have lived apart during these three years,
focusing on professional rather than personal lives. The POWRE award will give
her the opportunity to advance her career as a scientist and live with her
husband.