* 9753174
* POWRE: Development of Instrumentation for In-Situ           Measurement of Bottom Shear Stress Over Moveable Beds at    LEO-15
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Kelly Rankin, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2000
* USD 122,958.00

POWRE: Development of Instrumentation for In-Situ Measurement of Bottom Shear
Stress over Moveable Beds at LEO-15 The proposed effort involves the development
of a multi-directional shear plate to obtain in-situ direct bottom shear stress
measurements over moveable beds at the Long-term Ecosystem Observatory (LEO-15)
research area located offshore of the southern coast of New Jersey in 15 m of
water. These types of measurements are of critical importance to ocean
scientists and engineers. Numerical models for sediment transport, for the
prediction of wave transformation in shallow water, and for the circulation of
water bodies on meso- and large- scales, all require as input estimates of bed
shear stress. At the present time, the direct measurement of the time-average
bed shear stress, EMBED Equation.2 , under complex flow regimes remains
unattainable; estimates of EMBED Equation.2 used for sediment transport and wave
transformation models are obtained through indirect methods. A technique for the
direct measurement of the bottom shear stress over a moveable bed in the
laboratory was recently developed by the Principal Investigator (Rankin, 1997).
This technique offers direct, real time measurements of the bottom shear stress
and does not require information about the flow characteristics in the boundary
layer above the bed; it is thus well suited for complicated flow regimes. I
propose to continue the development of a shear plate device for use at LEO-15.
The proposed instrumentation development effort will contribute in several
significant ways to our knowledge of sediment transport and oceanographic field
installation, and to the nation's academic research infrastructure. The
development of this device will be of value to physical oceanographers modeling
sediment transport and hydrodynamic processes, to environmental engineers
studying dredging techniques and mapping the fate and transport of contaminated
sediments and to biological oceanographers examining the patch dynamics of
benthic communities. The POWRE award would have a significant impact on the
career of Dr. Rankin. As a new investigator, this award will provide an
opportunity to enhance her research activities through the development of new
instrumentation and access to state-of-the-art oceanographic field equipment.
Through POWRE's Visiting Professor program, Dr. Rankin will be afforded the
opportunity to collaborate with a nationally known team of oceanographers.