* 9753015
* POWRE:  Role of MPO-Brainstem Connection in Male            Reproductive Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Anne Murphy, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 03/31/1999
* USD 74,998.00

This POWRE award will advance Dr. Murphy's professional career by helping her
establish a new, independent line of investigation in an important area of
research, the neural mechanisms of mammalian reproductive behavior. The goal of
the research is to elucidate the neural mechanisms by which specific forebrain,
brainstem and spinal cord sites coordinate male reproductive behavior. The
medial preoptic (MPO) area of the forebrain plays a pivotal role in male
reproductive behavior; however, this region does not project to the lumbosacral
(L6/S1) spinal cord levels where the nerves are located that control sexual
reflexes. Dr. Murphy's preliminary studies suggest a potential pathway that
mediates forebrain influences on L6/S1 levels of the spinal cord. The lateral
paragigantocellularis (LPGi) and gigantocellularis pars alpha (GiA) in the
ventrolateral medulla receive direct input from the MPO and project heavily to
the L6/S1 cord. In addition, the LPGi/GiA have been shown to potently modulate
male reproductive behavior. The experiments to be conducted during the POWRE
award will test the hypothesis that MPO efferents target LPGi and GiA neurons
that project to the L6/S1 cord, and will provide the first anatomical,
functional, and physiological characterization of the MPO--LPGi/GiA--spinal cord
pathway. Currently, only fragmentary information exists regarding the neural
pathways and physiological mechanisms mediating the forebrain's influence on
spinal-cord sexual reflexes. Dr. Murphy's research, by closing this gap, will
advance our understanding of regulation of mammalian reproductive behavior by
the central nervous system.