* 9753119
* POWRE: Near Intergration: The Implications for Macro        Political Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1998,07/31/1999
* Suzanna Linn, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 93,485.00

The process of political change is the focus of inquiry across the subfields of
political science. Testing theories about political dynamics requires analysts
to make critical statistical assumptions about the nature of the memory of our
time series. Intuitively, the memory of a time series refers to the rate at
which the effects of shocks to a process, such as the effect of the massive
change in Congress in 1994 to the stream of policy outputs, dissipate.
Assumptions about memory lie at the heart of our theories about political
processes and they affect both the models we choose and the inferences we draw
from them. But these assumptions are not well known, are technically difficult,
and the implications of violating them have not been fully established. The
purpose of this study is to relate statistical assumptions about the memory in
our time series to theory and hypothesis testing. The results of the project
will illustrate the properties of alternative estimators as the nature of the
memory in time series varies and the conditions under which each estimator is
appropriate. The evidence will be used to gauge the reliability of results that
have led to theoretical debates in current applied work with a particular focus
on the support for the political parties and for the President, but the
implications have much broader applicability across the subfields of political
science and social sciences more generally. This POWRE award will support the
investigator in a Visiting Professorship to the Harvard-MIT Data Center. It will
allow her to interact and collaborate with other political methodologists who
will serve as her mentors during and after her year at Harvard. The Harvard-MIT
Cata Center will provide valuable tools that will be pivotal for the completion
of the research and will prove invaluable after she leaves Harvard and continues
to explore additional time series questions. The investigator will also immerse
herself in the various workshops and symposia relating to macro political theory
and econometrics while working on her research. The quantitative skills that she
will gain will enable her to make the needed breakthrough to successfully
complete her research and, thus, enhance her visibility in the field.