* 9753021
* POWRE:  Pheromonal Stimulation of Multiunit Activity in the MPN Mag
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Jennifer Swann, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 09/30/1999
* USD 123,639.00

Dr. Swann will carry out experiments desdesigned to determine how sex steroids
influence the activity of neural cells that regulate behavior. Gonadal steroids
have profound effects on the organization and expression of almost all forms of
behavior. Although it is clear from several different approaches that steroids
affect behavior through actions on specific neuronal cell groups, the exact way
in which steroids change neuronal function is not known. The results from
several experiments in Dr. Swann's lab indicate that gonadal steroids may
regulate behavior by regulating neuronal activity and communication among three
central areas in the hypothalamus (a brain structure). These results were
discovered by indirectly monitoring neuronal activity using a novel technique.
Dr. Swann plans to confirm and expand these findings by directly monitoring
neuronal activity in the same experimental design. Direct recording of neuronal
activity is a laborious technique that requires substantial technical skill and
equipment. Therefore, Dr. Swann had planned to visit laboratories with special
expertise in this technique. These plans were delayed by the birth of her
daughter. The POWRE award will provide the funds necessary to complete these
experiments, allow Dr. Swann to catch up on time lost to maternity, and prepare
her for a new phase of research using cutting-edge neuronal monitoring
techniques.