* 9753027
* POWRE:  Role of Calcium-Binding Proteins in Synaptic        Transmission Between Retinal Amacrine Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1998,08/31/2000
* Evanna Gleason, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2000
* USD 56,566.00

This POWRE Research Enhancement award will give Dr. Gleason the opportunity to
explore the feasibility of using antisense techniques to investigate her
research system of retinal neurons. Control of calcium concentration in cells is
critical for regulation of calcium-dependent events such as synaptic
transmission between neurons. Calcium homeostasis is especially important in the
retina, where synaptic signaling is relatively slow and therefore calcium
elevations can be large. This research project addresses the role that buffering
calcium-binding proteins play in neuronal calcium homeostasis and synaptic
transmission. Dr. Gleason will use antisense oligonucleotides to block the
expression of the predominant buffering calcium-binding protein, calretinin,
then examine the effects of removing this protein on synaptic transmission.
Synaptic transmission will be studied in a preparation of cultured neurons
derived from the chick retina, where an identified type of retinal neuron, the
amacrine cell, forms synapses with other amacrine cells. Isolated pairs of
synaptically connected amacrine cells can be studied with high resolution using
simultaneous perforated-patch voltage-clamp recording of both neurons. By
combining the two powerful techniques of molecular biology and
electrophysiology, this research will enhance our understanding of calcium-
homeostasis mechanisms in the central nervous system. The antisense methods
developed in this pilot project will be used in future studies to selectively
remove other neuronal proteins that may be important in retinal synaptic
transmission.