* 9753044
* Communication During Separations in Wild Bottlenose Dolphin Mothers and Infants
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1998,11/30/2001
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 11/30/2001
* USD 91,217.00

Bottlenose dolphins are characterized by a fission-fusion society, an elaborate
communication system (e.g., vocal learning, acoustic memory, individual
signatures, sonar) and long-term mother-offspring bonds (infants nurse for 3-6
years). Dolphin mothers and infants appear to simulate the fission-fusion
society at large by separating and rejoining frequently from the earliest days
of infancy. The communication system is likely to be the primary modality for
maintenance of such bonds, yet no studies have identified how individuals use
acoustic signals to indicate identity, location, or motivational state, and thus
how they can coordinate movements over long distances. The aims of this study
are (a) to determine the functions (motivation, localization, individual
identification) of bottlenose dolphin signature and non-signature whistles by
examining their use in natural behavioral contexts and responses during whistle
playback experiments; and (b) to determine how bottlenose dolphin mother-infant
pairs coordinate separations and reunions over large distances. Studies of
dolphin communication have been limited because it is difficult for humans to
localize the signaller and record the full spectrum of their high frequency
calls. However, with localization methods (an acoustic array) and high-frequency
recording, Dr. Mann can determine who is calling, examine the use of
"eavesdropping" among bottlenose dolphins, and explore the mechanisms and
functions of their complex communication system.