* 9753282
* POWRE:  Economic Models for Support of the Biological       Database Infrastructure
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1998,12/31/1999
* Lynda Ellis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 12/31/1999
* USD 59,798.00

The hundreds of biological databases which currently exist on the Internet form
the infrastructure which supports much present research in basic and applied
science, medicine, and biotechnology. They are significant information resources
that represent the fundamental research infrastructure for future
competitiveness in scientific research and application of technology. The rapid
expansion of this infrastructure and its new ease of access has outpaced the
scientific and business communities' ability to establish economic support to
maintain these resources over the long term. This project will explore
alternative support mechanisms for the maintenance, curation and further
development of the biological database infrastructure. A multi-disciplinary team
will survey biological database developers on sources for and stability of their
funding; benchmark the University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation
Database (UM-BBD), URL -- http://dragon.labmed.umn.edu/index.html, three other
biological databases, and three non-peer-group information- based systems, to
analyze costs, value creation, and value recover in information-based
infrastructures and establish a starting point for economic modeling of such
systems; and develop at least one economic model for the long term support of
the biological database infrastructure. At the end of this pilot project, one
will be validated by applying it to the UM-BBD and other biological databases.
If successful this pilot project will help assure the economic survival of the
biological database infrastructure.