* 9760320
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Carbon Electrodes for               Ultracapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Steven Dietz, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project's objective is to
prepare an improved ultracapacitors based on carbon electrodes. Ultracapacitors,
because of their high rate of charge and discharge, are prime candidates for use
as the load-leveling power source in electric vehicles. The most important
parameter in determining the power and energy density of a carbon-based
ultracapacitor is the amount of surface area accessible to the electrolyte,
which is primarily determined by the pore size distribution. The major
performance problem is pores that are too small for electrolyte access. TDA
Research, Inc. (TDA) has developed methods to prepare monolithic porous carbons
with the correct pore size distribution for use in ultracapacitors. This process
is considerably simpler than previous methods and uses low-cost feedstocks and
processing steps, which greatly lowers the production cost. This combination of
improvements should allow us to attain the cost/performance targets that will
make ultracapacitors commercially viable power sources. In Phase 1, TDA, with
the assistance of the Power Sources Group at Sandia National Laboratories
(Sandia), will prepare cells to evaluate the power and energy densities
attainable with the new materials, and estimate their cost in large scale
production. In addition to use as the load-leveling power source in electric
vehicles, improved ultracapacitors would be more cost effective in current
markets (calculators, watches and electric razors), emerging communications
markets (cellular telephones and digital communicators) and premium power
markets (clean power/filters and uninterrupted power sources). ?║_Á&gt;¥ ┴╣%%
Á┬¥Á&gt;┤ ?┐╝ ,&gt;?┴%Á┤ÀÁ ?Â ¥©Á ║©Á&gt;?_Á&gt;?&gt; ╣&gt; ╣¥¢ ┤Á└Á%?║_Á&gt;¥/%
/¢║Á│¥¢