* 9760613
* SBIR Phase I:  A Face Identification System Using a Novel   3D Camera
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Zheng (Jason) Geng, GENEX TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,999.00

The primary objective of this Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
from Genex Technologies, Inc. is to investigate the feasibility of building, for
the first time, an automatic 3D Face-ID (3D-FID) system with sophisticated 3D
face matching capability using a novel 3D camera. What is meant by 3D camera is
an electronic 3D imaging device that is able to produce digital 3D profile
measurement of a human face in one snap shot. Unlike the conventional Face-ID
system that use only 2D gray-scale images, the 3D face image available in Genex
Technologies' system provides accurate geometric information that makes the
Face-ID much more accurate and efficient. The human face is a three-dimensional
(3D) object, and each face has its unique 3D surface profile. The 3D features
and surface profile on a human face can be used for a rapid and accurate face
identification (Face-ID). Due to lack of low-cost 3D imaging devices and
effective 3D Face-ID algorithms, however, almost all existing Face-ID systems
use only 2D gray-scale face images as their input. The 2D images are inherently
vulnerable to changes in light condition and face orientation, because they
cannot preserve the 3D geometric structure of a face. This fundamental
restriction greatly limits the capability of current Face-ID systems in
effectively performing face recognition functions. As a result, the match-rate
for existing Face-ID systems in real-world applications is very low (below 90%).
The key components of the proposed 3D-FID system include (1) a novel 3D camera
that is able to acquire both 2D and 3D facial images in real-time; (2) software
based on an efficient 3D face identification algorithm; (3) 2D and 3D facial
image database; and (4) a user-interface. The commercial market for automatic
face identification systems is sizable, and applications are numerous, including
those in both military and civilian areas. Security and ATM machines can use
Face-ID to verify the identity of bankcard users, saving millions of dollars in
false claim of cardholdership. Computer access control can use a Face-ID system
instead of password to grant authority for computer usage. Law enforcement
agents can use a Face-ID system to preselect and nail down fugitives based on
their images. Military can use the Face-ID system to control access to
restricted areas. Valuable properties such as cars or boats could use the 3D-FID
system to identify their owners. The low cost 3D camera can also be used for
many other applications, such as manufactured parts inspection, robotics,
autonomous vehicles, and virtual reality. The rapid advances in video-
conferencing and interactive television further broaden possible applications of
3D imaging technologies.