* 9760805
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Microcrystalline Silicon Solar Cell    Devices Prepared Using Unique Microwave/Electron Beam       (EM) Gas Jet Deposition Technique
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Scott Jones, Energy Conversion Devices, Inc. (ECD, Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760805 Jones This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
test the feasibility of using a novel Microwave/Electron Beam (EM) Gas Jet
technique to prepare high stable efficiency microcrystalline silicon cells at
high deposition rates. These cells, with light absorbing microcrystalline
layers, have been proposed as an alternative to amorphous silicon based cells
because, in contrast to the amorphous cells, the efficiencies do not degrade
with long term light exposure. While microcrystalline cells with 11% stable
efficiencies have been obtained, the technique used to prepare these cells
requires unacceptably low deposition rates of 1-3 A/s for microcrystalline
formation. The proposed technique is unique in that it utilizes a microwave
source, an electron beam and a Gas Jet that produces near supersonic gas speeds.
The microwaves efficiently decompose the silane gas to create high deposition
rates and with large amounts of hydrogen dilution generate large atomic hydrogen
fluxes that are important for microcrystalline formation. The electron beam is
required to stabilize the plasma while high gas speeds created by the Gas Jet
minimize any detrimental gas phase interactions. The proposer will demonstrate
in this program that high quality microcrystalline silicon materials and solar
cells can be prepared at high rates with this novel deposition technique. The
success of this program will ultimately lead to a wider use of Photovoltaic (PV)
products thereby reducing the dependency on fossil fuel energy sources.
Development of a high deposition rate technique to prepare high quality
microcrystalline silicon could also be applied in other industries such as thin
film transistors, photodetectors, and photosensors. ***