* 9760204
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Temperature Fluidized Bed Reactor for   Producing Silicon Carbide Coated Activated Carbon
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* James Atwater, Umpqua Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 970204 Atwater This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes development of a high-temperature fluidized bed reactor (HTFBR) based
process for the production of a homogeneous and integral high surface area
silicon carbide (SiC) coating on activated carbon. The primary application of
this new material will be as a catalyst support for use in gas phase and aqueous
phase heterogeneous catalytic processes for the deep oxidation (mineralization)
of organic environmental contaminants. For destruction of airborne or waterborne
contaminants, current catalyst supports such as silica, alumina, titania,
zirconia and ceramic monoliths yield catalysts with relatively low activities
due to inadequate surface areas for deposition of catalytic nuclei. High surface
area activated carbon supported catalysts have been prepared with extremely high
levels of activity but unacceptably short useful lives resulting from
degradation. In contrast, silicon carbide is a material with excellent chemical,
thermal, and mechanical stability characteristics. It is anticipated that a
catalyst support combining the desirable features of high surface area,
mechanical stability, and resistance to chemical attack will result from the
formation of a thin SiC coating over an activated carbon surface. The primary
commercial opportunity will be the manufacture and sale of supports suitable for
oxidation catalysts needed for environmental remediation applications. However,
carbon supported catalysts are used extensively in petroleum refining and
chemical processing industries. It is anticipated that many new applications for
the novel catalyst support will arise, because of its excellent qualities of
hardness, strength, high surface area, and superior chemical, thermal, and
mechanical stability. ***