* 9760940
* SBIR Phase I:  IR and Abrasion Protective Inorganic         Coatings for Polycarbonates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* T. Jan Hwang, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760940 Hwang A superior coating system improving the optical and mechanical
properties of transparent face protective equipment is needed. Present visors
are prone to scratching and/or cannot tolerate direct flame impingement. 'Fire
novel approach described in this proposal uses an open atmosphere CVD technique
to apply an inexpensive, hard, flexible gold based silica thin film coating
system to enhance the abrasion, flame resistance and overall duration and visual
acuity of polymer based transparent visors. The reflective properties of the
gold should also show improvement in the IR reflective properties of the system.
mct' will determine the optimal coating system, which may be a nanolaminate, to
provide the properties needed for face protective equipment. All work will be
based on previous coating development of metals, silica and other advanced
materials using the open atmosphere CCVD process. This process is both low cost
and production friendly, and offers the capability to deposit high quality thin
films onto large complex shapes for this application. Silica and metal coatings
have been successfully deposited onto polycarbonate substrates using CCVD
processing at MCT. A support letter from an industry leader in the development
of protective equipment for firefighters is included in the proposal; the letter
expresses a strong interest in the proposed approach. ' 'he experience and
skills of this company will be instruments in attainment of the objectives of
this project. By developing a new coating process for transparent plastics, it
is possible to extend the applications beyond optical coatings to light blocking
applications, metallization of electronic packaging, compact discs and light
weight wave guides, all of which can then use low density inexpensive bulk
polymers. Collectively, these areas present a multi-hundred million opportunity.
With recent Phase III funding from its first Phase 11, MCT has demonstrated the
capability to effectively utilize SBIR fun ding. ***