* 9760996
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Holographics for Information        Storage and Retrieval
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Debra Trantolo, Cambridge Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

***9760996 Trantolo This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project aims
to develop, fabricate, and test a holographic memory for mass information
storage using the photodynamic protein, bacteriorhodopsin (bR) as the recording
medium. The ultimate configuration is a page-oriented system with reasonable
access times technology and long holographic lifetimes. Although bR has shown
potential as a holographic material, its use has been limited by the short
lifetime of the hologram. If the advantages of a bR system could be coupled to
longer holographic lifetimes and capacities, then technology for large data
storage and rapid information retrieval could be realized in a system more
compact than current CD-ROM technology. In this Phase I project, the proposer
will investigate the feasibility of increasing bR holographic capability by
coupling bR to a liquid crystal (LC) system which offers increased birefringence
in the writing of the hologram. Given that a key issue is the magnitude of the
real component of the refractive index, increasing the birefringence may be a
useful approach. In writing the hologram, the LC's go from isotropic to an
ordered dispersion, a property which can be linked to those of bR to improve
holographic lifetime. Thus, if Phase I can demonstrate an improved bR
holographic, the Phase II development workscope will address dense memory
storage via a compact, yet thick, material. This research addresses the
development of new and innovative techniques for large data storage media with
rapid retrieval capability. As such there are many applications in the
commercial world. It could conceivably replace the CD-ROM currently in use with
smaller size, large capacity, more rapidly accessible, bulk storage devices. The
use of such devices throughout the computer environment is widespread. ***