* 9760978
* SBIR Phase I:  Methanol Crossover-Resistant, Membrane        Electrode Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Robert Kovar, Foster-Miller Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1998
* USD 97,231.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a low cost
Methanol Crossover Resistant - Membrane Electrode Assembly (MCR-MEA) for use in
liquid feed Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFC). A chemically resistant,
dimensionally stable, high temperature MEA will be produced. This MEA will
address serious problems preventing Next Generation Vehicle (NGV)
commercialization, including: methanol crossover, excessive cost and ease of
manufacture. These new MCR-MEA based fuel cells will achieve a increase in power
density. The development team includes experts in polymeric membranes,
catalysis, MEAS, and fuel cell commercialization (LANL, IFC, GM and Ballard).
DMFC are attractive for defense and transportation (NGV) applications due to
their lower weight and volume since they do not require any bulky fuel
processing equipment. DMFC have rapid start-up and load following capabilities
and also avoid the hazards associated with handling gaseous hydrogen. Commercial
applications for DMFC fall into three broad categories: space and military,
utilities and automotive. Space and military applications include space based
(e.g. Space Shuttle), surface ships, low power units (battery replacements) and
portable/mobile field generating units. Utility applications include
communications, computers (laptop) and stationary power generation. Automotive
applications include automotive (NGV), bus, truck and railway power. The
automotive (NGV) application itself represents an incredible market potential.