* 9760633
* SBIR Phase I:  Hand-Held Environmental Monitors for Initial Site Characterization of Volatile Organic Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Ross Thomas, Eltron Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,996.00

*** 9760633 Thomas This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop a hand-held environmental Monitor, which employs a four-component
microsensor array of chemiresitors, for initial Site characterization of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). This solid-state device is designed to
generate characteristic response patterns that arise from key analytes and
mixtures from fuels, cleaning solvents, and aromatic hydrocarbons. The VOCs are
identified and quantified by analyzing the unique response produced by the
microsensor array using a pattern recognition algorithm integrated with the
environmental monitor. For example, conducting particles dispersed within
polymer films provide a basis to detect trace concentrations of organic vapors
by measuring resistance changes that occur to these materials as they swell.
Previous research studies have demonstrated that it is possible to correctly
identify and quantify a model group of VOCs using chemiresistor arrays
manufactured with these types of materials. This technology has the following
advantages: (1) integratable into small, inexpensive systems, (2) high
sensitivity and reliability to detect VOCs, (3) low power requirements, and (4)
immunity to shock and vibration. Successful completion of this project will
significantly impact the use of gas microsensors for environmental applications
by developing a low-cost system to reliably identify and quantify the presence
of VOCs. The proposed hand-held analytical instrument, which employs a
microsensor array of chemiresistors, provides a basis to monitor the presence of
gas-phase analytes and mixtures from fuels, cleaning solvents, and aromatic
hydrocarbons. These low-cost systems are designed for environmental applications
to reliably detect potentially hazardous environments. ***