* 9760906
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Overhead-Rail Cobot for    Intelligent Material Handling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* David Burns, Cobotics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project submitted by
Collaborative Motion Control, Inc. will result in an innovative prototype
intelligent materials handling system. The prototype will incorporate a
conventional overhead rail system, to which a cobot (`collaborative robot`)
component has been added. Cobots do not enhance human strength or replace a
human operator, but rather provide virtual `guiding` surfaces to help a human
operator maneuver a payload. The human part of the team supplies all motive
power, while the cobot interfaces to a computer. The cobot's physically passive
design confers a degree of intrinsic safety. The ease of manipulations that
cobots provide translates into fewer injuries and reduced worker's compensation
costs, issues of tremendous concern in the material handling industry. In
addition to ergonomics, cobots benefit productivity (speed) and quality
(avoiding collisions). Research objectives include design of a sufficiently
robust continuously variable transmission (CVT) joint, which is the core
mechanical element of a cobot. A riser interface for the specification of smooth
virtual constraint surfaces will be developed. Control software that was
developed for a laboratory environment will be pointed to an industrial
microcontroller. Commercial applications include automobile assembly, textile
mills, and other industries in which human workers are essential, yet mechanical
assist devices are needed.