* 9760886
* SBIR Phase I:  Theory and Simulation of Dense Phase Granular Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Yansi Zhang, Cambridge Hydrodynamics Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
application of a generalized kinetic theory to describe the dense, quasistatic,
regime of granular materials and the development of a computational tool for
engineering design and control applications. Dense phase granular materials play
important roles in the energy, metallurgical, food/agricultural, pharmaceutical
and chemical industries. There are significant environmental ramifications of
granular flows as well. The research effort here will be based on a statistical
mechanical approach using nonlinear response theory arid the projection
operators methods extended to apply to systems which do not obey detailed
balance. New macro-fields, which describe structure, will be introduced in order
to close the equations of motion. In parallel, molecular dynamics codes will be
developed to test and improve the modeling work. Full macroscopic equations of
motion and an efficient molecular dynamics (MD) simulation code for dense phase
granular flows are anticipated as the main results of this project. Applications
will be made to vibrated and sheared systems as prototype cases. The product to
be developed is intended to replace inaccurate empirical estimation with a
predictive tool that should find applications throughout the granular material
processing industries. In particular, applications include the design of high-
performance devices that manufacture, store and transport granular materials.
The market for a successful software product could reach $10million per year
within 3 - 5 years.