* 9760044
* SBIR Phase I: Improved Biocatalyst for Methyl Tert-Butyl    Ether (MTBE) Degradation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760044 Steffan This 6 month Phase I SBIR project involves the development
of improved biocatalysts for destroying gasoline oxygenates such as methyl tert-
butyl ether (MTBE), ethyl tert butyl ether (ETBE), and tert-amyl methyl ether
(TAME). Oxygenates such as MTBE have been added to gasoline in the United States
since the late 1970@, to replace lead and other toxic components. Currently,
MTBE is second on the list of organic chemicals produced in the United States
with greater than 24 billion pounds produced annually, and it has become one of
the most common contaminants of urban groundwaters. Recent concern over
groundwater contamination has led some states to reduce their allowable maximum
levels of MTBE in groundwater to <100 ppb. The few studies that have addressed
MTBE biodegradation have met with very limited success, thereby leading to the
conclusion that MTBE is recalcitrant to biodegradation. Recent studies by
Envirogen, however, have identified a class of microorganisms that can
biodegrade MTBE, but can not use it as a growth substrate. The goal of the
proposed work is to use modern molecular biological techniques to exploit
knowledge gathered to date to develop an organisms that can grow on MTBE as a
sole source of carbon and energy. The technology developed during this project
will be applicable for destroying gasoline oxygenates in a variety of
wastewaters including groundwater remediation and end-of-pipe treatment.
Initially, the technology will be deployed in contained bioreactors, and
eventually, upon deomonstrating the safety of the biocatalysts, in situ. More
than 300,000 leaking gasoline storage tanks have been reported to regulatory
agencies, and many of these sites contain MTBE-contaminated groundwater. The
lack of alternative remediation alternatives for MTBE makes the proposed work
commercially significant. ***