* 9760236
* SBIR Phase I:  Selection and Storage of Cord Blood Stem     Cells in a Novel Bioreactor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Mark Pykett, CYTOMATRIX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 88,190.00

*** 9760236 Pykett This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
examine the ability of a novel three-dimensional biomaterial, Cellfoam, to pre-
select, expand, cyopreserve and transduce hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCS)
present in cord blood (CB). Preliminary data from NSF Phase I award DMI-9661006
show that CD34' HPCs cultured in Cellfoam without exogenous cytokines are
expanded 8-10 fold while maintaining their viability and multipotency. IIPCs can
be cryopreserved in Celifoam, thawed, re-cultured, and transduced efficiently
with a retroviral vector. We propose to examine a novel application of Cellfoam:
the integrated pre-selection, expansion, cryopreservation and transduction CB
HPCS. We will utilize cells from either unfractionated, Ficoll purified or CD34'
selected preparations of pooled CB samples to evaluate the survival, phenotype
and multipotency of cells pre-cultured in Cellfoam without cytokines for up to
four weeks and cryopreserved in the same units for one month. We will also
examine the retroviral transduction of thawed HPCs over three weeks. By using
different CB fractions we may isolate novel, critical subsets of HPCS. This work
will facilitate commercialization of Cellfoam systems for the first-ever
integrated selection, storage and modification system for CB HPCs in an HPC
banking market anticipated to exceed US $600 million annually in the next
decade. ***