* 9760399
* SBIR Phase I:  Observer's Associate
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1998
* Patrick Simpson, Scientific Fishery Systems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760399 Simpson This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
proposal. With the world's fishing capacity at twice the estimated sustainable
harvest, accurately assessing fish stocks is an international priority. The
federal government requires that North Pacific fishing vessels over 60 feet long
have an observer onboard at least part-time and large vessels require a full-
time observer. Observers collect a wide range of data on both target catch and
bycatch. Scientists and fish managers use this information to set catch limits,
close fisheries, revise population estimates, and determine fishing areas.
Recently, the observer program has become stressed. Poor conditions, low pay,
and the inherent stress of being a fisheries "watch dog" have resulted in high
turn-over rates. Furthermore, observers are required to sample from as much as
250 metric ton in 2 hours. Under these conditions, the sample size is as little
as 0.08%. Observers, and the fisheries, need help. Scientific Fishery Systems,
Inc. (SciFish) proposes to design, build, and test an automated fish stock
measurement and identification system entitled Observer's Associate. Observer's
Associate will automatically provide whole catch weight and individual fish
statistics. At least a 5% sample size under peak conditions is the design goal,
resulting in as much as 60 times greater coverage than the current approach. It
is conservatively estimated that there are 15,000 commercial fishing vessels
over 100 ton (the size of vessel that would use Observer's Associate. World-wide
this number increases to 100,000. The target price for the trawler-based
Observer's Associate is $50,000 and the smaller unit price target is $5,000.
Based upon preliminary projections, 5% of the available world-wide market would
result in a $10M product line. ***