* 9760309
* SBIR Phase I:  Polystyrene Supports for Large Scale and     Long RNA Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Stephen Scaringe, DHARMACON INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760309 Scaringe This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will evaluate the effectiveness of non-porous polystyrene beads derivatized with
branched linkers to yield a high loaded support to be used in conjunction with
an efficient RNA synthesis chemistry. This support will enable (1) large scale
RNA syntheses and (2) syntheses of RNA up to 120 bases.The company is
successfully developing an RNA chemistry in which each nucleotide couples in
less than 90 seconds with yields in excess of 99%. 36-Nucleotide RNA
oligonucleotides are functional sites on the external and internal surfaces of
porous polystyrene beads. Unfortunately, the pores constrain the amount and
length of RNA that can be synthesized. Large syntheses and long sequences are
unfeasible with this chemistry on porous support. Development of a suitable non-
porous bead is proposed.. Oligonucleotides would grow out into solution without
limitations of length. Branched linkers would multiply functional surface sites
for large syntheses. These supports will be evaluated with the existing RNA
chemistry to synthesize larger scales and longer sequences. Project success will
satisfy research and pharmaceutical market needs for large scale RNA syntheses
and routine synthesis of RNA less than or equivalent to 120 bases long. These
more powerful RNA synthesis capabilities will help the biotechnology and health
care industries in investigating RNA-based therapeutics. ***