* 9760985
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Creation of NURBS Patches From     Triangulated Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Ping Fu, RAINDROP GEOMAGIC INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,964.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Raindrop Geomagic,
Inc. will explore the automatic creation of non-uniform rational B-spline
(NURBS) surfaces from both 3D point sets and polygonal surfaces representing 3D
models. NURBS surfaces are the preferred representation in the design phase
because they allow easy and intuitive manual manipulation through control
points; yet using current methods, the task of constructing NURBS surfaces has
been both laborious and time-consuming for designers. Raindrop Geomagic seeks to
investigate and prototype several methods from the theoretical community and
compare their performance and feasibility. Automatically creating NURBS surfaces
is one of the hardest unsolved problems in the computer-aided design industry,
and a general solution may not be found in the short term. In Phase I, Raindrop
Geomagic will prototype different geometric methods for this problem in the
context of selected markets where data classification is not completely general.
This work will provide the project team with a gain insight necessary to the
achievement of defining an implementation path for a product for automated
conversion in the next phase of the research. The resulting software, when fully
developed, will fill an urgent need in the computer-aided design industry: to
freely convert from polygonal surfaces (used for analysis and rendering) to
NURBS-based surfaces (used for conceptual design and styling). Both computer-
aided design/computer aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) users and animators have a
strong need for software tools that can help speed up their production schedules
and reduce their costs.