* 9760520
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Atmospheric Laboratory
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Glenn Van Knowe, MESOSCALE ENVIRONMENTAL SIMULATIONS AND OPERATIONS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from MESO, Inc.
addresses the opportunity to utilize advanced atmospheric simulation technology
for teaching atmospheric and related earth sciences at the university, high
school and middle school levels and for use at weather forecasting training
centers and by the general public. The overall objective is to provide students
at various educational and experience levels with a mechanism to develop problem
solving skills as they learn about the earth-atmosphere system. This will be
accomplished by developing a software system, termed the Virtual Atmospheric
Laboratory (VAL), that will allow students to easily conduct and analyze
realistic atmospheric experiments involving complex solar, terrestrial and
atmospheric dynamical interactions. The secondary objective is demonstrate
feasibility of running the experiments on a low-cost desktop computer making
this educational tool available to every student The VAL will be an integration
of several technological components, including: (1) sophisticated physics-based
atmospheric numerical models; (2) visualization tools which permit the user to
interactively examine and animate complex multidimensional datasets; (3)
graphical user interfaces which allow the user to easily navigate through and
control complex computer programs; and (4) hypertext instructional databases
which permit the user to pursue threads of knowledge through the use of words
and phrases which are linked to other parts of an instructional database or even
other databases. The Phase I research will (1) evaluate a conceptual VAL
prototype in an actual university-level instructional setting; (2) establish the
educational objectives and functional design for the fully-functional VAL for a
broad range of educational levels; and (3) determine the computational
feasibility of hosting the VAL on a low-cost computational platform. A
successful completion of the Phase I research will develop a working prototype
on a UNIX workstation, demonstrate the computational feasibility on Windows- and
Macintosh-based platforms and illustrate the instructional utility of the VAL
concept in order to provide the foundation for the development of the a more
sophisticated fully-functional VAL in Phase II. The primary commercial
application for the Virtual Atmospheric Laboratory will be as an educational
tool used by middle schools, high schools, colleges, universities, government
weather forecasting training centers, and government and commercial `field`
weather forecasters. Other VAL applications which have potential to generate
commercial revenue include use as: (1) a low-cost research tool and data
generator for meteorologists and non-meteorologists investigating atmosphere-
related problems; (2) a home atmospheric laboratory for weather hobbyists and
general science enthusiasts; and (3) a real-time high resolution local weather
forecast system.