* 9760772
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Catalysts for Photocatalytic           Adsorption-Integrated-Reaction (AIR) Emissions Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* James Kittrell, KSE Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760772 Kittrell This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to establish the technical and economic feasibility of an Adsorption-Integrated-
Reaction (AIR) technology, and provide a system to destroy volatile organic
compounds (VOCS) in applications with high flow rates of air and dilute
contaminant concentrations. The research program will provide a new,
multicomponent, zeolite-based photocatalytic adsorbent, shown to be much more
active than traditional titania photocatalysts. It will consist of synthesis and
evaluation of catalyst compositions, kinetic studies of destruction efficiency
on representative classes of VOCS, and a comparative cost analysis of the
resulting photocatalytic technology relative to other emissions control
alternatives. It is anticipated than an effective dilute phase pollution control
concept will be developed, which will provide a cost-effective technology for
destroying VOCs in high flow rate air with dilute VOC concentrations. The
commercial applications for the concept will be for control of air pollution (a)
by destruction of air emissions of VOCs from soil and groundwater remediation,
(b) from industrial emissions, and (c) for enhanced indoor air quality. The
technology will reduce the costs of air pollution control, enhance environmental
quality, and improve economic competitiveness. ***