* 9760657
* SBIR Phase I:  Co-Tolerant Electrocatalysts for Proton      Exchange Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1998
* Cong Pu, T/J Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 08/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
CO-tolerant anode electrocatalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells
operating with reformate hydrogen. Improving the tolerance to carbon monoxide
will reduce the required loadings of noble metal catalyst and permit operation
on reformed hydrocarbon fuels without requiring separation and purification of
the hydrogen. The proposed approach is a synergistic combination of two previous
strategies that have proven successful in improving the efficiency and CO
tolerance of anodic electrocatalysts. Inherently active and poison-tolerant high
surface area support materials will be used. In addition, the supports will be
modified to create highly disperse bifunctional sites. Phase I involved a
systematic study of three process variables used in preparing the supported
catalyst materials. The composition and microstructure of the materials will be
analyzed. Electrodes will be prepared for standard electrochemical measurements
of activity. In Phase II, electrode designs will be optimized and
electrochemical measurements extended to evaluate full cell and stacked cell
performance as a function of catalyst loading, temperature range and fuel
composition. Reducing catalyst costs will address a key obstacle hindering the
commercialization of PEM fuel cells for vehicle propulsion and off-grid electric
power generation.