* 9760389
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable Handwriting Capture Device for    Augmenting Communications Within Groups
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Kurt Goszyk, CyberScan Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 63,548.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project submitted by CyberScan
Technologies Company provides an affordable means of electronically enhancing
the nation's large installed chalk boards, white boards, and drawing board base.
By adapting conventional writing surfaces rather than replacing them with
expensive electronic white boards or graphics tablets, academic institutions,
corporations, and governments could save approximately $5 billion in new
equipment and installation costs. CyberScan Technologies proposes to develop a
retrofittable, low cost, area adaptive system that can optically capture notes,
drawings or sketches to a computer or the Internet. CyberScan will research the
feasibility of digitizing hand strokes in real time using two small optical
sensors and an optically transmitting pen or chalk holder. CyberScan anticipates
this technique could convert written information on surfaces from one to twelve
feet in diagonal into electronic data suitable for display on a PC SVGA display
screen. Potential commercial applications of the research include: CAD/CAM
digitizers, low cost and portable electronic white board alternatives, video
conferencing input devices, medical patient charting, and academic, corporate,
military, and government interactive presentation devices. Because of the
serious interest of a potential marketing partner in the electronic white board
field, rapid commercialization of products is extremely likely.