* 9760608
* SBIR Phase I:  Computation of Three-Dimensional Travel Times for Seismic Prospecting via the Fast Marching Method
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Alexander Popovici, 3DGEO DEVELOPMENT INC
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will exploit recent
advancements in optimal algorithms for solving the Hamilton-Jacobi equations
which arise imaging seismic data volumes used in oil and gas exploration and
reservoir characterization. Fast Marching Methods are recently developed
numerical techniques for solving the Eikonal equation. They compute the correct
viscosity solution in O(N log N) time, where N is the total number of points in
the computational domain. As such, they are the fastest schemes available, and
rely on a marriage of upwind finite difference operators for entropy-satisfying
gradients, the theory of viscosity solutions to Hamilton-Jacobi equations, and
fast sort algorithms. The techniques are unconditionally stable and designed for
large variations in velocity. The goal of this Phase I project is to use Fast
Marching Methods for computing first arrivals in analysis, as a key part of the
migration and imaging algorithms, providing significant computational
advancement over existing techniques. The Phase II effort will involve the
demonstration of the method on a full 3-D data volume, and the extension of the
method to calculate multivalued travel times, most-energetic traveltimes, and
traveltimes in anisotropic media. Oil and gas reserves in areas of complex
geological structure are costly to produce and therefore require sophisticated
and detailed 3-D seismic imaging. This project will have a direct and
significant impact on the oil and gas industry by laying the groundwork for the
development of a fast, accurate and easy to use imaging method that will meet
the increasingly stringent demands at today's competitive exploration and
production environment.