* 9760767
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Nanostructured Polymers for Membrane   Separations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Ingo Pinnau, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760767 Pinnau This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
focuses on determining the feasibility of developing polyacetylene-based
polymers with the selectivity and permeability of poly(l-trimethylsilyl- 1
-propyne (PTMSP) but with much improved solvent resistance. Several substituted
polyacetylene polymers have extraordinarily high fractional free volumes (25% or
more), and cast films of these polymers contain a connected nanoporous network
which leads to remarkable gas permeation properties. Membranes made from these
polymers have shown high permeabilities and very high selectivity in separating
condensable-noncondensable gas mixtures. Unfortunately, the most selective and
permeable of the polyacetylenes, PTMSP, is soluble in most hydrocarbon liquids.
Consequently, the membrane must never contact any condensed vapor or entrained
liquid droplets, a likely occurrence in industrial membrane systems. If stable
membranes can be formed, a breakthrough in the separation of condensable C3-C5
hydrocarbons from nitrogen, hydrogen and methane would result. This represents a
large, economically important group of separations in the petrochemical,
refinery, and natural gas processing industries. The novel nanostructured
polymer materials to be developed in this project can be used to form membranes
for a wide range of separations such as natural gas treatment, hydrogen recovery
in refineries, recovery of propylene and ethylene in polyolefin plants, and
separation of Volatile Organic Compounds from air and nitrogen in petrochemical
plant vent gases. ***