* 9760647
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-Sensor Module for Seismic and          Infrastructure Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* William Clark, Integrated Micro Instruments
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 94,000.00

*** 9760647 Clark This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
involve development of a micromachined-accelerometer based Micro-Sensor Module
for use in seismic testing and infrastructure monitoring applications ranging
from earthquake studies to active structure control. The heart of the module
will be a triad of miniature, inexpensive, low-power accelerometers. Built-in
serial bus and wireless communication capability will be included. Integrated
Micro Instruments was formed from the core DARPA-sponsored Berkeley Sensor &
Actuator Center (BSAC) design team which produced some of the first integrated
microaccelerometers. This work has resulted in a medium performance micro-sensor
module with signal processing on a thumbnail sized silicon chip. These proven
sensor architectures will be combined with a deep trench micromachining
technology developed at BSAC. The extremely thick structures will dramatically
increase sensitivity and hence improve performance. Integrating circuits with
these sensors will allow temperature compensation, filtering, exceptional
miniaturization, and digital output. The goal of Phase I is to prove that
micromachining can produce sensors and sensor systems with the performance
required for seismic and infrastructure monitoring. Complete mechanical sensor
and electrical circuit design will verify feasibility and allow rapid
fabrication of functional devices in Phase II. Market research firms forecast
inexpensive, micromachined inertial sensors to command a market of over one
billion dollars with unit sales in the tens of millions by the year 2000. High
volume commercial applications such as automotive safety, virtual reality, 3-D
computer mice, and machine monitoring already incorporate miniature sensors
which can be vastly improved using this technology. The high performance micro-
sensors envisioned open new frontiers such as augmented GPS navigation, general
aviation, robotics, and platform leveling. Integrated Micro Instruments has be
en approached by venture capitalists and a military contractor continuing the
very high level of commercial interest. ***