* 9760447
* SBIR Phase I:  Stabilization of Microenvironmental          Temperatures on Plant Surfaces with Microencapsulated Phase Change Materials to Prevent Frost/Freeze Damage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* David Colvin, Triangle Research and Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,998.00

*** 9760447 Colvin This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
program will investigate the use of microencapsulated phase change materials
(microPCMs) to control and stabilize plant surface temperatures within a range
that protects the plant tissue against low temperature damage. The project will
study ways to stabilize the microenviromnent temperature on the plant surface
with microPCMs as an impetus to develop a safe, economical, and effective method
for controlling frost damage in the agricultural and horticultural industries.
Microencapsulated phase change materials (microPCMs) - developed by Triangle
Research and Development Corporation (TRDC) on multiple SBIR programs from 1984
to 1996 - will be selected and used in this program. TRDC has already developed
coatings for textiles and aircraft that can control temperature at temperatures
from ambient to 1,000 degrees F. A wide array of potential temperature
stabilizing microPCMs are available for testing and based on ongoing research,
we know that microPCMs go into suspension well, can be easily applied to plant
surfaces, and have demonstrated a compatibility on plants tested thus far in
other unrelated work. The proposed research would demonstrate the effectiveness
of microPCMs to slow or prevent cooling of the leaf or flower surfaces to a
level where protection of the tissue is achieved. Annually, significant portions
of citrus fruits, deciduous tree fruits, small fruits, winter vegetables,
ornamentals, and cereal crops are lost to frost/freeze damage. For the fruit
industry alone, which is worth eight to ten billion dollars in the United
States, losses are consistently high. The market potential for a successful
product for frost/freeze protection of this nature would be enormous. For the
horticultural industry, conservative estimates for frost damage in the U.S. is
near the billion dollar figure. This research may provide a solution to these
problems and markets. ***