* 9760351
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Gel Actuator for Variable-Volume       Sockets of Lower-Limb Prostheses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Robert Dean, Jr., SYNERGY INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 0.00

*** 9760351 Dean This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
prove the feasibility of smart, responsive-gel actuators for variable-volume
sockets. The comfort, walking efficiency and security of lower-limb prostheses
are related directly to the fit of the socket. Yet, a consistent, precision
socket fit is often not achieved because of natural fluctuations in the volume
of an amputee's residual limb. Chronic discomfort and an expensive, often
endless search for a comfortable prosthesis result. To correct this basic
defect, we will innovate a Smart Variable-Volume Socket (SVVS) whose main
feature will be intrasocket, responsive-gel-filled actuators whose volume can be
varied electrically. Associated pressure sensors will provide feedback to an on-
board controller. The socket will sense and automatically compensate for volume
variations of the residual limb. It will create a consistently precise fit which
should lower the need for and cost of rehabilitation and improve greatly the
quality of life of amputees. The smart gel actuator also has important
applications for orthoses and splints. Widespread utilization of the SVVS
concept is expected among the 220,000 U.S. lower-limb amputees. A worldwide
business of tens of millions of dollars should develop. Savings of over $100
million/year in U.S. rehabilitation cost are projected. ***