* 9760377
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable Braille Display Using Novel       Microactuators
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Frederick Lisy, ORBITAL RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I program from Orbital Research,
Inc. will improve the yield on microelectrochemical (MEMS) devices for a
Refreshable Braille Display System (RBDS). MEMS technology has the potential to
provide ten rows of Braille text for the same price as the current cost of a
single row display. As the MEMS devices are the major cost of the display,
device yield becomes the most important factor in the ultimate cost of the
product. This program will evaluate several designs and fabrication techniques
to reduce the overall cost of the Refreshable Braille Display System. These
improved actuation mechanisms are required to provide more Braille cells per
display to emulate a sheet of Braille text and/or the computer monitor. This
device will more effectively access computer based information, enhancing
educational and research opportunities for visually impaired and also visually
and hearing impaired individuals. The anticipated array of Braille dots will
make available an entire page of computer screen information either from a
computer spreadsheet, the Internet, or CD-ROM in the most appropriate Braille
code. This device will allow visually impaired users to skim documents and
access links such as those encountered while surfing the Internet. The proposed
Refreshable Braille Display System (RBDS) technology is designed to be
compatible with any 386 computer unit, and it will include software which will
make the system compatible with all Braille codes. Future trends toward a
paperless society will make refreshable Braille display systems imperative for
the over 500,000 visually impaired individuals in the United States. Finally, a
large market exists for other spin-off microactuator technologies such as
microsatellite propulsion systems, smart surfaces for aircraft, earring perfume
dispensers, automotive fuel additive systems, televisions with odorants (smell-
o-vision), and virtual reality goggles with olfactory inputs.