* 9760847
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanostructural Aerogel Materials for         Electrical Energy Storage Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Yuhong Huang, CHEMAT TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,999.00

*** 9760847 Huang This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to develop processing techniques for the synthesis of transition metal
carbonitride aerogel materials for energy storage applications. Aerogels are a
class of low density foam materials characterized by open cell structures
composed of particles usually less than 10 nanometers in diameter with pore
sizes usually less than 50 nanometers in diameter. It is well known that
nanostructural aerogel materials prepared by the sol-gel process exhibit very
high porosity and surface areas. Moreover, pore structures and pore sizes can be
tailored with this process. Ultracapacitors are capacitive energy storage
devices based on double-layer capacitance. The potential power density and cycle
life of electrochemical capacitors are two orders of magnitude higher than those
of rechargeable batteries. A wide range of potential applications have been
identified. The extremely low density and high surface area metal carbonitride
aerogels have potential as electrode materials for long-cycle life, high energy
and high power densities ultracapacitors. Potential applications include power
sources for automotive subsystems, load leveling for electric vehicles, and
power supplies for medical devices and portable electronic equipment. Other
potential applications of aerogels include thermal super-insulation, catalysts
and catalyst supports, gas filters and gas storage materials, and acoustic
insulation. ***