* 9760800
* SBIR Phase I:  Comparative and Experimental Embryology      Multimedia Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* John Neas, Biomedical Imaging Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 57,200.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Biomedical Imaging
Technology, Inc. is for creation of a CD-ROM, to teach comparative and
experimental embryology to college students in zoological and veterinary
sciences. The dynamic and integrated processes of development are difficult to
learn or teach through textbooks. Computers, however, portray change very well.
The proposed CD-ROM will have a complete text describing normal development of
invertebrate and vertebrate animals and the experiments that elucidate the
processes of development. The software package will include videos, animations,
color photographs, illustrations, and microscopic images of organisms common in
laboratory courses. Hypertext linkage will enable students to study concurrent
development of different organ systems or similar developmental stages in
different organisms. Project development involves writing text, scientific
illustration, photomicrography, handling living materials, and processing of
computer images, videos, and animations. The incorporation of processed data
will entail programming with Microsoft Visual Basic and HTML. The primary target
market includes four-year educational institutions, faculty members in
biological fields, and undergraduate and graduate students with life science
majors. Public libraries, progressive secondary schools, and other interested
individuals supplement this annually renewable customer base. The commercial
prospects of this project are further enhanced by the form and substance of the
comprehensive computerized curriculum proffered. In keeping with the trend of
institutions to move their curricula onto the Web, both multimedia web-based and
CD-ROM versions will be produced. In accordance with the importance of subject
of embryology in educational institutions throughout the world and with the fact
that English remains the dominant language in science, international as well as
U.S. sales are anticipated to be strong.