* 9760379
* SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Conductive Diamond Materials for Apertures in Electron and Other Particulate Beam Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,08/31/1998
* Gerald Wallmark, IMAGE GRAPHICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 99,859.00

*** 9760379 Wallmark This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will investigate electrically conductive synthetic diamond as a base material
for high performance, ultra-fine beam controlling and spot size defining
apertures. Scientific, industrial, commercial, medical and military instruments
employing electron and other particulate beams require beam defining and
controlling apertures. Historically, these apertures have been made of platinum,
molydenum, tungsten or metal foil. When apertures less than 10 microns are
bombarded with high particulate densities in vacuum, they limit system
performance. Limitations include: reduced beam currents to prevent 1) aperture
base material meltdown and 2) spot size degradation due to erosion and/or
feathering of the aperture. Metal aperture manufacturing technology cannot
produce apertures smaller than 10 microns with tolerances of typically +/-0.2
microns that can withstand high density particulate bombardment. While the
proposer has demonstrated the feasibility of using gold coated, nonconductive
diamond as a base material, the comparatively fragile conductive coating reduces
the dimensional integrity and lifetimes of these apertures. Knowledge gained
will improve aperture performance and reliability, resulting in higher
resolution, higher throughput, and greater reliability of electron and other
particulate beam systems. This knowledge will also lead to the development of an
innovative material technology for apertures having important commercial value
in many diverse fields. The successful completion of this phase will lead to the
evolution of an innovative material technology for apertures having commercial
value to the electronic imaging instrument industry and other industries
requiring chemically inert, ultra-fine apertures capable of withstanding
repeated bombardment of high particulate emissions densities, thermal cycling
and exposure to atmosphere without degradation. Typical among these industries
are sate llite reconnaissance imaging, aerospace instrumentation, medical
imaging, CD mastering, optical digital storage, cinematography, printing and
publishing, cartography and micro-machining. ***