* 9760323
* SBIR Phase I:  An Integrated Computer Aided Design (CAD)    Package for Rapid Design and Analysis of Optoelectronic     Components
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Peter Weitzman, CONCEPTS ETI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1998
* USD 98,874.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a development
effort to show the feasibility of an integrated Opto-Electronic Computer Aided
Design (OECAD) package incorporating the below elements. Such an integrated
package will support the goals of both the government and commercial high-speed
communications industries by allowing substantially accelerated development of
advanced optoelectronic components. Computer Aided Design (CAD) tools have
played a critical role in the spectacular advancements over the last three
decades in the area of microelectronics. CAD tools for optical circuit design
are in a far less advanced state than their microelectronic counterparts.
Optical circuits and networks have shown exceptional promise for providing
rapid, secure and precise delivery of information. However, optoelectronics has
not yet reached its potential, due in part to a lack of significant development
and simulation tools. With the expected growth of optoelectronic (OE) components
including transmitters, receivers and amplifiers and at 22% annually, efficient,
accurate and inexpensive CAD of OE circuits is required. The U.S.
competitiveness in these endeavors hinges on swift implementation by an American
company. High-performance, user-friendly software will be critical to success.
This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation Research Program and
the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).