* 9760123
* SBIR Phase I:  Dulse as Abalone Food and Biofilter:         Sustainable Production in a Semi-Closed Polyculture System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* J. Lane Cameron, Big Island Abalone Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760123 Cameron Over the past two decades, the world abalone market has
suffered from a significant decline in supply. This is due primarily to over-
fishing of wild abalone. Farm reared abalone have not yet been produced in
sufficient quantity to fill this void in the world market. Significant effort is
being devoted to the development of cost-effective abalone cultivation systems.
The limited availability of suitable seaweed as abalone food has been identified
as one of the main impediments to farming of abalone. It is the problem of food
availability that Big Island Abalone Corporation proposes to address in this
feasibility test of it's proprietary design for a low maintenance, land-based,
modular abalone and macro-algae polyculture grow-out system. The primary focus
of the proposed research will be to determine the maximum sustainable production
of a macro alga, Palmaria mollis, to be used as abalone food, under the unique
parameters that comprise the aquaculture environment at the Natural Energy
Laboratory Hawaii Authority at Keahole Point, Hi. The ability to grow dulse in
sufficient quantity to sustain commercial production of abalone is pivotal for
the success of BIAC's efforts at commercial abalone farming. The demand for
abalone, as a result of the precipitous declines in world-wide Catch, is at an
all time high. The FAO has estimated the world catch of abalone in 1968 at
28,000 metric tons, and only 13,000 metric tons in 1995. With this plunge in
wild catch of abalone has come significant increases in price at all market
levels. Again in 1968, abalone landed in California sold for about $95.00 a
dozen. While today wild caught abalone in California are selling for about
$600.00 a dozen. The market for abalone, while world-wide in scope, is not one
market but actually two. The largest segment and somewhat independent from the
smaller, is in Asia (Japan, China, Hong Kong, Korea & Taiwan). The smaller
market segment includes the United States, Canada, Mexico, En gland, Ireland,
Iceland, Israel, France, South Africa, New Zealand, and Australia, with emerging
interest in Chile. From it's mid-Pacific base Big Island Abalone is
strategically placed to sell abalone in all Pacific Rim markets. ***