* 9760510
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Frequency Sonochemistry -- A Cutting Edge Industrial Processing Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Lawrence Farrar, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to demonstrate
the capability for resonant-sonic technology to enhance and/or enable
homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical processes and establish the resonant-
sonic operating conditions that cause the observed chemical reaction
enhancements. The project will characterize resonant-sonic machine design and
operational features, as well as associated process(es) for continued
development in Phase II, where the application of a resonant-sonic process on
one commercially important chemical process will be demonstrated at intermediate
scale. The technology has already been demonstrated in the laboratory to produce
highly energetic cavitation in liquids and slurries at low frequencies. It can
be applied for industrial scale homogeneous and multiphase processing, and has
the potential to greatly increase reaction rates, decrease reaction temperatures
and pressures and/or reduce reagent concentrations to affect a wide range of
chemical reactions. The market potential for this technology is immense, and
includes the pulp, food, petrochemical, chemical, waste processing,
manufacturing, mining, and metals refining industries. The technology can be
used to greatly reduce the cost and environmental impact of industrial scale
heterogeneous chemical processes. This award is supported by the Small Business
Innovation Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).