* 9760555
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthesis of Hydrogen Peroxide Directly from Hydrogen and Oxygen on a Phase-Controlled Palladium Catalyst
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Bing Zhou, HYDROCARBON TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,630.00

*** 9760555 Zhou This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to develop a direct synthesis process for hydrogen peroxide from
hydrogen and oxygen using a highly selective catalyst. The current commercial
process is complex and based on autoxidation of anthraquinone. Many attempts
have been made to replace this process with a simple, direct synthesis. However,
none of the attempts have been commercially feasible due to the low activity and
selectivity or the operating limitations set forth by explosion limits. The main
objective in this Phase I is to develop a new generation phase-controlled Pd
catalyst that will function below the lower explosion limit and will remain
highly active and selective. A capping polymer will be used to control the
morphology of Pd on the catalyst, in order to expose the desired crystal phase.
The research will lead to a cost efficient process due to its simplicity: no
organic solvent, reduced purification cost, and fewer processing steps. A
potential saving of 20 - 30 % over the current commercial process is
anticipated. The direct synthesis process has two potential niches: clinical
applications due to its ultra-pure and organic-free product, and as bleach in
the pulp and paper industry due to its simplicity which makes on-site production
viable. ***