* 9760667
* SBIR Phase I:  Turbo Product Coded Modulation (TPCM) for    Bandwidth and Power Efficient Data Transmission
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* William Thesling, Efficient Channel Coding Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,780.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Efficient Channel
Coding, Inc. will evaluate the performance and feasibility of implementing a
class of combined modulation and coding techniques called Turbo Product Codes
Modulation (TPCM). TPCM uses Turbo Product Codes (TPCs) and other soft-decision
block codes as constituent codes applied to multiple levels in Quadrature
Amplitude Modulation (QAM) formats. For example, a TPCM system applied to 16-QAM
offers 3.57 bits per symbol and requires an estimated 8.9 dB Eb/No to obtain a
BER of 10E-10. There are a wide variety of other TPCM formats that provide high
rate and coding gain while emphasizing low complexity, enabling low-cost and
high-speed implementations. Constituent TPC devices are currently under
development by Efficient Channel Coding. and will greatly accelerate the
implementation of TPCM systems. A flexible TPCM system is applicable to a large
number of commercial and government digital communications systems that use
bandwidth efficient QAM techniques. Efficient Channel Coding is targeting TPCM
insertion into the next generation Direct Broadcast Satellite and other future
satellite communications systems as well as emerging terrestrial systems. These
terrestrial systems include Wireless Local Area Networks, Digital Radio, Digital
Television, Local Multipoint Distribution Systems, cable modems, Digital
Subscriber Links, and Video Blanking Interval data broadcasting.