* 9760642
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Efficient Solid-State Crystals for    Lasers and Nonlinear Optics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Thomas Reynolds, REYTECH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760642 Reynolds This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
aims to develop a novel and highly versatile family of laser and NLO crystals
that may overcome the limitations of conventional technology. These materials
are multifunctional and exhibit a number of unique properties that include,
isolated sites for doping with rare-earth laser ions and transition metal laser
ions, efficient nonlinear optical materials, high damage thresholds, wide
transparency range, and function as a self-frequency doubling laser. In Phase I,
the proposer will demonstrate feasibility by preparing small optical quality
crystals and evaluate their optical properties. The most promising of these
materials will be optimized in Phase II, in preparation for Phase III
commercialization. The need for new optical materials is clearly evident from
the substantial amount of time and money being devoted to this research by
industry and government agencies. Although many materials have been developed
for specific applications, emerging technologies require new optical materials
with specific properties. Essential to the growth of the photonics industry is
the development of new laser materials and nonlinear optical (NLO) materials.
Specifically there is a need for laser systems that operate at blue and UV
wavelengths, are wavelength tunable, more compact, rugged, with improved
efficiencies over conventional technology. The materials developed will be used
in materials processing, optical memory storage, flat panel display technology,
and medical applications such as eye surgery. ***