* 9760360
* SBIR Phase I:  An Issue Development, Exploration and        Analysis System (IDEA) to Support Group-Based Environmental Decision-Making for Brownfields Redevelopment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Thomas Moore, Geo Choice Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,625.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Geo Choice Inc.
will determine the merit and feasibility of a computer-based issue development,
exploration, and analysis system (IDEAS), a software tool to support brownfields
redevelopment decision-making. Brownfields are typically urban areas that are
currently abandoned and unattractive for redevelopment because of the
implications of environmental contamination from past industrial activities. To
identify and select the areas to clean up, decision-makers must address many
issues which have environmental, health, social, and economic dimensions. The
problem is further complicated by the amount of information that must be
considered, and the number of people involved in the decision process that leads
to `clean` sites. Spatial decision support systems (SDSS) are a relatively new
technology, based on geographic information systems, that are useful for
weighting criteria and selecting alternatives; however, they are not effective
for group-based problem structuring to generate these criteria and alternatives.
IDEAS technology will extend current SDSS software capabilities to help groups
work together to define and structure geographic problems and solutions. With
brownfield sites, numbering at least in the tens of thousands, effectively
removed from the market, the supply of amenable to development properties is
curtailed. To spur redevelopment, the federal government has taken the lead to
provide programs and funding to bring the stakeholders together, at the local
level, to address these problems creatively. The development, exploration and
analysis system (IDEAS) proposed here would be valuable to decision makers
involved in brownfield projects, enhancing the shared understanding of
participants at all stages of decision-making. Other possible applications
include any locational decision-making involving multiple criteria and
alternatives such as environmental impact assessment, transportation
improvement, health-care resource allocation, and commercial real-estate site
selection.