* 9760405
* SBIR Phase I:  Treatment of Organically Contaminated Water  with Short Wavelength Ultraviolet Light
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1999
* Raymond Schaefer, PHOENIX SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1999
* USD 99,999.00

*** 9760405 Schaefer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
addresses the need for cost effective water treatment systems. Ultraviolet (UV)
water treatment is attractive because contaminants are destroyed, unlike
filtration techniques that produce toxic byproducts. The use of UV water
treatment systems is limited by electricity cost for lamp power. This project
uses a new UV lamp with three times higher efficiency than the industry
standard. Furthermore, initial research indicates that the shorter wavelength UV
spectrum of the new lamp both increases oxidation rates and reduces the amount
of oxidant for many organic molecules. The project objectives are to engineer a
new lamp with practical lifetime and use it to research the water treatment
process using the new lamp's short wavelength spectrum while minimizing the
quantity of oxidant. The project team includes a lamp manufacturer to support
lamp engineering and a UV water treatment company to support controlled organic
destruction testing. The results will serve to establish the feasibility of a
water treatment process based on the new lamp, and are intended to lead in Phase
II to refinement of the lamp and water treatment process, a prototype, field
demonstrations and commercialization in Phase III. A successful project will
result in the commercialization of UV lamps and a new UV based water treatment
process that will supersede existing commercial UV groundwater systems. A new
system would be cost effective for cleaning up pink, gray, bilge and other high
concentration organic water contamination problems. For groundwater applications
where commercial UV systems already exist, water treatment costs will decrease
by large increments. Furthermore, the new system has potential as a replacement
for chlorination. ***