* 9760050
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Mixed Oxide Catalysts for Treatment of Offgas Removal of NOx
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,07/31/1998
* Eleonora Witteles, World-wide Innovative Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760050 Witteles The Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
develop a mixed oxide and/or superlattice of iron/chromiun/zinc/copper as a
selective catalyst for destruction of NOx, in offgas of high temperature
combustion processes: MLLW, power plants, factories, automotive vehicles. This
improved catalyst will replace more expensive, less efficient vanadia/titania
catalysts used for stationary applications and less durable, less effective
zeolitic-copper catalysts used in automotive vehicles. Such a catalyst, imported
by DOE from the Former Soviet Union, evaluated for destruction of the offgas NOx
in the Plasma Arc Process in MLLW, was shown to be more effective than
vanadia/titania. We will improve the reduction properties and efficiency of the
catalyst by introducing a novel deposition process for the mixed oxides through
use of our proprietary WIT-TIFIDTM deposition process and its superior
properties. In addition we will investigate the feasibility of replacing the
mixed oxides with a superlattice structure of the oxides for a more
homogeneous/uniform coating. 'Me advantages/disadvantages of the two structures
will be evaluated. During Phase II mixed oxides and/or superiattice catalysts
will be produced and a laboratory bench test will be tested and evaluated.
During Phase III we will test our catalysts in MLLW, power plants and automotive
vehicles. The accomplishment of the goals set in this program will advance the
efforts on behalf of environmental management of mixed low level waste sites
(MLLW), stationary pollutants (power plants and factories) and mobile pollutants
(automotive vehicles), by providing for a more effective, more durable, less
expensive selective reduction catalyst for the destruction of oxides of
nitrogen, an objectionable pollutant produced in high temperature combustion
processes in the above mentioned industries. ***