* 9760187
* SBIR Phase I:  Archive of Exemplary Behavioral Science      Research Instruments
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Josefina Card, Sociometrics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 98,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Sociometric
Corporation will establish the Archive of Exemplary Behavioral Science Research
Instruments (BSRI). The BSRI Archive will contain searchable, edit-ready, and
print-ready machine-readable versions of approximately 200 demographic,
behavioral, and health science instruments used to collect the exemplary
quantitative research data in the Sociometrics Data Archives and to document the
effectiveness of the exemplary social intervention programs in the Sociometrics
Program Archives. Norms for the scales and items comprising the BSRI instruments
will be included in BSRI in the form of scale means and standard deviations and
item frequencies or response distributions calculated from the linked data
archives at Sociometrics. The approximately 200 instruments and 165,000
constituent items and scales that will comprise BSRI have been selected and
acquired by Sociometrics for public use over a period of 14 years under the
guidance of eight National Advisory Panels of scientist-experts. There will be
three commercial product sets comprising BSRI: a book series, a CD-ROM series,
and an Internet suite accessible on Socionet, Sociometrics World Wide Web
server. Phase I will create prototypes for these three product sets. That
Behavioral Science Research Instrument (BSRI) is characterized by comprehensive
substantive scope, availability in multiple formats, and easy-to-use interface
make it a natural product for several thousand institutional target markets
serving several hundred thousand individual users. Examples are: (1) academic
markets, including social science departments, social and health science
professors and researchers working in the topical areas covered by BSRI, main
libraries at colleges and universities, and medical libraries in universities;
(2) policymaking and business markets, such as members of the Association of
Public Data Users and employees of the federal and state Depts. of Health and
Human Services; and (3) general information resource markets, such as libraries
serving the general public.