* 9760992
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Perspective Autostereoscopic Display
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Dimension
Technologies, Inc. (DTI) will determine the feasibility of a desktop
autostereoscopic (3D without glasses) rear projection display. This proposed
display would offer freedom of observer movement, hologram-like look-around, and
multiple observer viewing of large, full color, high resolution images. It will
use a fast ICFLCD or DLP light valve along with other off-the-shelf optical and
lighting components. The project will concentrate on three main objectives:
construction of a fully functional bench model; characterization of the model by
means of psychophysical tests and optical measurements; and the definition of
requirements and features of an engineering prototype to be built in the next
phase of the research for the purpose of developing commercial products for
scientific visualization. A display of this type would significantly enhance
existing advanced simulation capabilities by presenting complex representations
of data and simulated phenomena in a natural, easy to see and interpret 3D
format that can be viewed by several people simultaneously without encumbering
glasses or headgear. Desktop autostereoscopic displays of the type proposed
could find widespread use as visualization tools in areas where stereoscopic
displays are already known to be of benefit. These include such applications as
chemistry, geology, mathematics, medical imaging, CAD, and architecture.
Partnering with a firm that is a current DTI display user and is a potential
customer for this proposed desktop autostereoscopic displays should lead to
rapid commercialization.