* 9760237
* SBIR Phase I:  Seed Treatment with a Fungal and a Bacterial Antagonist for Reducing Corn Damping Off Caused by Species  of Pythium and Fusarium
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,07/31/1998
* Weili Mao, TJ Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1998
* USD 98,040.00

The plant pathogens, Fusarium and Pythium, can cause significant losses to corn
producers when the weather conditions are conducive to the plant pathogens and
the seed is not treated with a protective fungicide seed treatment. Chemical
seed treatments are commercially available to control the effects of these
pathogens on the seedlings, however, no viable control is commercially available
to control the root rots and stalk rots that these pathogens cause in later
growth stages of the plant. A combination fungal/bacterial antagonist has been
identified that may be effective to control these pathogens in the early plant
growth stages with continued protection throughout the growing season.
Presently, this combination has a relatively short shelf life. This proposal is
directed towards the development of methods to increase the shelf life of the
fungal/bacterial antagonist and test the fungal/bacterial antagonist for
efficacy under greenhouse conditions. Phase II will continue the efficacy
testing of the successful methods under various field conditions and with
several corn hybrids. This proposal is designed to commercialize a biological
corn seed fungicide that is more effective and more environmentally friendly
that the presently used chemical corn seed fungicides. Because the proposed
product would provide a season long control that the chemical fungicides do not,
it is anticipated that hybrid corn seed companies would readily accept the
product as a preferable alternative as long as the questions of shelf life and
efficacy can be answered. This award is supported by the Small Business
Innovation Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).