* 9760703
* SBIR Phase I:  Removal of Contaminants from Soil Using an   Enhanced Phytoextraction Process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Dalibor Hodko, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760703 Hodko This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
describes the development of an innovative approach for decontamination of soils
and wastes polluted by heavy metals. Heavy metal contamination presents one of
the most intractable problems for soil clean-up. Present technology relies
mostly upon ex situ metal extraction or in situ contaminant immobilization
processes, which are expensive and which remove all biological activity in the
soil during the soil treatment. Recently, the use of metal-accumulating plants
was explored for the removal of metals from contaminated soils. This new
phytoremediation technology utilizes specially selected or engineered metal
accumulating plants or plants native to metalliferous soils with a capacity to
bioaccumulate metals to concentrations greater than 2% in the aerial plant dry
matter. However, the use of this technology is limited to superficially-
contaminated soils, which is determined by the plant root length and plant
suction potential. Lynntech, Inc. proposes a development of an innovative
approach to phytoremediation, which will significantly enhance the process of
phytoextraction and extend its application to soils with deep subsurface
contamination. The approach involves a process which allows an upward, counter-
gravitational transport of contaminants, water, as well as nutrients through the
soil matrix to the rhizosphere. Once the contaminants are transported to the
rhizosphere they will be extracted by contaminant-accumulating plants which can
concentrate contaminants from the soil into the harvestable parts of roots and
above-ground shoots. Potential Commercial Applications of the Research: The
development of this technology, if shown to be successful, will have a large
potential commercial applications: (i) in remediation of mixed waste polluted
soils (heavy metals, organics and radionuclides); (ii) in agriculture for
remediation of sewage sludge amended soils and for removal of pesticides and
other toxins fr om the rhizosphere zone, and (iii) as an innovative practice for
nutrient and moisture transport and containment in dry soils. ***