* 9760760
* SBIR Phase I:  High Use-Temperature Proton Exchange         Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Ying Wang, MAXDEM INC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,779.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project relates to the research
of proton exchange membranes (PEM's). The project proposes to develop a new
class of PEM's based on polyphenylene polymers by exploring the
structure/proton-conductivity relationship. These new PEM's are designed to
overcome problems encountered with conventional PEM's at temperatures
above100(C, and are expected to have better performance at ambient temperatures
at much lower cost. Current PEM's require condensed water to attain useful
conductivity at temperatures above the boiling point at which time the PEM dries
out and conductivity drops drastically. High temperature is preferred for
optimal performance of state-of-the-art oxidation catalyst systems. Recently,
Maxdem has conducted some preliminary studies of polyphenylene PEM's and
demonstrated the outstanding properties of these materials for proton
conductivity. The conductivity of some of these materials is much higher than
Naflon membranes, even at high temperature. Further investigation in
structure/proton conductivity relationship is expected to provide PEM's for
practical fuel cell applications with unmatched performance at lower costs. The
novel proposed electrolytes would allow major advances in fuel cells.
Lightweight, high energy density fuel cells are needed for powering electric
vehicles and for man-portable applications. Both defense and civilian
applications present lager potential markets.