* 9760097
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Composite Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* William Biter, Sensortex Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9760097 Biter This small Business Innovation Research Phase I will fabricate
a new sensor consisting of a composite magnetoelectric material fabricated as a
wire. This research builds on previous work on a composite laminar
magnetoelectric material that uses a novel method of measuring applied stress.
Existing sensors all have limitations for measuring applied forces over an
extended area. Most only respond to pressure and are not sensitive to side
forces (slip, friction). Others am expensive or incompatible with matrix
addressing, making a large array of sensors difficult and expensive. The
objectives of this Phase I research project are to design and fabricate an
advanced composite material in the form of a small diameter (.020") wire coated
with a magnetoclectric layer. A sensor element is defined by the intersection
with a second wire. The low cost and small size will allow fabrication of a
large dense array of sensing elements.
Amajoradvantageoftbissensoristhatitmeasuresappliedstressgivingitthe ability to
measure shear or slip forces and can be configured to closely match the response
of the human hand. There is a significant commercial application for the
composite wire as a sensor but the magnetoelectric element itself appears to
have a much larger potential market. It can be adapted to any pressure sensing
application that benefits by arrays. This includes 2-D sonar imaging, ultrasonic
imagers for medical and non-destructive testing and even a flat panel display.
***