* 9760257
* SBIR Phase I:  Construction and Expression of Synthetic     Spider Silk Genes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Michael Hinman, WYOBIGEN INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 80,595.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will lead to production
of materials for use as synthetic tendons and ligaments. The materials are
spider silk proteins which exhibit strengths of the order of Kevlar or steel yet
have the elasticity of nylon. Use of synthetic fibers will be advantageous
because: a) spider silk is nonimmunogenic so implants will not need to be taken
from other tissues of the same patient, b) the fibers are stronger than natural
tissues but still elastic, and c) the fibers are not degradable by biological
systems and will not erode in the patient. WyoBiGen will produce significant
quantities of spider dragline silk proteins from genetically engineered genes.
The first protein produced will be major ampullate spider silk 2 protein.
WyoBiGen will construct and express a second synthetic gene, major ampullate
spider silk 1. Development of a new strategy for synthetic gene construction
allows blending of various properties, such as strength, elasticity, and
toughness, by joining structural domains of the native silk genes. Objectives
will be pursued simultaneously and generation of fibers from these materials
will be pursued in our laboratories, as well as those of companies who have
requested these materials from WyoBiGen. The first applications will be
artificial ligaments and tendons due to the unique blend of strength,
elasticity, nonimmunogenic nature, and toughness of the spider silk proteins.
Light porous films for tissue reinforcement or drug delivery are also possible.
Other applications of this unique material are airbags, seatbelts, climbing
gear, composite material reinforcements, and textiles. A list of eighteen major
companies who have already requested these proteins or the fibers to develop
their own applications is included. This award is supported by the Small
Business Innovation Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).