* 9761605
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Array-Based Chemical Microsensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Anuncia Gonzalez-Martin, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761605 Martin This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
describes the development of a novel array-based chemical microsensor and a
dedicated sampling system for the monitoring of chlorinated hydrocarbons in the
subsurface. Chlorinated hydrocarbons represent the most prevalent contaminants
in the subsurface, threatening the quality of groundwater at aquifers. Existing
technology for monitoring these contaminants requires expensive, labor-intensive
methods of sample collection and analysis. In the proposed sensor, the chemical
and electrical properties of the individual elements of the array will be
controlled so that a unique fingerprint will identify each pollutant. The output
signals will be integrated into a software-based neural network for analyte
identification. The simple design, cost, fabrication, and operation requirements
of the proposed sensor will overcome the limitations of other existing array
sensors. The development of a low-cost, reliable sampling and monitoring system
would reduce the cost associated with sampling and contaminant monitoring, and
allow timely continuous information. Also, it will provide the possibility for
automated and unattended monitoring of the migration of contaminant plumes, as
well as for monitoring contaminants that breach containment operations. Phase I
will (i) demonstrate the feasibility of the sensor design, (ii) develop a hand
held prototype, and (iii) test contaminated groundwater. During Phase II, a
field deployable prototype instrument will be developed and demonstrated.
Potential Commercial Applications of the Research: The increasing emphasis on
environmental issues, waste reduction, and improved efficiency for industrial
processes has underlined the importance of the development of new chemical
sensors for field or in-plant use. Specifically, sensors are needed to gauge the
effectiveness of remediation efforts, to effect waste minimization, and to
detect the presence of toxic, hazardous, or otherwise regu lated chemicals in
waste effluents, drinking water, and other environmental systems. In addition,
this proposed sensor will find wide application in the food, drink and perfume
industries for the determination of odors and aromas, as well as in the clinical
(e.g., breath monitor) and agronomic industries (e.g., detection of pesticides).
***