* 9761194
* SBIR Phase I:  Software Development for Automatic Scanning  and Analysis of Fluorescent Labeled Prostate Cancer Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,10/31/1998
* Stephen Lesko, Cell Works Incorporated .
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761194 Lesko This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes the development of an automated scanning microscope to permit the
commercialization of a promising cytogenetic procedure for prostate cancer
analysis. The procedure is based on the specific fluorescence labeling of rare
cells isolated from patients' blood which are then scanned and analyzed for
cancer cell characteristics, such as cytokeratin, PSMA and chromosome
aneuploidy. While the sample preparation procedure is now ready for routine use,
the current method for scanning the slide for positive cancer cells is far too
labor intensive and time consuming to permit the successful commercialization of
the test. Therefore we propose to develop an automated fluorescence microscopy
system that will scan the test slides with a speed, accuracy and cost that is
compatible with successful commercialization. The project team at CeIlGene has a
proven track record for combining genetic biotechnology with computer and
imaging techniques and has now gained the additional elements necessary to make
the transition from research to production and finally commercial deployment.
Although the initial commercialization effort will be directed towards prostate
cancer, the proposed automated system will be adaptable to support related
cytogenetic procedures that address other important medical problems with
similar commercialization potential. ***