* 9761500
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthesis of Sinterable Nanophase Materials  for Low-Cost Manufacturing of Multichip Modules
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* M. Albert Capote, AGUILA TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761500 Capote This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims
to develop entirely new electrographic toners that, when combined with well-
known electrographic printing techniques, can be used to inexpensively and
reliably apply metallizations and dielectrics to multichip modules (MCM) with
features as small as ten microns or less. There is an unmet need today for a
simplified, lower cost faster turnaround method for fabricating high density
MCMs substrates. The emergence of commercial compact-information products, such
as personal digital assistants, wireless communicators and distributed sensor
systems are creating a revolution in the way commercial electronics are
packaged. These products share the attributes of being driven by small size,
lightweight, high-operating frequencies and low cost. The proposal entails
creation of nanophase powders which are sinterable during the electrographig
development and fixing cycles by means of novel adhesive fluxes and coatings,
When printed, the powders can be sintered together by heating to a modest
temperature, forming a continuous metal film without having to overheat the MCM
polymeric substrate. There is an unmet need for providing low-cost, fast
turnaround high density multichip modules and high density printed circuits to
microelectronics manufacturers. Such a new technology could reduce MCM
deposition capital equipment entry cost by an order of magnitude while at the
same time increasing metallization production throughput by an order of
magnitude. ***