* 9761360
* SBIR Phase I:  Agent-based Simulation and Modeling Over the World Wide Web
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Alexander Repenning, AGENTSHEETS INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

Thinking of a computer as an educational tool emphasizes solitary interaction
between the learner and the computer. Reconceptualizing the computer, however,
as a constructionist medium--that is, a collection of tools and capabilities
that are used to communicate--increases it potential educational value by
allowing the development and support of communities of learners. Agentsheets is
an agent-based graphical spreadsheet environment that lets a wide range of users
create SiMCity(TM) like interactive simulations, domain-oriented visual
programming environments, games and cellular automata. This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project from Agentsheets, Inc. plans to use
classroom-tested Agentsheets technology to create and share interactive
simulations and virtual worlds that combine student creations, real-world
hardware, and World Wide Web resources, thus addressing the need for enhanced
student learning through virtual experimentation and user-driven visualization.
The central Phase I objective is to demonstrate feasibility by developing an
Agentsheets-based environment (the Web Behavior Exchange) that lets K-1 2
students not only construct, but also share and link educational software
components over the Web. Phase I includes the implementation of a prototype
Exchange automated server. The end result should be a significant resource--a
Web Behavior Exchange featuring a changing set of compelling student creations.
The project proffers a reconceptualization leading to a new class of computer
applications that place constructionist activities, such as creating a
simulation, within a more social context in which computers simultaneously
provide opportunities for learning how to communicate as well as for enabling
communication to enhance the learning experience. Commercial applications
include not only simulations and modeling for education and research, but also
for games, programming tools, and virtual reality applications in architecture,
medicine, and data analysis.