* 9761316
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a High Gain Imaging Avalance  Photodiode
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Eric Karplus, Science Wares
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 97,628.00

*** 9761316 Karplus This small business innovation research Phase I proposal
seeks to develop an avalanche photodiode for use as a high gain single photon
imaging device that generates the time and position of incidence for each
detected photon event. Such a device will provide a lower cost, higher
performance alternative to microchannel plate based single photon imaging
detectors and will provide data in a format that is more conducive to rapid
analysis than traditional image files. Applications for the device include a
variety of emerging techniques for real time in-vivo imaging of physiological
and developmental processes such as calcium dynamics and free radical production
using luminescent indicators. Phase I of this project involves three iterations
of the design, construction and characterization of an imaging avalanche
photodiode device to verify the device concept, establish the design
requirements and determine the production costs. Phase II will produce a
commercial imaging system that consists of an imaging avalanche photodiode in a
c-mount enclosure, customized support electronics and data acquisition and
analysis software. Phase III will pursue opportunities to use the device for
other imaging applications such as positron emission tomography and single
photon emission computed tomography, and will also consider how to apply the
position sensing technology to similar semiconductor devices. Many scientific
and medical imaging applications require high gain, high resolution image
sensing devices. The need for improving the performance and reducing the cost of
these devices is expected to grow to keep pace with the development of
luminescent labels that can be used for in-vivo imaging of calcium dynamics,
free radical production, gene specific activity, and other physiologically
significant processes. Our device will provide higher performance at a lower
cost to both the applied and research communities in science and medicine,
making research activities more efficient and reducing the cost of clinical
procedures. It will also make new research and commercial applications possible
because of a unique image acquisition and analysis paradigm that will be used.
***