* 9761580
* SBIR Phase I:  Processing of Microcellular Foams from       Unfilled and Filled Liquid Crystalline and Semicrystalline  Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Seng Tan, WRIGHT MATERIALS RESEARCH CO.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,997.00

*** 9761580 Tan This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will use a novel technique to process microcellular foams using a single-step
operation and that does not use or release any hazardous chemicals/gases. The
proposed foaming technique uses the principle of thermodynamic instability with
nitrogen as the foaming gas. The proposer will foam both the unfilled and filled
liquid crystalline and semicrystalline polymers (LCPs & PPS) which have
excellent strength and stiffness to weight ratio, good solvent resistance,
barrier properties, and high temperature stability. The blowing process will
align the carbon/glass fibers along the struts of the foamed matrix. It has been
demonstrated for amorphous polymers that the properties of microcellular foams
are similar to their solid counterparts. Therefore, the low-density
microcellular LCP and PPS foams will have tensile strength in the range of 20 to
over 30 ksi. These microcellular foams will have much higher temperature
stability and mechanical properties than those of the commercially available
structural foams including Rohacell and Divinycell. Sandwich structures can be
fabricated using these foams by heat pressing, thereby reduce manufacturing and
assembling costs. Conventional processing techniques for rigid closed-celled)
foams involve multiple steps and the blowing agent used is toxic. Some rigid
foams give off hazardous gases during the post-processing steps. Low-density
microcellular LCP & PPS foams are expected to have many commercial applications
including sandwich structural materials for high speed aircraft, aerospace,
outerspace vehicles, housing and support structures for rockets and propulsion
components. Conventional applications of LCPs and PPS include various electronic
connectors, electronic and audio-visual devices. They can be replaced by the
proposed microcellular LCP and PPS foams with equivalent performance but much
lighter in weight. On the ground applications, ladders an d bridges fabricated
using these classes of microcellular foams would have extreme convenience of
mobility because of much lighter weight. ***