* 9761061
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, Emissions Sensor for Compression   Ignition Direct Injection Engines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* David White, NeuroDyne Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1998
* USD 96,900.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project plans to demonstrate
that compression-ignition (diesel) engines are an attractive candidate
technology for light duty vehicles due to their much higher baseline thermal
efficiency than spark-ignited, throttled gasoline fueled engines. Diesel engines
are used extensively in Class 3 to Class 8 vehicles but will require significant
reductions in emissions of oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulate matter
before current and anticipated light duty emissions standards may be met. The
use of present day heavy duty diesel engine technology in a mid-size vehicle
would imply NOx emissions of 0.8-1.0 grams per mile (g/mi.), well above Tier I
standards of 0.4 g/mi. or ULEV standards of 0.2 g/mi. Furthermore, the lack of
real-time sensor technology to characterize NOx emissions prevents the
application of recent innovations in control, which may address the nonlinear,
varying nature of Cl engine dynamics. In Phase I, NeuroDyne and Ion Optics
propose to apply innovative IR `smart` sensing technology to identify and
characterize NOx emissions using a Navistar V-8 diesel engine. This combination
will yield a small, low power, thermally stable and cost effective IR emissions
sensor applicable to diesel or spark-ignition engines. This effort will provide
the necessary feedback information to enable the development of reduced
emissions control in next generation vehicles. Eaton Corporation has reviewed
our design and has offered to beta-test the sensor for potential inclusion in
their automotive and truck equipment product line.