* 9761352
* SBIR Phase I:  Real Time Measurement of Dissolved Carbon    Dioxide in the Bioreactor System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* James Kane, Polestar Technologies Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,980.00

*** 9761352 This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop a novel optical sensing system for real time measurement of dissolved
carbon dioxide in the cell culture medium for bioreactor systems. The
concentration of carbon dioxide in the bioreactor medium is an important
indicator for respiratory and bioactivity of microorganisms and a useful
parameter for controlling cell metabolism in reactors. Carbon dioxide
accumulation in the bioreactor medium has a variety of influences on microbial
morphology, and inhibition of cell growth and product formation. With the lack
of reliable sensing devices, dissolved carbon dioxide in the bioreactor medium
is not currently monitored. We propose an optical sensor which will provide
rapid and continuous determination of carbon dioxide concentration in the cell
culture medium for various fermentation processes. The proposed technique is
based on trapping carbon dioxide in a polymer membrane which repels liquid, and
spectral measurement of carbon dioxide specific absorption in the infrared
region. The probe to monitor dissolved carbon dioxide in reactors will have
significant value to the biotechnology and pharmaceutical markets. The field of
human therapeutics requires close quality control of materials such as
recombinant bacteria. Development of a dissolved carbon dioxide sensor is
important, since there is no sensor currently available. ***