* 9761250
* SBIR Phase I:  Membrane Hydrogen Dissolution for            Bioremediation of High Strength Nitrate Waste
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Stuart Nemser, COMPACT MEMBRANE SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761250 Nemser This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
proposal. Certain remediation facilities generate waste streams containing high
concentrations of nitrite and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons. These can be
destroyed biologically using dissolved hydrogen gas as the electron donor.
Hydrogen offers several economic and operational advantages over other organic
electron donors in denitrification and in reductive dehalogenation. The factor
limiting hydrogen use is its low solubility, i.e. existing commercial gas-
dissolution technologies cannot dissolve sufficient hydrogen in a safe, cost
effective manner. Membrane-based gas-dissolution technologies can potentially
supply the hydrogen required for these processes safety, but commercially
available membrane suitable for bubble-free gas-dissolution have poor
performance, biological fouling, or both. Compact Membrane Systems, Inc., has
developed a highly gas permeable perfluoropolymer coating for microporous
membranes. The smooth, non-porous nature of the perfluoropolymer coating is
highly resistant to biological fouling, especially compared to microporous
hydrophobic membranes. This coating could remove the performance, fouling, and
cost barriers that preclude the use of membrane-based gas dissolution
technologies in continuous biological processes. The proposed study will
demonstrate the technical feasibility of using perfluoropolymer-coated membrane
devices as the hydrogen source for biological denitrification of high
concentrations of nitrate and nitrite. In addition to nitrate, nitrite and
chlorinated hydrocarbon removal, these perfluoromembranes can be used to
transfer many other gases into or out of water. Examples include: oxygenation of
bioreactors for enhanced cell growth, oxygenation of aquaculture, oxygenation of
wastewater, ozonation of drinking water for enhanced quality and safety. This
broad base of utilization should lead to both high probability of commercial
success plus a large sales base to allow for lower pricing in remediation
markets. ***