* 9761528
* SBIR Phase I:  Delivery of Ultrashort Laser Pulses for the  Treatment of Glaucoma
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Tibor Juhasz, IntraLase Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,980.00

*** 9761528 Juhasz This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
investigate the scientific, technical and commercial feasibility of laser
surgical systems for the treatment of glaucoma. The project will focus on the
engineering and development of a novel laser delivery system as well as proof of
concept of its application. The project is executed in collaboration between
Escalon Medical Corporation and the University of Michigan. Approximately two
million Americans have glaucoma, while another ten million are at risk of
developing this disease due to elevated eye pressure. Drug treatments for
glaucoma are only modestly effective and are associated with side effects and
poor patient compliance. Current laser and traditional surgical treatments also
have limited success in preserving vision. Current pulsed laser systems deposit
large amounts of thermal energy into the tissue. The result is extensive damage
to adjacent structures and complicated by scarring. Near infrared ultrashort
pulsed lasers are uniquely qualified to perform improved laser glaucoma surgical
techniques, since energy threshold requirements for tissue ablation are nearly
100 times less than with existing pulsed clinical lasers. This translates into
minimal damage to adjacent structures and greatly reduced scarring. Successful
completion of the proposed project will identify optimal laser and delivery
parameters which will allow us to design a commercial prototype in the Phase II
project. ***