* 9761239
* SBIR Phase I:  Solid-State, Low-Cost, Intelligent Sensor    Systems for Fuel Cell Reformer Control Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Chuanjing Xu, Nanomaterials Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop solid-
state, low cost, intelligent sensor systems for fuel cell reformer control
technology. The state-of-the-art sensor technology have limitations that are not
suited for compositional monitoring of a number of reducing gases that are found
in a fuel cell reforming process. The proposed sensing material will be Ga2o3
nanoceramics that have distinct relative sensitivities with respect to different
reducing gases at different operating temperatures. A sensor array with each
sensor element operating at different temperatures will be used in the Sensor
system, and an on-chip-pattern-recognition neural network will be developed to
relate the response matrix from the sensor array to analyze concentration.
During Phase I, Nanomaterials Research Corporation (NRC) will establish the
proof-of-concept that commercially useful, nano-engineered sensor arrays can be
prepared and those on-chip-pattern-recognition neural networks offer significant
performance advantage. Phase II effort will Seek to optimize the technology and
produce prototypes for customer qualification. Phase III will commercialize the
technology. The proposed research would provide solid-state, low cost,
intelligent sensor systems for fuel cell reformer control technology. Chemical
sensor systems for compositional detection of multicomponent gas mixtures can
also be extremely useful for environmental monitoring, automobile engine control
technology, and chemical and petrochemical industries.