* 9761205
* SBIR Phase I:  Fractal-Based Packing and Tiling Algorithms  in Surface Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Christopher Brown, Christopher A. Brown
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 94,350.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will test the technical,
scientific and commercial feasibility of the next generation of scale-sensitive,
fractal-based tiling and packing algorithms. These algorithms will be used to
develop software that can be used to improve the characterization of topographic
data acquired from engineering surfaces. It is well known that the topography or
roughness of a surface influences its performance or behavior, and is influenced
by the manufacturing or creation processes, although quantification of these
relationships depends on advancing surface metrology. The improved
characterization will promote better functional correlations between the
topography of a surface, its performance and its manufacture, which will support
concurrent engineering design of surfaces topography. These algorithms will be
applied to topographic data acquired by several kinds of instruments which have
been recently developed: atomic probe microscopes, interferometric microscopes,
confocal microscopes, scanning laser microscopes and stereo reconstruction of
digital images, as well as conventional profiling devices. The market for these
kinds of devices is several hundred per year and growing at 10-20% per year.
Currently several software packages are in use for less sophisticated scale-
sensitive fractal analyses which have sold to industry for about $ 10,000
apiece. This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation Research
Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).