* 9761249
* SBIR Phase I:  Microporous Perfluoropolymers via Thermal    Inversion Polymer Separation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Peter Plimmer, COMPACT MEMBRANE SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761249 Plimmer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes development of microporous perfluoromembranes (both flat sheet and
hollow fiber) via thermal inversion phase separation process (TIPS). Numerous
polymers (e.g. polysulfone, cellulose ester) are fabricated into microporous
flat sheet and hollow fiber membranes by solution based phase inversion. The
TIPS process has been developed for polyolefins which do not lend themselves to
conventional solution processes. Earlier attempts to fabricate microporous
perfluoromembranes by the TIPS process have been limited by the high temperature
and the associated volatility of the additive oils. In this program, new
families of soluble, non-volatile, non-crystalline, perfluoropolymers will be
melt-blended with the crystalline, thermoplastic perfluoropolymer targeted for
the TIPS process. Conventional TIPS processing, followed by solvent extraction,
should produce the desired microporous perfluoromembrane. In Phase 1, we will
demonstrate proof of concept on flat sheets and also evaluate coatings of these
microporous membranes. In Phase 11, we will (1) scale-up the operation, (2) do
pilot testing, and (3) evaluate both flat sheet and hollow fibers. Microporous
perfluoromembranes are presently only available in flat sheet form (e.g.
"Goretex"). The development of perfluoro based TIPS hollow fiber and flat sheet
products will greatly expand the market. This includes harsh chemical
filtration, gas venting, and electronics applications. ***