* 9761362
* SBIR Phase I:  In Situ Cell Studies of Dense Nanostructured Nickel Oxide Battery Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* T. Danny Xiao, US NANOCORP, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761362 Xiao This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to
demonstrate the feasibility of exploiting the unique properties of an exciting
new class of "nanophase" materials (ie. atomic-scale particles on the order of
several manometers, where 1 nm = 10 angstroms) as the active ingredients for
high performance rechargeable nickel alkaline batteries. US Nanocorp's (USN)
principals have developed proprietary techniques for the synthesis and
processing of nanostructred battery materials. USN has begun efforts to
fabricate high density nickel electrodes where the active material is nanoporous
(and mesoporous), so that the pore surface area remains high for effective
electrolyte irrigation, yet the total pore volume is reduced in comparison to
electrodes formulated from conventional and so called "spherical" nickel
hydroxide. The increased density results in higher capacity. High utilization
has been achieved by USN in preliminary lab cell tests. The Phase II program
will develop prototype cells based on optimized electrodes. This novel approach
can be applied to a wide array of battery materials. Rechargeable batteries
comprise a word-wide business of more than $16 B/annum, of which alkaline
batteries have a 20% market share ($3 B/annum). This would have profound
implications for improved batteries for medical, commercial (power tool), and
consumer applications, as well as large capacity batteries for cordless lawn
mowers, scooters, electric vehicles and hybrid vehicles. ***