* 9761114
* SBIR Phase I:  An Innovative Process to Produce Powder      for Fabrication of Ferritic Stainless Steel
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Kenneth Moyer, Magna-Tech P/M Labs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 90,747.00

*** 9761114 Moyer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
designed to produce high compressibility low oxide iron powder that is coated
with chromium in concentration sufficient to yield ferritic stainless steel once
the chromium is diffused into the iron by high temperature sintering. Chromium
will be deposited on high purity water atomized iron powder by injecting
chromium-containing solution of sufficient concentration to permit deposition of
a chromium coating on iron powder in a fluidized bed. Presently, the proposer
fabricates stainless steel parts from prealloyed stainless steel powder that is
limited in compressibility. Since particle surfaces are highly oxidized, they
are difficult to reduce, limiting sinterability and corrosion resistance.
Elemental admixtures of 10 micron chromium powder with water atomized powder
alleviate low compressibility and poor corrosion resistance, but a low oxygen 10
micron chromium powder is difficult to produce commercially. If coated chromium
powder is produced, denser parts can be produced. Denser parts improve corrosion
resistance, magnetic induction and tensile strength. Increased purification
improves ductility and structure sensitive magnetic properties. If so, magnetic
parts with improved corrosion resistance can be produced. The proposer's parts,
unless forged, contain porosity. Porous parts are subject to corrosion.
Increasing porosity lowers density. Coated iron powder permits production of
parts that are purer and higher in density. Therefore, corrosion, magnetic and
high temperature properties should be enhanced. If the process prove successful,
the proposer would consider construction or expansion of a plant to produce the
powder in commercial quantities. ***