* 9761308
* SBIR Phase I:  KidSource OnLine PersonalNews - An Adaptive  Agent for the Delivery of Personalized Information
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Karen Dillon, KidSource OnLine, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,980.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project submitted by KidSource
OnLine, Inc will develop a new version of PersonalNews that includes a new
adaptive feedback mechanism incorporating the user's explicit and evolving
preferences. The research will focus on designing the prototype and user-testing
the new functions. The results from this testing will be used to develop a
specification for the next phase incorporating scalability and performance
requirements. The approach will be to build upon the success of a prototype of a
personalized information agent called KidSource OnLine PersonalNews.
PersonalNews delivers a web page of prioritized content for parents based upon
detailed user preferences and demographics. Creating a new attribute will add
the style of information (voice and audience) into the user preference model.
These features will result in a more human-centric design that incorporates a
wider range of user capabilities and will produce results that are more
accurate, relevant and more reflective of the user's total needs than can any
existing technology. This technology is applicable not only to the parenting
market, but also to many other market segments and can be used to proactively
deliver personalized information to disadvantaged groups in order to improve
their health and education.