* 9761264
* SBIR Phase I:  Micromachined Scintillating Pixel X-Ray      Imaging Plate
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Charles Beetz, NANOSCIENCES CORP
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project focuses oil x-ray and
particle imaging of biological specimens using radionuclides, radiotracers or
x-ray beams. An imaging detector requires: detection efficiency close to unity;
photon counting; high spatial resolution, comparable to film; improved contrast
due to insensitivity to scattered x-rays or particles; liticar intensity
response; large dynamic range; low noise; and differential attenuation imaging
using x-ray energies. We propose to address these issues with a novel form of'
high spatial precision imaging scintillator pixel plate, fabricated by
micromachining of very high aspect ratio holes (length/diameter) in silicon. The
Si holes will be formed into dielectric waveguides (optical fibers) by forming a
cladding film, for example by oxidizing the walls to form SiO2. The holes will
be filled with standard and novel scintillation materials, including index-
matched collodal dispersions of nanocrystalline photolithographic techniques,
with holes from 1 um-1 mm in diamiter, and plate thickness up to about 1 mm. The
scintillator array is well-matched to the precision and spatial resolution of
optical pixel detectors including CCD image intensifiers and film. This program
may led to novel large area, high precision x-ray imagers, enabling replacement
of film or enhancing film in medical and dental x-rays. It may also lead to
ultra-high precision fiber-optic plates at low cost, and compact full aperture
optical and x-ray collimators.