* 9761035
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Prototyping of Assistive Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Richard Mahoney, APPLIED RESOURCES CORP
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1998
* USD 98,324.00

*** 9761035 Mahoney This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will assist manufacturer's in the development of aids for people with
disabilities. New software concepts call for integration with existing CAD
systems and animation packages and require various tools and facilities to
support product conceptualization, consumer evaluation, virtual prototyping, and
design iteration. The new software system will support external input devices to
interact with virtual prototypes, thereby evaluating disability behaviors such
as spasticity, tremor, and movement constraints of disabled users. The concept's
potential to provide three-dimensional modeling comparability would support use
of design information over both corporate intranets and the external internet.
Phase I will test various system modules through a design case study based on an
available sotware product. Potential commercial applications are expected in
affordable design aid and evaluation tools to develop consumer-specific aids for
people with disabilities. Manufacturers and rehabilitation professionals need a
design and evaluation software tools to develop aids for people with
disabilities. This new softwarel would provide a rapid prototyping tool
specifically tailored for disabled individuals. ***