* 9761508
* SBIR Phase I:  CuInSe2 (Copper Indium Diselenide)           Thermoelectric Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Ingrid Repins, Materials Research Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761508 Eisgruber This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project
proposes development of thin film copper indium diselenide (CIS) thermoelectric
devices on rigid and flexible substrates, including both development of the film
growth process for thermoelectrics and modeling the incorporation of the devices
into systems with specific power generation or cooling requirements. Currently,
high production costs and low efficiency inhibit the widespread use of
thermoelectric devices. Most commercially available thermoelectric devices are
manufactured using single crystal semiconductor stacks. Single crystal
fabrication technologies are fairly mature; To reduce production costs, new
materials and fabrication technologies must be utilized. Recent developments in
deposition of CIS for use in thin film photovoltaic modules has been especially
dramatic. Interestingly, CuInSe2 also holds great promise for thermoelectric
devices. Initial investigation of its thermal properties indicate a very high
(exceeding unity) thermoelectric figure of merit. The development of
inexpensive, lightweight thermoelectric devices promises a huge commercial
potential. Possible applications include electronics cooling, precisely
controlled refrigeration for medical applications, power generation from vehicle
exhaust heat recovery, and silent, compact air-conditioning for use in ships and
submarines. Mobile applications stand to benefit significantly from the
development of flexible thermoelectrics, as flexible substrates reduce both
weight and packaging size. ***