* 9761590
* SBIR Phase I:  Complete Software System for 3D Surface      Modeling of Anatomy from 2D Sections
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Thomas McCracken, VISIBLE PRODUCTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,789.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Visible
Productions L.L.C. seeks to develop the initial version of a software system
that can efficiently create 3D polygonal mesh surface models of anatomical
structures from 2D section data such as CT, MRI and Visible Human Project
images. The software systems will consist of refining and integrating the
following existing modules: 1) Semi-automated tracing module, which utilizes
neural networks to perform user-assisted and semi-automated tracing of the
perimeters of anatomical structures on 2D section images; 2) 3D model-based
registration module which transforms adjacent section images and individual
structures as necessary to ensure proper alignment and registration; 3)
Automatic connectivity triangulation module, an improved triangulation software
which creates 3D polygon surfaces from the traced 2D perimeters with little user
intervention; and 4) Post-processing system, an improved software for editing,
decimating, and reshaping polygonal mesh surfaces for customizing the models.
The Phase I will concentrate on development and testing of the semi-automated
tracing module since this is the least developed component in Visible
Productions' current system. A concept and plan for a model-based registration
system will be generated. Visible Productions' existing triangulation and post-
processing modules will be improved and the project team will begin the
integration effort with other modules. There is a very large market for 3D
polygonal mesh models of anatomical structures, but the tools available to
create these models are very limited. The users of such models include
researchers, educators, medical professionals, diagnosticians, multimedia
publishers, simulation design specialists, and entertainment and gaming industry
engineers. Visible Productions' software would allow these diverse groups to
efficiently create their own models at a reasonable price. Also, the system will
allow the creation of custom models for customers at a much faster rate than is
currently possible.