* 9761598
* SBIR PHASE I:  Development of High Gain Curved Channel      Microchannel Plates (MCPs) with Improved Performance and    Reduced Cost for Photon and Particle Detector Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Peter Prideaux, Pegasus Glassworks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,534.00

*** 9761598 Prideaux This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is directed toward the commercialization of high-quality, reduced-cost,
Sheared-channel Microchannel Plates (SMCPs)(TM). Under an earlier NASA SBIR
award, fabrication procedures were developed which were successfully used to
produce the high-quality, 50-mm-format SMCPs for the Hubble Space Telescope
Imaging Spectrograph (STIS), and for the Hubble Advanced Camera. A significant
number of 25-mm-format MCP wafers are available from the NASA SBIR award. The
objective is to use these wafers to optimize the procedures for fabricating
high-quality SMCPs at a commercially-acceptable cost. The optimum shear process
will be established, etch and reduction procedures will be validated, and the
performance characteristics of a number of finished SMCPs will be quantified. At
the end of Phase I, the goal is to have developed all of the data required to
set up a dedicated SMCP fabrication and test facility, including a second-
generation shear engine. The SMCPs produced in this facility will have a very
wide range of scientific and commercial applications in fast-timing and position
sensitive detector systems. These include time-of-flight mass spectrometry, ELTV
and soft x-ray imaging and spectroscopy, military and civilian night-vision,
low-light-level spectroscopy, and' speckle image reconstruction and wavefront
sensing. ***