* 9761457
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi Photon Detection (MPD) Enhanced Food   Quality Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Andrzej Drukier, BioTraces Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,032.00

*** 9761457 Drukier This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
proposal. The research proposed herein addresses a critical need for high low
cost and rapid diagnostics for pathogenic bacterial contaminants associated with
food home enteric infections. The main goal of the proposed effort is to exploit
the superior sensitivity of BioTraces' Multi Photon Detection (MPDTM) technology
to develop an integrated test system for use in process diagnostics and
monitoring in the food processing industry. This test system will be based upon
the complementary techniques of MPD-enhanced quantitative PCR and MPD-enabled
direct detection of DNA. We will utilize MPD's 10,000-fold sensitivity advantage
over current instrumentation and BioTraces' experience in developing ultra-
sensitivity assay protocols to significantly decrease assay tumaround times and
improve specificity by minimizing non-specific biological backgrounds. Our
objective is to develop tests which are sensitive to less than 10 pathogenic
bacteria per sample with turnaround times of less than one hour. The potential
market for very rapid (< 30 minutes), high sensitivity (< 10 CFU/ml) assays for
food-bome pathogens are expected to account for about 20% of the total food
quality testing market, which is currently estimated to be about $5 billion/year
worldwide. More generally, the quantitative PCR and DNA direct detection methods
to be developed herein will find significant applications in life science
research and clinical diagnostics. ***