* 9761225
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational Optimization of Magnetic       Resonance Flow Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* John Siegel, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,951.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
computational environment which will enable optimization of magnetic resonance
(MR) flow sequences. The optimization (suppression or enhancement) of signal
intensity from arteries and veins in magnetic resonance images (MRI's) requires
a major effort by MRI sequence developers Currently, costly clinical studies in
commercial scanners are used to optimize imaging sequences. The goal of the
research will be to combine a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) program with a
MR sequence emulation module. The Bloch equation will be integrated using CFD-
derived fluid velocities in a finite volume scheme. The net magnetization within
the flow field will be summed to generate a simulated echo signal. Multiple echo
signals will yield a k-space data which will be 2D Fourier transformed to
display the simulated image. The project will also apply Bayesian statistical
methods to assess the inverse problem of obtaining important physiologic
parameters (e.g. flow rate) given a MR echo signal. The Phase I project will
utilize arbitrary sequences within a laminar flow field. Phase II will extend
the simulation capabilities to include turbulent flow, injection of contrast
agents, and neural net logic for the inverse problem. A number of imaging system
manufacturers have expressed a need for a computational optimization tool for MR
flow imaging. If the approach is successful, the cost savings could be
substantial: currently, one hour on a commercial MR scanner is valued at around
$1500, while one hour on a computer workstation is typically valued at around
$9. Ý¾▄%[¤þ[ X &lt;"L7@Úm g M¶' P▀¦Ò&lt;"z ┌Yf¯║¿$Ì└¾Â!ÌM¾Á·┼@ ½?2 $¶ÎG­Á ‗¬ ^ ┴
P}´o:Pp _ ═­ð+╦?úf(­║┴5$´µ­▄M´µ t ╗;{47_¸ ½În.±)wzp rC ÝðA-ÈG­Á·┼&lt; ©^¶
│yNL²[v·9@¾m o:|╔ZB░wþHkí!ú"p╣ß¹Ìñ»¹‗ L¾4Nfñ»¹,'PpÔf‗‗┌¦╠µ¼?#Í
pÔf‗;╔ßm╣Z)óÔo┤$@ó¶Ã╣¶9L ¾P ¬.]À _.¸Ãz 'Ý▀&lt; ¢ÚOB¶ÙvÕC uo:ßXTõ├ZÎ ÁÏ 'Ý▀&lt; ¢
ó[;¸$¯)²O¬ ð¨╠¬C¬¨ ^ Ú4 r:[*¶° ┴¾ÌYÕ¾´Á·,'PpÔf‗‗┌¦¹ °w ┐]] ¢ LKÒf¥ IÌ8fM LM3p¶9
¦ ±}3'[ ¦M# JÌM ý