* 9761273
* SBIR Phase I:  Chitosan-Based Biopolymers as Additives to   Oil Well Drillling Fluids
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Roy House, The Venture Group (Venture Innovations, Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761273 House This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Proposal.
Technical advances in oil recovery and increased environmental stewardship are
providing substantial new opportunities for drilling fluid additives which are
environmentally-benign and which offer enhanced performance characteristics. We
propose to examine derivatives of the natural polysaccharide chitosan as an
alternative water-soluble viscosifying polymer in drilling fluids. Specifically,
we propose to: (1) produce chitosan from crabshell wastes; (2) derivatize
chitosan to yield polymers which offer low-shear-rate viscosities (i.e. have
yield stresses) but which are shear thinning; and (3) perform laboratory tests
to study the performance of the chitosan derivatives in simulated oil drilling
applications. The project team for this study is a subset of a larger team which
is examining how to commercially convert Maryland's crabshell wastes into
chitosan in partnership with end-users who are developing large volume outlet
markets for low-end chitosan. If successful, this research would lead to two
commercial opportunities. First, large-volume markets would develop for high
performance, environmentally-friendly chitosan derivatives as drilling fluid
additives. Second, supplying large-volume chitosan markets would provide
commercial opportunities to convert seafood wastes into a value-added products.
***