* 9761618
* SBIR Phase I:  Photodefinable, Integrated, High Capacitance Composites for MCM-L Type Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Kristen Law, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,995.00

*** 9761618 Law This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to
synthesize a new, high capacitance polyimide-barium titanate polyamic acid which
will be patterned by contact photolithography to produce a polyimide composite
network having an order of magnitude higher capacitance than current polyimide
composite materials. The next generation of electronic packaging requires the
replacement of discrete passive devices with embedded material to achieve the
necessary gains in component density, performance, and cost reductions. Of the
three passive components, resistors, inductors, and capacitors, it is capacitors
that are used in the highest quantities, and have received the smallest amount
of integration research. Current capacitive materials for MCM-L substrates lack
the dielectric properties which will be required for future performance
improvements. A composite dielectric material composed of a newly synthesized
photo-active and high polarity polyimide with nanometer scale ceramic powder
will be able to meet the performance, thermal, and processing requirements
required for developing embedded capacitance devices. The total North American
printed circuit board market is currently at $6 billion, with no integrated
passive components. By the year 2007, total PC board estimates are at $13
billion, with approximately one quarter of that expected to be generated by
boards employing integrated passive devices. Current discrete passive component
costs are $0.10 per component, plus an additional $0.03 for insertion. Even with
a slight premium for developing new embedded materials, the savings involved in
eliminating insertion costs are substantial. ***