* 9761399
* SBIR Phase I:  Parallel Non-Blocking Routing Algorithm      Implementation for Free-Space All-Optical Interconnect
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* George Lu, Reveo Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 97,677.00

High-speed optical interconnections promise to play a major role in the
development of the national information infrastructure. Numerous tasks in a
world reliant on information technology to improve the quality of life and
productivity require the creation, processing, and transmission of images which
have tremendous information content. Hence the enormous demand for wider
bandwidth hardware that enables the realization of high data rates. This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Reveo, Inc. will
develop a routing algorithm that works in conjunction with a revolutionary all-
optical crossbar switch that is capable of multi-tera-bit/second, which is being
developed under a separate National Science Foundation SBIR project. This
routing algorithm will enable Reveo to realize the full potential of the
crossbar switch. The proposed program of research will focus on the design and
implementation of the novel routing algorithm that can be scaled up to large
network sizes. In addition to the multi-tera-bit data rate of the whole system,
the non-blocking routing algorithm features reconfiguration speeds that approach
the nanosecond time scale. Routing is an essential operation in all switching
networks. The proposed routing algorithm, along with the all-optical crossbar
switch, will be commercialized within a multi-billion dollar high-speed
networking market which is growing significantly.