* 9761057
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Control of Chemical Processes       Based on Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy    and Artificial Neural Networks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Michael Serio, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,806.00

*** 9761057 Serio This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
demonstrate the feasibility of using Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR)
spectroscopy measurements and artificial neural networks (ANNS) for adaptive
control of chemical processes. Three recent events together provide an
opportunity to develop a new generation of process monitoring and control
systems: 1) the availability of low cost, high speed computation with personal
computers; 2) the availability of user friendly software involving artificial
intelligence techniques such as neural networks; 3) the availability of rugged,
compact FT-IR spectrometers. The capabilities of FT-IR spectrometers to monitor
multiple components of a gas phase process stream have been demonstrated by
Advanced Fuel Research, .Inc. (AFR) and other researchers in numerous field
demonstrations. However, the marriage of this technology with adaptive process
control software such as ANNs to produce a superior process control algorithm
remains to be proven. The objective of the Phase I program is to demonstrate the
proof-of-concept of this approach for a model chemical process.. The Phase II
program will concentrate on refinement and generalization of the methodology so
that it will work in a full-scale plant as part of a distributed control system.
The successful completion of this program would result in process control
methodology for maximizing conversion, selectivity and/or environmental
acceptability of many common chemical processes which involve gas phase
intermediates and products. This technology would provide both economic and
environmental benefits to the nation, and potential installations exist at
thousands of sites in the U.S. and abroad. ***