* 9761104
* SBIR Phase I:  A Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Biodegradable     Commodity Plastic
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Georgette Siparsky, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9761104 Siparsky This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I proposal
addresses the issue of waste reduction from food packaging material. There have
been very few commercial solutions to the problem of accumulated plastics waste.
After a decade of intensive research and political backing, plastics recycling
remains specific to very few packaging systems such as milk containers and large
carbonated beverage bottles. Similarly, degradable polymers have also had a
negligible commercial impact, mostly due to their cost and poor physical
properties. To overcome these problems, TDA Research Inc. has developed a low-
cost degradable hybrid organic/inorganic polymer based on a low-cost natural
material, to give a resin with considerable structural integrity and
biocompatibility. The hybrid polymer is stable at high temperatures and can be
used in the manufacture of microwavable clamshells and dualovenables for the
food packaging industry. The proposed resin is expected to be cheaper than the
current laminates used in the food industry. In Phase I, TDA will prepare the
degradable resin, mold the dual-ovenable containers and examine their
properties. In Phase II, TDA will collaborate with a major producer of
biodegradable plastics to prepare 100 lb. quantities of the resin and carry out
market testing. The proposed degradable hybrid organic/inorganic material will
be used to prepare food packaging that requires high temperature stability and
excellent barrier properties. These applications include dual-ovenables and
clamshells, containers used to store ready-to-eat food in the freezer and to
heat it in the microwave. Other applications include barrier coatings on
inexpensive paperboard. ***