* 9761044
* SBIR Phase I:  Strain Measurements in Bridges By Use of     Fiber Optic Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* David Brower, Astro Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,781.00

*** 9761044 Brower This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
attempt to demonstrate the feasibility of measuring strain in real time on
bridge structures by investigating a method to monitor the mechanical response
of the bridges components using fiber-optic sensors. The effect of forces
exerted on major civil engineering structures during normal usage and natural
catastrophes such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, or severe
storms could be measured. These sensors will be designed to be rugged, low-cost,
and will provide monitoring of strain in real time -- allowing a constant
vigilance of the state-of stress, the safety, state of repair, and expected
life-time of the structure. The ultimate goal of this research effort, is to
commercialize a fully developed Fiber-Optic sensor that can be used throughout
the construction industry. The commercial sensor systems will contain "proven"
low-cost optical fibers, hardware, software, memory, display, and support
equipment. This will be achieved through research, and application of an
approach, that uses innovative ideas built on existing fiber-optic
interferometeric sensors. If successful, it will be possible to accurately
measure the mechanical response properties of bridges and other civil
engineering structures in any desired location. Strain from long-term and
transient loads can be measured and recorded. Currently, large civil engineering
structures are visually inspected. Extensometers or mechanical measuring devices
are used on a periodic basis to evaluate the state of the structure.
Unfortunately, visual inspections usually occur after a structural problem has
already manifest itself. Presently, there is a significant need for sensing
devices that Provide constant monitoring of the state of the structure. The
sensors could be used in civil engineering structures that use concrete, steel,
composites and other construction material. Bridges, buildings, parking garages,
highway overpasses are ex amples. ***