* 9761288
* SBIR Phase I:  Thin Film Deposition & Dynamic               Characterizations Using Sub-Psec Eximer Laser Sources
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,09/30/1998
* Kenneth Church, SCIPERIO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 99,768.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
preparation and characterization of tribological layers for advanced application
environments. Sub-picosecond-derived films will be evaluated as a function of
the essential PLD processing parameters; the films derived via sub-psec ablation
will also compared to films deposited by conventional nsec ablation. The
proposed program will focus on pulsed laser deposition (PLD), a comparatively
new processing method by which a variety of novel and complex materials systems
may be prepared. Research in Germany has recently demonstrated that PLD carried
out with sub-picosecond excimer laser pulses allow the deposition of thin films
that possess superior properties to those obtained using conventional chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) or nanosecond pulsed laser deposition methods. These
properties include improved film smoothness, substrate adhesion, and a large
degree of epitaxial orientation in the ablatively-deposited films. At present,
there are no laboratories in the United States capable of producing films using
sub-psec PLD methods. A program of experimental investigations, leading to the
first femtosecond pulsed laser deposition facility in the United States, is
proposed. The proposer has the necessary equipment to assemble the femtosecond
pulsed laser necessary to do the advanced deposition. The enhancing of
capabilities is brought about using several techniques including chemical vapor
deposition sputtering, activated reactive evaporation, molecular beam epitaxy,
solution synthetic approaches, and PLD. The femtosecond pulsed laser deposition
proposed would have application to hardened drill bits, diamond blades,
bearings, panels and optics and other components that are enhanced to withstand
high heat, high friction and corrosion and will provide results superior to the
traditional techniques. This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation
Research Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).