* 9761142
* SBIR Phase I:  Monolithic Superconducting Rapid Single Flux Quantum (RSFQ) Phase-Locked Loop for Signal Processing      Applications Above 20 GHz
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1998,06/30/1998
* Michael Pambianchi, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,962.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project from HYPRES, Inc. proposes the
development of a monolithic phase-locked looped (PLL) circuit operating at
frequencies in the range 20 - 100 GHz. HYPRES proposes to develop a
superconducting PLL circuit using Rapid Single Flux Quantum (RSFQ) logic
elements for the phase detector, the voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), and
the frequency divider for looking to a lower reference frequency. In Phase I,
HYPRES will demonstrate a PLL which locks with a phase precision of 10 to the
minus 4 radian at 50 GHz and follows the reference signal over a range of 5 GHz.
This significant achievement requires an on-chip VCO with inherent quality
factor of 10,000 and a feedback loop bandwidth of at least 5 MHz. In the next
phase of the research, HYPRES will develop a frequency tracking demodulator with
clock recovery using the PLL developed in Phase I, capable of operating at 30
GHz. There is a significant need for inexpensive, tunable, phaselocked clock
sources in this frequency range for signal processing in scientific and
communications applications. These applications include ultrafast clocking of
superconducting digital circuits and acquisition, modulation, demodulation, and
tracking of carriers above 20 GHz. Gunn diodes are already available as high-Q
microwave sources in the frequency range 20 - 100 GHz. They are expensive,
however, and must be locked by even more expensive electronics (typical cost,
circa $30,000). The proposed approach will yield a much less expensive option
(typical cost - $1000) for creating phase-locked clock signals in the frequency
range 20 - 100 GHz and directly useable by RSFQ digital signal processing
circuits. The primary commercial application is in satellite communications
hardware, which is a market worth over $100 M per year.