
* 0070312
* Potential Theory of Symmetric Stable Processes, p-Laplacian on Trees and Quasiregular Maps
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,04/22/2002
* Jang-Mei Wu,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2004
* USD 108,849.00

ABSTRACT

The goal of the research is to study potential theoretic problems arising in the
following areas. (1) Symmetric stable processes are discontinuous and nonlocal
versions of Brownian motions. The jumps of the processes impose many technical
complications, at the same time making the roughness of the boundary invisible;
consequently they produce many unexpected properties and interesting questions.
Harmonic measures, Martin boundaries and a certain version of boundary Harnack
principle will be investigated. (2) On trees of nonregular branching, or on a
random Galton-Watson tree, problems on sizes of Fatou sets of bounded p-harmonic
functions will be studied. These are discrete analoge of the usual p-harmonic
functions. (3) For a quasiregular mapping on the unit ball, the relation between
the volume growth of the mapping and size of the set on the unit sphere where
the function has asymptotic values will be analyzed. This constitutes a first
step towards a very difficult problem of Fatou sets for bounded quasiregular
mappings. Brownian motion has been studied at least since Norbert Wiener and has
played a central role in probability and potential theory, which in turn are
very important in the study of differential equations, heat conductivity,
electrostatic potential and fluid dynamics. Recently, there are many problems in
physics and mathematical finance and risk estimation which have been modelled
and studied successfully with the use of symmetric stable processes --
discontinuous counterpart of the Brownian motions. A symmetric stable process
has discontinuous sample paths and heavy tails, while Brownian motion has
continuous sample paths and exponentially decaying tails. Therefore many
techniques from Brownian motions can not be routinely adapted to these
processes. Wide range applications and challenging behaviors of the processes
are the motivation behind the proposed research. Wu hopes that knowledge derived
from a theoretical study of these processes from an analytical point of view,
will give new tools for applications in physics and finance.


