
* 0070807
* Foundation of the Geometric Function Theory in R^n: The Governing differential Forms, Variational Integrals and Nonlinear Elasticity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,06/11/2002
* Tadeusz Iwaniec,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* David Drasin
* 06/30/2003
* USD 130,722.00

Abstract :

ANALYTICAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE GEOMETRIC FUNCTION THEORY; VARIATIONAL INTEGRALS
AND NONLINEAR ELASTICITY

Tadeusz Iwaniec



One of the major recent advances in the higher dimensional geometric function
theory is based on finding new differential equations analogous to the Cauchy-
Riemann system in the complex plane. Hodge theory of differential forms has come
to play a central role in this rather modern approach. The Jacobian determinants
and the wedge products of the exact differential forms are subjected to a great
deal of investigation, as they provide the means of achieving continuity,
compactness, or normal family type results. It is important to realize that the
higher integrability properties of the Jacobians can only be observed for
mapping in the Orlicz-Sobolev classes. More recent developments have emphasized
the connection between quasiconformal mappings and the theory of nonlinear
elasticity already formulated by S.S. Antman and J. Ball in 1976-77. This
connection is an important aspect of the proposal. And that is why we depart
from the usual quasiconformal theory quite far towards mappings (deformations of
elastic bodies) with unbounded distortion. However, some control, such as BMO-
bounds, of the distortion tensor will be necessary to achieve concreate results.
The governing equations for mappings of finite distortion are non-linear first
order systems of PDEs. There are also related second order systems which arrise
naturally as the Euler- Lagrange equations of the associated variational
integrals (stored energy of the deformation). An analogy between the analytic
aspects of the holomorphic functions and mappings of finite distortion is
particularly pronounced in even dimensions. A fruitful idea when studying these
mappings is to view them as conformal with respect to certain measurable metric
or conformal structures. Many of these notions extend to Riemannian manifolds,
and accordingly, while we do not develop this aspect in full all the machinery
we set up is ready and willing for these generalizations. The reader interested
in developments along these lines and a comprehensive account of the geometric
function theory is warmly referred to the forthcoming monograph of G. Martin and
PI.




