
* 0070514
* Multilinear Operators, Discrete Decompositions, and Spectral Resolution of Nanostructures
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,05/01/2002
* Rodolfo Torres,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,998.00

ABSTRACT:

The research to be conducted includes the analysis of operators associated with
multilinear singular integrals and the study of discrete functions spaces. The
investigations will be based on techniques related to Littlewood-Paley theory,
molecular decompositions, and time-frequency analysis tools. Specific aspects
proposed in the analysis of operators are to continue collaborations in the
development of a multilinear counterpart of the linear Calderon-Zygmund theory,
and to study various classes of multilinear pseudodifferential operators.
Problems in the analysis of discrete function spaces include issues about the
sampling of functions with controlled mean oscillations and the approximation of
band limited signals. The proposal also contains an interdisciplinary component.
In particular, theoretical problems arising in the analytic formulation of the
scattering of light by structurally colored tissues of living organisms will be
considered. The spectral resolution and mathematical properties of quasi-ordered
geometries will be investigated. The last part of the research will be assisted
by numerical computation and data visualization.

Operators associated with singular integrals arise as technical tools in
analysis and also as transformations encountered in the mathematical modeling of
certain physical phenomena. Such transformations can be used to describe the
changes in the properties of a function or the transition from the input to the
output of a system. Properties of functions or signals often need to be
understood from the information encoded in samples of the data. Such information
can be quantified by function spaces and decoded by Fourier analysis and related
time-frequency techniques. Fourier analysis is the mathematical version of a
diffracting physical prism. It resolves a signal into a spectrum of waves of
different amplitudes and oscillations in a similar way that a prism diffracts a
ray of light into a rainbow of colors of different wavelengths. Modern
decomposition techniques in analysis provide a universal language for the
processing of complicated information. Progress in this area of analysis always
produces important advances in scientific problems where large and complicated
sets of data need to be analyzed to search for ordered patterns, reduce
unnecessary information, or visualize intricate structures.


