
* 0070725
* Plurisubharmonic Functions on Algebraic Varieties
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,06/14/2002
* B. Alan Taylor,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2003
* USD 97,878.00

ABSTRACT: The classical Phragmen-Lindelof theorem extends the maximum principle
to unbounded analytic functions by showing that an analytic function that
satisfies an asymptotic exponential bound in the upper half plane and a uniform
bound on the real axis in fact satisfies a uniform exponential bound in the
upper half plane. Research of the past three decades has shown that the validity
of estimates of a similar character for analytic functions on algebraic
varieties in n-dimensional complex Euclidean space are in fact equivalent to
certain properties of linear constant coefficient partial differential
operators. Some such properties of the operators are surjectivity on the space
of real analytic functions or Gevrey classes, the existence of lacuna in
fundamental solutions, the existence of linear solution operators, and
continuation properties of solutions of the homogeneous equation(s). While there
are different sets of these estimates associated to the different properties of
the operator, they all are similar in spirit. The aim of this work is to develop
methods that give a geometric characterization of the algebraic varieties for
which a given Phragmen-Lindelof condition is satisfied. If successful, the work
should also give insight into questions about the partial differential equations
such as the existence of fundamental solutions with cone-shaped lacuna.

This work is focused on developing tools in complex analysis that can be used to
answer basic questions about linear partial differential equations. In the
1950's, Laurent Schwartz formulated such fundamental problems for general linear
partial differential equations. Are they always solvable? If so, can the
solution be chosen as smooth as the data in the problem? Do fundamental
solutions exist? Can the equations be solved with a "formula", so that the
answer depends linearly on the data of the problem? Most of these questions were
answered in the 1950's by Ehrenpreis and Malgrange. However, the question of
whether the solution could be chosen to be real analytic when the data is real
analytic was open until the late 1960's when the first counter examples were
given. In 1973, Hormander gave a characterization of the equations with this
property in terms of the validity of certain inequalities for analytic functions
on the zero set of the polynomial giving the differential equation. In 1990,
Taylor, Meise, and Vogt answered the question about the existence of "formulas"
for the solution and showed they were also characterized in terms of some
similar inequalities. The aim of this project is to develop tools that allow one
to decide whether or not the required estimates are valid for a given partial
differential equation. We believe that it is possible to develop an algorithm
that will make the verification, and further, will explain the geometry of the
zero set of the associated polynomial that is necessary for the inequalities to
be satisfied.


