
* 0070649
* Invariant Distributions on p-adic Lie Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2000,07/20/2000
* Rebecca Herb,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2003
* USD 72,000.00

Technical Description: Let G be a connected reductive p-adic group, and let L(G)
be its Lie algebra. The proposal is to study the G-invariant distributions on
L(G) which are Fourier transforms of invariant distributions with compactly
generated support. This class of distributions includes the Fourier transforms
of orbital integrals, which are important for the theory of characters on the
group G. Harish-Chandra proved that these distributions are given by functions
which are locally constant on the set of regular elements of L(G), and can be
normalized to be locally bounded on L(G). When G is a real Lie group, the
restrictions of these functions to Cartan subalgebras have simple formulas
because they satisfy differential equations. In the p-adic case, there are
analogous formulas for the Fourier transforms of orbital integrals restricted to
Cartan subalgebras of L(G), but they are only valid for large enough
sufficiently regular elements in the Cartan subalgebra. These formulas can be
used to develop a theory of the constant term analogous to that for the real
case. One goal of this proposal is to use these formulas at infinity to prove
global bounds for the restrictions of Fourier transforms of orbital integrals to
Cartan subalgebras. In order to do this it is necessary to control behavior at
infinity uniformly as regular elements approach singular hyperplanes. A further
goal of this proposal is to suitably generalize this work to the class of
distributions obtained as Fourier transforms of invariant distributions with
compactly generated support.

Non-technical Description: The theory of Fourier series and Fourier transforms
was developed, starting in the 18th century, to study functions of a real
variable. The idea is to write an arbitrary function as a sum or integral of the
well-understood trigonometric functions. This theory today has many applications
in the sciences, in engineering, and in mathematics. Many of the basic ideas
involved in Fourier analysis can be extended to analyze functions on any space
with sufficient symmetry. One class of spaces of special interest in physics and
many areas of mathematics is linear algebraic groups and their Lie algebras, the
analysis on the Lie algebra being a linearization of the analysis on the group.
These groups and algebras can be realized as matrices. Classically, the entries
of the matrices are real or complex numbers. However there is also an
interesting theory when the entries come from other fields, in particular the
fields of p-adic numbers. These fields are important in number theory, and the
study of p-adic groups has many applications to number theory. In the classical
situation, much of the analysis involves the use of differential equations. This
tool is not available in the p-adic case. The goal of this proposal is to
analyze the behavior at infinity of certain important distributions on p-adic
Lie algebras. The classical results are available as motivation, but the
techniques of proof are necessarily completely different.
