
* 0070405
* Projects In Operator Algebra: Tensor Algebras, Coordinates, and Toeplitz Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2000,04/02/2004
* Paul Muhly,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 177,537.00

ABSTRACT DMS-0070405

Muhly will study a variety of problems in operator algebra that may be divided
into three groups: General Operator Algebras, Groupoids, and Toeplitz and
Related Operators. Under the first heading are found a number of problems
pertaining to the structure and representation theory of non-self-adjoint
operator algebras. The theory of these algebras has been reinvigorated in recent
years through advances in what has come to be known as quantized functional
analysis, i.e., the theory of operator spaces. This subject coupled with the
recent work of Muhly and Solel that identifies the C*-envelopes of various very
general operator algebras allows one to make good progress on the program
proposed more than thirty years ago by Wm. Arveson as a generalization of the
Sz.-Nagy - Foias model theory of contraction operators on Hilbert space: study
the representations of an operator algebra in terms of the C*-representations of
its C*-envelope. In the area of groupoids, emphasis will be placed on the study
of Fell bundles over groupoids. The impetus for this study comes from the
representation theory of groupoids and from efforts to understand co-actions of
groupoids. Further, these bundles (more accurately, generalizations of them)
occur in the theory of product systems and the structure of non-self-adjoint
operator algebras just mentioned. Toeplitz operators have long been a subject of
intense interest in operator algebra/theory. In recent years Muhly and Xia have
identified the automorphisms of the C*-algebra generated by all Toeplitz
operators. The identification is described in terms of constructs that have
played important roles in function theory and harmonic analysis on the disc. A
particular importance is played by commutator singular integrals. Muhly proposes
to extend these results, to the extent possible, to multivariable settings.
Again, commutator singular integrals should play a decisive role, but the jump
to dimensions greater than one presents difficult challenges.

Muhly's work on non-self-adjoint operator algebras, while inspired primarily by
developments in pure mathematics, has connections with problems of an applied
nature, most particularly, mathematical systems theory - the theory of so-called
H-infinity control. This, basically, is a body of knowledge dedicated to the
problem of building machines, such as cars and airplanes, so that they meet
certain performance criteria. Among these are such things as the responsiveness
of the steering wheel, in the case of cars, or the rudder, in the case of
airplanes. In short, Muhly's work will contribute to theoretical underpinnings
of design problems ensuring the safety of all sorts of conveyances. Much of
Muhly's work on tensor algebras over C*-correspondences, which has been inspired
by the operator theory that underwrites this kind of control theory, seems to be
usable in multivariable control problems. Indeed, quite serendipitously, it
appears to be ready-made for multivariable problems. Muhly expects his research
to provide a theoretical underpinning of multivariable control problems that
here-to-fore have been handled by essentially ad hoc methods. Muhly's work in
non-self-adjoint algebras and the theory of groupoids has made unexpected
connections with quantum Markov processes - the theory of so-called open systems
that arise in a variety of places such as the theory of lasers and materials
science devoted to super conductivity. They also arise naturally in quantum
field theory through the constructs known as sectors. It is anticipated that
Muhly's work will help to provide the mathematical underpinnings of quantum
field theory and advances in laser and materials science. Finally, Muhly's work
on Toeplitz operators has made connections with perturbation theories that arise
in areas of relativistic quantum theory and in quantum chemistry. It is
anticipated that his projects on higher dimensional Toeplitz operators will have
an increased impact in this arena.
