
* 0070679
* GEOMETRY OF FLAG VARIETIES AND REPRESENTATION THEORY
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2000,06/19/2002
* Shrawan Kumar,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 127,888.00

ABSTRACT OF THE NSF PROJECT OF SHRAWAN KUMAR

Shrawan Kumar intends to continue work in the general area of 'Lie Theory and
Geometry'. He has proposed to work on five projects requiring diverse and
extensive mathematical tools from Algebraic Geometry, Classical and Quantum
Representation Theory, and Topology. Briefly described, these projects are as
follows: In an attempt to understand the Kostka-Macdonald coefficients, Garsia
and Haiman proposed a remarkable conjecture, known as the n! conjecture. This
asserts that the dimension of a certain space of polynomials in 2n variables is
exactly n!. The validity of the conjecture will imply that the coefficients of
the Kostka-Macdonald polynomials are non-negative integers which remains an open
challenging problem. The first project aims at proving this conjecture (jointly
with Prof. J. Thomsen from Aarhus) by using the geometry of Hilbert schemes. The
second project involves proving the non-existence of non-constant holomorphic
maps between certain homogeneous compact complex manifolds. Kumar already has a
precise conjecture in this direction. Lusztig has defined a certain Frobenius
morphism for quantized enveloping algebras at roots of unity and also a certain
'splitting' of this morphism defined on the positive parts of the algebras
involved. On the other hand, any algebraic variety defined over a field of
positive characteristic admits a Frobenius morphism. Mehta-Ramanathan introduced
the concept of Frobenius splitting of such a variety and showed that the flag
varieties associated to any semisimple algebraic group do admit Frobenius
splitting. This leads to some important results on the geometry of flag
varieties. Now Kumar-Littelmann have obtained a very precise connection between
these two (quantum and geometric) notions of Frobenius morphisms and Frobenius
splittings and the third project involves completing this ongoing work. The
fourth project involves proving a conjecture given by Kumar himself on the
cohomology of 'thick' flag varieties associated to affine Kac-Moody groups with
coefficients in homogeneous vector bundles. A 'direct' proof of this conjecture
will lead to uniform proofs of several important results related to the Moduli
of Vector Bundles and Verlinde Formula. The fifth is a long continuing project
which is due for completion by the end of this summer. It involves writing the
book "Kac-Moody Groups, their Flag Varieties and Representation Theory," to be
submitted to the Graduate Texts in Mathematics series of Springer-Verlag. To
explain these to a general scientific community, the main underlying theme
behind Kumar's projects is to exploit 'symmetry' or in more technical terms
'invariance' in problems arising in mathematics and mathematical physics.
Several natural phenomena exhibit symmetry, from crystals to the surface of the
earth we live on (where the latter of course is invariant under any rotation).
Now consider a mathematical or a physical problem, say studying the geometric
properties of an object (from a cell to the universe), or solving some complex
equations arising in diverse situations in mathematics and other sciences. An
effective method has been to study the collection of all the symmetries of the
problem under consideration (called a Group) and use the properties of the Group
to shed light on the original problem. This method has been very successfully
employed in a wide variety of problems leading to some pioneering works since
the nineteenth century.


