
* 0070511
* Problems in Measurable Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2000,04/22/2002
* Daniel Rudolph,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 191,700.00

A range of studies in measurable dynamics of are proposed. They lie generally in
extensions and applications of orbit equivalence methods. The PI has helped to
develop two general approaches here. The first is Restricted Orbit Equivalence,
where one places restrictions on the sorts of orbit preserving maps allowed. The
second, and new, method is an "orbit transference method" where the orbit
equivalence is arbitrary but measurable with respect to an algebra orthogonal to
the algebra of interest. Among the applications proposed for these methods are:
1) a deeper and perhaps complete understanding the the Weak Pinsker property of
Thouvenot 2) a version of the theory of Isometric Extensions of Bernoulli
automorphism for some class of restricted orbit equivalences, in particular for
standard dyadic reverse filtrations. 3) extensions of restricted orbit
equivalence beyond actions of descrete amenable groups to spaces of labeled
random graphs, to not necessarilly descrete groups and to non-singular actions.
Most important here is that one should look for good examples, for example an
entropy theory for nonsingular actions.

Large scale phenomena can often exhibit a random behavior. Crystals often
include random inclusions. Large data bases often (always?) include random
errors. The genome can be modeled as an infinite sequence of base pairs that in
places is random and places not so. One models such structures in probabilistic
terms as a space of linked nodes to which are attached labels, colors if you
will, endowed with some notion of the probability of occurance of some
particular local labeling or picture occuring within an infinite picture. It is
natural to look for ways of coding and comparing such random arrays among
themselves. One can seek extremely rigid encodings that allow no distortion of
the nodes and their links, just an encoding of the label at a particular node to
that same node in the other labeling of the array. Or more generally and
interestingly one can allow the nodes and links to distort as well. By setting
some control on the distortions one can craft an approach to understanding a
variety of properties of such systems. Although the goals of this proposal are
of an abstract nature, one of the first such controlled distortions (called
f-bar) was brought over from genetics where it was used as a measure of
evolutionary relatedness among DNA molecules. What is proposed here are a
variety of applications of methods involving controlled distortion of such
labeled arrays to understand such random phenomena more deeply.


