
* 0070335
* The Interaction Between Geometry and Analysis in Geometric Function Theory and in the Theory of Discrete Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,07/17/2000
* Petra Taylor,CT,Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2004
* USD 73,293.00

ABSTRACT:

The specific work described in this proposal consists of three projects. Part I
is a joint project with Juha Heinonen: A celebrated result by Hayman and Wu says
that the level sets of any Riemann mapping can not be arbitrarily long. The PI
and Heinonen are analyzing the exact conditions under which this result extends
to the more general case of covering maps from the unit disk onto multiply
connected domains. To this end, we explore the uniform thickness of boundaries
of domains in the complex plane, a condition that is measurably stronger than
uniform perfectness. Part II is a project that consists of generalizing
Jorgensen's inequality to discrete quasiconformal groups acting on the
n-dimensional unit sphere. Such a generalized Jorgensen inequality would make it
possible to extend fundamental aspects of the rich theory known in the Kleinian
case to the setting of quasiconformal groups. A natural question (with Gaven
Martin) for example is: Under what assumptions is a discrete quasiconformal
group isomorphic to a Kleinian group? In part III, the PI is working on
questions concerning the dynamical action of a discrete quasiconformal group
acting on the n-dimensional unit ball. A portion of this project is joint with
Edward Taylor. We are exploring local properties of the Hausdorff dimension of
limit sets of discrete quasiconformal groups. One of our questions is, for
example, to find the relation between the local Hausdorff dimension of the limit
set and the local Poincare exponent of the group. Another question involves
limit sets of infinite index subgroups of discrete groups.

The theory of discrete groups of Mobius transformations is especially beautiful
as it intertwines geometry, analysis, and topology. This proposal is part of an
ongoing program to study the interaction of geometry and analysis in the setting
of discrete quasiconformal groups and more generally, in geometric function
theory. The study of Kleinian groups (discrete groups of Mobius transformations)
goes back to the 18th century, when it was developed by such mathematicians as
Gauss, Lobachevsky, Klein, and Poincare. One of our goals is to analyze the
thickness of the set of chaotic behavior of a Kleinian group (and more general
sets) and to investigate under what assumptions such sets are uniformly thick.
Another goal is to explore how certain analytically and geometrically defined
properties change as one enlarges the class of Kleinian groups. The enlarged
class of groups that we are mainly interested in is the class of discrete
quasiconformal groups. One objective is to analyze how one can quantify the
concept of discreteness in the class of quasiconformal groups. Another goal is
to relate the conformal action of a quasiconformal group on the boundary of
hyperbolic space to its action on hyperbolic space. Much of our work is inspired
by analogous conjectures and developments in the field of hyperbolic geometry.




