
* 0070044
* Topics in Complex and Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2000,06/17/2002
* Carlos Berenstein,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 160,621.00

Professor Berenstein intends to continue his research in several problems of
complex analysis, commutative algebra, and integral geometry. For instance, the
membership problem, which consists of deciding whether a polynomial belongs to a
given ideal, appears in robotics, control theory and computational geometry. For
that reason, it is of great interest to estimate its complexity and obtain a
priori knowledge about its solvability. Using methods from complex analysis
(multidimensional residues, integral representation formulas), Berenstein, in
collaboration with Yger, has already obtained important results in this area.
For instance, sharp estimates about the degrees and sizes of the coefficients of
n-variable polynomials solving Hilbert's Nullstellensatz for fields of arbitrary
characteristics. Berenstein plans to continue working on these problems and
solve related questions in trancedental number theory. Several problems in
tomography will also be investigated by Prof. Berenstein. For instance, an
algorithm that allows a significant reduction in the radiation dosage for CAT
scans was obtained by Berenstein with Walnut et al. (A patent will be awarded to
this invention). Continuation of this work, with possible applications to lung
cancer detection is envisioned. Electrical impedance tomography is another kind
of non-intrusive medical imaging and also used in the detection of cracks in
materials. The geodesic Radon transform in the hyperbolic plane plays a role in
the algorithms. Another imaging problem lies at the heart of the Pompeiu
transform, which models a homogeneous detector of arbitrary geometrical shape.
Earlier work on this problem, done jointly with Gay, has lead both to the
consideration of problems of complex analysis in the Heisenberg group, as well
as several other questions of non-destructive evaluation of materials.
