
* 0070774
* Quantum Statistical Mechanics of Lattice Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/15/2000,05/14/2002
* Bruno Nachtergaele,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 118,989.00

ABSTRACT

Nachtergaele will work on a variety of problems in quantum statistical
mechanics. In a first group of problems he will study quantum spin systems as
models for magnetic materials. The main focus here is on equilibrium and non-
equilibrium properties of domain walls and other structures such as droplets.
With Messager, he proposes a new quantum solid-on-solid model for the 111
interface in the Heisenberg XXZ ferromagnet. For this model the stability of the
interface at strictly positive temperatures will be studied. The universality of
fluctuations of interfaces will be investigated in a class of one-dimensional
models. Another goal is to prove the existence of droplets in quantum spin
models at zero temperature and to make first steps towards the study of their
dynamics. In continuum quantum statistical mechanics Nachtergaele will work on
the derivation of the Euler equations from the Schroedinger dynamics of
interacting fermions, and on a characterization of the various types of Bose
condensation. The latter is a project in collaboration with Zagrebnov and Bru.
The first is work already begun with HT Yau. Quantum statistical mechanics is an
area of growing interest because many of the phenomena that are being discovered
and studied today in condensed matter physics and material science are
intrinsically quantum mechanical: Bose condensation, superfluidity,
superconductivity, quantum optics, quantum computation, and many of the most
interesting aspects of magnetism at the microscopic scale. In addition to the
implications in material science, this work will provide new insights in
fundamental problems of quantum statistical mechanics and lead to analytical
methods for their solution. The mathematical models of quantum statistical
mechanics, though related to problems in partial differential equations,
representation theory, spectral theory of operators, and probability theory,
pose new mathematical challenges of their own. Many fascinating questions have
so far resisted existing analytical and numerical methods. The results of this
project will contribute to our understanding of the fundamental mathematical
structures of quantum mechanical models and, in the long run, may lead to
innovations in numerical work on quantum mechanical models, which is
increasingly needed in pure and applied science.
