
* 0070586
* Self-Similarity, Tiling, and Wavelets
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2000,04/19/2002
* Yang Wang,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 113,937.00

ABSTRACT This proposal concerns several interrelated areas of mathematics: self-
affine tiles and reptiles, refinable functions and wavelets, spectral sets, and
mathematical quasicrystals. Although the subjects may appear to be rather
distant from each other, the proposal actually has a very coherent central
theme, which is self-similarity and tiling, and using analytical techniques to
study them. The theme occurs naturally in self-affine tiles and reptiles, and in
the branch of quasicrystal questions the PI proposes here. It occurs, although
less obviously, in refinable functions and in spectral sets. The refinement
equation satisfied by a refinable function is a generalized self-similarity, and
it is closely related to self-affine tiles and self-similar measures. Spectral
sets, on the other hand, are closely tied with tiling, as it is conjectured that
a set is a spectral set if and only if it tiles by translation. A self-similar
tile is one that can be disected into several pieces such that all pieces are
identical in shape and are similar to the original tile. The simplest example of
such a tile is the square, which can be disected into 4 identical squares half
in dimension of the original square. By repeated inflation and disecting of a
self-similar tile we can cover a larger and larger area, and this results a
self-similar tiling. Self-similar tilings are fascinating, and many of the
aperiodic tiles discovered in recent years, such as the Penrose aperiodic tiles,
can be viewed as generalized self-similar tiles. Furthermore, self-similar
tilings have been linked to quasicrystals, materials whose atomic structures are
aperiodic rather than the usual periodic structures. It is not clear how these
types of atomic structure are formed, but models have been conceived by
physicists using aperiodic tiles.


