
* 0070538
* Nonperturbative methods for quasiperiodic discrete Schroedinger equations on the line
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,05/26/2000
* Wilhelm Schlag,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2003
* USD 98,214.00

ABSTRACT: This proposal deals with various aspects of discrete Schroedinger
equations on the one dimensional lattice with deterministic potentials. So far,
in collaboration with Jean Bourgain and Michael Goldstein, the author has
considered quasi-periodic potentials given by ergodic shifts on tori, potentials
obtained by means of the skew-shift on the two torus, as well as potentials
defined in terms of strongly mixing dynamics, such as the doubling map on the
circle or hyperbolic automorphisms on the two torus. In each of these cases,
positivity of the Lyapunov exponent, regularity of the integrated density of
states, and Anderson localization were studied. At this point, we are planning
to address several remaining questions, including the following ones: 1) Is the
Lyapunov exponent positive in case of skew-shift potentials for small disorder ?
2) Is it possible to obtained detailed information on the nature of the
eigenfunctions in the quasi-periodic case assuming only positivity of the
Lyapunov exponent ? In fact, do the non perturbative techniques allow the
definition of the essential support as described in the perturbative regime by
Sinai and Froehlich, Spencer, Wittwer ? These questions are intimately linked
with Y. G. Sinai's recent work on "anomalous transport in quasi-periodic media",
and would provide better and more precise information on the subdiffusive
behavior of the random walk considered by Sinai. 3) Is it possible to extend the
nonperturbative methods to strips, or the two-dimensional plane ? 4) Is the
integrated density of states Holder continuous in the case of several
frequencies or the skew-shift ? 5) What can be said about the statistics of the
level-spacings of the eigen values for the case of the skew-shift ?

Historically, the study of random Schroedinger operators started with Phil
Anderson's work in the late 1950's, for which he received the Nobel prize.
Before his work it was believed that small random impurities in a crystal would
not significantly change its conductance. Anderson, however, showed that this is
not the case: Arbitrarily small random impurities occurring independently at
each lattice site turn a conductor into an insulator. Since his work, which was
not mathematically rigorous, the development of a precise theory of "Anderson
localization" has been pursued by many mathematicians. It turned out that there
were connections with deep results from several areas of mathematics. For
example, Fuerstenberg's theorem on products of random matrices was a crucial
tool in the development of the theory. These works attracted the attention of
physicists, particularly experts in statistical mechanics. To this day, there is
an active and fruitful exchange of ideas between mathematicians and physicists
in this subject. In fact, the interest in random phenomena and methods has
intensified quite notably in physics in recent years, as many important problems
posed by statistical mechanics have proved to be rather deep mathematical
challenges whose solution has lead to significant advances of probabilistic
techniques. It is our hope that the projects set forth in this proposal will
further advance our insight into the models of statistical mechanics as well as
providing useful tools for mathematicians working in ergodic theory, analysis,
and mathematical physics.








