
* 0070623
* Nonlinear Equations, Weighted Norm Inequalities, and Best Constants in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,07/17/2000
* Igor Verbitsky,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 89,913.00

ABSTRACT:

The proposed research is concerned with the investigation of certain classes of
nonlinear partial differential and integral equations, and related weighted norm
inequalities. A systematic use will be made of function spaces intrinsically
connected with the problems involved, dyadic linear and nonlinear models,
nonlinear potential theory, quasimetrics on spaces of homogeneous and
nonhomogeneous type (without the doubling property), and other means of modern
analysis. The main goal is to characterize completely the solvability problem
(i.e., find necessary and matching sufficient conditions), and obtain sharp
estimates for solutions of nonlinear elliptic and parabolic PDEs with very
general coefficients at the lower order terms and data, as well as for nonlinear
integral operators with general kernels. Linear problems for operators of
Schrodinger type with general potentials (possibly complex valued distributions)
will be considered as well. A good control of the constants involved is an
essential part of this study. In particular, a special attention will be paid to
best constant inequalities which appear in related problems of harmonic analysis
and operator theory.

Many questions considered in the proposed research are motivated by studies in
mathematical physics, control theory, and stochastic processes. As a result,
sharp inequalities and criteria of solvability will be found for equations and
operators which describe important phenomena with linear and nonlinear sources
appearing in quantum physics, fluid flow, heat transfer, and electromagnetism
problems.


