
* 0071759
* Multiple Trigonometric Series and Multiple Walsh Series
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2000,06/14/2002
* Marshall Ash,IL,DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2003
* USD 116,115.00

Proposal Abstract

A square partial sum of a double trigonometric series is the sum of all the
terms with both indices less than or equal to a fixed value. Our first goal is
to study square uniqueness for double trigonometric series. By this we mean that
if the sequence of square partial sums of a double trigonometric series
converges to zero everywhere, then the series is necessarily the trivial series.
If this is true, we will then try to generalize this result to higher
dimensions. The corresponding statements for circular/spherical convergence have
been shown by Shapiro in dimension 2 and by Bourgain in higher dimensions; and
by Ash-Freiling-Rinne and, independently, Tetunashvili for the unrestrictedly
rectangular convergence case in any dimension. There is some evidence that
square uniqueness may actually be false. For example, there is an everywhere
square convergent double trigonometric series with coefficients having faster
than polynomial growth rate. Our second goal is to study a related question:
uniqueness for multiple Walsh series under different types of summation modes.
The new approach we will take is to use classical harmonic analysis methods. By
combining the traditional martingale approach with the new techniques developed
from recent progress made in the area of multiple trigonometric series, we
expect much progress can be made here. This in turn may give insights into the
square uniqueness question for trigonometric series. The third goal is to study
the long standing open question about the pointwise circular convergence for
Fourier series of square integrable functions. We will try to shed some light on
this by studying the corresponding question for double Walsh series, which are
special form of tree-index and two parameter martingales.

Almost any surface is composed of simpler ones by a process called multiple
Fourier analysis. A major long standing problem in pure mathematics is to show
that this construction can be accomplished in only one way. This is called the
problem of uniqueness. There are about a half dozen main varieties of this
problem depending on just how the simpler surfaces are combined to make the
general surface. Gathering the simple surfaces in different orders may lead to
different resultant surfaces. For certain gathering procedures, uniqueness has
been proved. That is, for such gathering, there is only one way to produce the
resultant surface. The most important gathering procedure for which the
uniqueness remains an open question is called square convergence. We will try to
determine if uniqueness holds for this procedure. Another way to construct a
surface is to build it up as a combination of two dimensional oscillating square
waves. Such a process is called a multiple Walsh series. We will consider the
uniqueness question in this context also. We hope that understanding one of the
two methods of construction may lead to insights about the other.


