
* 0071402
* The Novikov and Exactness Conjectures for Discrete Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,06/26/2000
* Erik Guentner,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/28/2002
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract Guentner

The proposed research comprises two distinct projects; the relationship between
the Novikov and exactness conjectures for discrete groups, and the use of global
analytic techniques to study quantum mechanical systems. The first is motivated
by the observation that the classes of groups for which the Novikov and
exactness conjectures are known coincide to a large degree; both classes contain
amenable groups, hyperbolic groups and Coxeter groups, for example. This project
is joint with J. Kaminker. The second is based on the idea that the Berezin-
Toeplitz quantization can be analyzed using spectral properties of family of
Dirac-type operators. This project is joint with J. Trout.

The Novikov conjecture, one of the most important problems in topology, has
stimulated a tremendous amount of mathematical research over the last thirty
years. The exactness conjecture is purely analytic. That there could exist a
connection between these two conjectures from entirely different branches of
mathematics is somewhat surprising, but nevertheless is supported by empirical
evidence. We plan to develop more fully the relationship between these
conjectures. This research has bearing on a number of important outstanding
problems including the Baum-Connes Conjecture. At the heart of the connection
between mathematics and physics is the theory of quantum mechanics. We propose a
new method to analyze quantum mechanical systems based on geometric properties
of certain systems of differential equations. This work should lead to a better
understanding of a number of quantum mechanical systems from mathematical
physics.


