
* 0072098
* Stochastic and Quantum Dynamics of Large Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/2000,06/14/2002
* Horng-Tzer Yau,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 350,575.00

0072098 Yau

The Euler equations were derived from microscopic Newtonian dynamics
heuristically by Morrey in the sixties and rigorously by Olla-Varadhan-Yau
recently (assuming the Boltzmann hypothesis). The first part of the project
proposes to change the underlying dynamics to quantum mechanics. The aim is to
show that the Euler equations obtained in the quantum case are similar to the
classical ones except all physical quantities should be computed quantum
mechanically. The approach will be based on the relative entropy method and
certain extension of large deviation theory to the quantum case. The second part
of the project concerns the dynamics of an electron interacting with a lattice
structure, modeled by a phonon field. Therefore, its dynamics is governed by a
Schrodinger equation of an electron coupled to a scalar quantum field. The goal
is to prove that the phase space density of the electron converges to a
Boltzmann equation in the weak coupling limit.

The underlying dynamics for electrons in a material are governed by quantum
mechanics, or more precisely the Schrodinger equations. Since the Schrodinger
equations are difficult to solve no matter analytically or numerically, most
models in use nowadays for transport behavior of electrons are semi-classical
ones based on classical particles and diffusions. Although these semi-classical
models are valid approximations for large distance behavior, they neglect
crucial quantum effects in small scales. The aim of this project is to study the
transport behavior starting from the first principle---the Schrodinger
equations. In particular, the validity of the Euler and Boltzmann equations will
be established from the Schrodinger equations. This is the first step toward
understanding the quantum effects in transport behavior. The long term goal is
to understand quantum corrections to these equations.
