
* 0074037
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Transportation: Its Geometry and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2000,09/09/2004
* Wilfrid Gangbo,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 950,000.00

ABSTRACT:

Optimal Transportation: Its Geometry and Applications

This project focuses on the analysis of a collection of variational optimization
and dynamical evolution problems centered around the theme of optimal
transportation --- which enters the dynamical setting whenever the evolution
conserves a scalar locally. The central problem can be sketched as follows:
Given a distribution of iron mines throughout the countryside, and a
distribution of factories which require iron ore, decide which mines should
supply ore to each factory in order to minimize the total transportation costs.
Here the cost per ton of ore transported from the mine at x to factory at y is
specified by a function c(x,y) --- so the problem can be formulated as a linear
program. However, when the mines and factories are distributed continuously
throughout Euclidean space or a curved landscape with obstacles --- and the cost
is related to the distance on this landscape, then the problem has a rich
structure and deep connections to geometry and non-linear PDE which have only
begun to be explored. Incarnations of this problem embed in current models for
surprisingly diverse phenomena. Along with basic questions concerning the
structure and qualitative features of optimal mappings, the proposed research
addresses models for front formation in the atmosphere, dissipative
equilibration in kinetic theory, fluid flow, elastic crystals, and granular
materials, geometric and dynamical inequalities, and microeconomic decision
problems formulated in the principal-agent framework which involve designing
price systems, tax structures, or contracts in the face of informational
asymmetry.

After half a century of mathematical neglect, the past decade witnessed a
revival of interest in optimal transportation, and watched as it blossomed into
a fertile field of investigation as well as a vibrant tool for exploring diverse
applications within and beyond mathematics.The transformation occurred partly
because long-standing issues could finally be resolved, but also because
unexpected connections were discovered which linked these questions to problems
in physics, geometry, computer vision, partial differential equations, earth
science and economics. The time is ripe for a collaborative effort on an
international scale to explore existing connections and unearth new ones, while
simultaneously developing the basic theory of optimal maps and introducing
students and colleagues to the challenges and promise of the field --- thus for
the formation of a focused research group with these goals. The core of our plan
is to arrange sustained interactions between and around members of the group,
who in addition to collaborating scientifically, will work together over the
next several years to create the research environment and manpower necessary for
transportation research to flourish. To achieve this goal, we plan to organize a
series of three semester long periods of emphasis and two workshops on different
aspects of the subject in several of our home institutions. Furthermore, we plan
to share the responsibilities of training graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, by using funds from the grant to support young researchers while
allowing them to divide their time between their home institutions and the
semesters of emphasis. This unique arrangement will give participants access to
an unusually broad assortment of perspectives and expertise. Moreover, we
believe a three-year nurturing window for young researchers to learn the subject
and become involved --- if established now - will ultimately advance progress in
the field by more than a decade.


