
* 0087339
* The Role of Gaussian Curvature in Harmonic Analysis and Related Areas
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2000,07/20/2000
* Alex Iosevich,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2003
* USD 77,000.00

ABSTRACT: The author proposes to study a set of problems in harmonic analysis
and related areas where the Gaussian curvature, the determinant of the
differential of the Gauss map taking the point on a hypersurface to the unit
normal at that point, plays an important role. More specifically, the author
proposes to study the following three basic problems: regularity of averages
over surfaces, distribution of lattice points in convex domains, and the
existence of orthogonal exponential bases for domains in Euclidean space. In the
context of averages over surfaces, we propose to find a set of necessary and
sufficient conditions for the Lebesgue space boundedness of these averages in
terms of natural and easily computable geometric criteria. In the context of
lattice points in convex domains, we propose to compute a sharp rate of growth
for the discrepancy between the volume of a dilated convex body and the number
of lattice points trapped inside, again in terms of natural geometric properties
of the boundary. In the context of orthogonal exponential bases, we propose to
make progress towards the proof of the Fuglede Conjecture, which says that a
domain has orthogonal exponential basis if and only if it is possible to tile
Euclidean space with disjoint translates of this domain. Combinatorial and
number theoretic methods are expected to play an important role.

The study of the maximal averaging operators and other similar operators in
harmonic analysis is partially motivated by the following interesting question:
How close can we come to recovering a set of data from the various kinds of
averages of that data? The question is of potential practical value since
scientists are often called upon to make predictions based on average
information. For example, meteorologists make predictions about the rainfall in
a particular location based on the average rainfall in years past in nearby
towns. Seismologists make earthquake predictions based on the pattern of shocks
in the surrounding area. The tradeoff involved in the study of these phenomena
is, roughly speaking, the following. If the data is very precise, then it can,
generally speaking, be recovered from any kind of a reasonable average. If the
data is less precise, then we have to make sure that the averaging process
compensates for the deficiencies of the data. The main thrust of this project is
to study the averaging phenomenon when the data is given by a certain kind of a
mathematical function, and the average is taken over a curved surface. The study
of the distribution of lattice points in convex domains and the associated
discrepancy function is motivated by the desire to approximate discrete
information, for example integer points in the plane, by more easily computable
continuous information, in this case the area. Finally, the study of orthogonal
exponential bases is motivated by an important practical problem of
approximating functions by trigonometric functions. These types of
approximations have numerous applications in physics, engineering, and many
other areas of science and technology.




