
* 0088935
* Renormalization in Dynamical Systems and Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,07/10/2000
* Hans Koch,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 77,880.00

Professor Koch is investigating critical behavior in Hamiltonian systems and
models from statistical mechanics. Such behavior appears to be attributed not to
individual systems, but to manifolds of systems. In the renormalization group
approach to these phenomena, one attempts to identify these manifolds as the
invariant manifolds of a transformation acting on the space of systems
considered. Such a "renormalization group transformation", acting on
Hamiltonians, was introduced in a previous project. It is expected to have a
nontrivial fixed point, whose stable manifold describes the critical breakup of
certain invariant tori. One of the main goals is to prove the existence of such
a fixed point. The proposed method involves the use of a computer, to carry out
the large number of estimates that will be needed. Another goal is to use the
known or anticipated properties of the fixed point in order to describe critical
invariant tori and nearby periodic orbits. Extensions of renormalization group
methods to other (problems in) Hamiltonian systems will be investigated as well.
Some interesting formal connections with quantum field theory and statistical
mechanics also suggest new ways of approaching old problems in these areas. One
of the long term goals in this area is to gain a better understanding of the
critical behavior of Ising type models. The approach here is to find and study
suitable improvements of the corresponding hierarchical model. Other interesting
questions concern the hierarchical model itself, and two fixed point problems
relevant to disordered media.

Much of this project is related to the question of stability in classical
Hamiltonian systems. Examples are coupled oscillators, certain plasma beams, and
models from celestial mechanics. In the case of two degrees of freedom,
quasiperiodic orbits that trace out smooth invariant tori divide phase space
into regions from which other trajectories cannot escape, thus adding to the
stability of the system. The breakup of such tori, as system parameter are
varied, can cause the dynamics to become locally unstable or chaotic. Numerical
studies reveal that this happens in a highly universal way, with certain
measurable quantities taking exactly the same values, within a large class of
systems. The standard explanation of these findings is based on the assumption
that there exists a nontrivial Hamiltonian system that is invariant under a
suitable "renormalization group transformation". The goal here is to prove that
this assumption is correct. Part of the proof will be carried out by a computer.
This work should yield valuable insight into the mechanism behind the observed
phenomena, and at the same time, advance the state of the art in computer-
assisted proofs -- a technique that will undoubtedly play an important role in
the future of mathematical research. Similar universality phenomena are
associated with phase transitions in condensed matter physics, and models from
several other areas in mathematics and physics. A more general form of
universality -- the fact that macroscopic descriptions are possible without the
exact knowledge of microscopic details -- is in fact at the heart of physics and
other sciences. The projects under investigation are part of a long term effort
to understand such phenomena, and to describe them mathematically. A correct
mathematical description can also be expected to lead to significant
improvements in numerical algorithms.


