
* 0088922
* Scattering Theory on Manifolds
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,07/12/2000
* Tanya Christiansen,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 73,493.00

The P.I. studies problems in scattering theory. Some involve resonances, complex
numbers which for many problems on noncompact domains are natural analogs of
eigenvalues. Of particular interest to the P.I. are lower bounds on the number
of resonances and the existence of asymptotic expansions of solutions to the
wave equation in terms of resonances when there is trapping. The investigator
will also study the problem of determining the asymptotic expansion of a
perturbation of a stratified sound speed from knowledge of the scattering matrix
at fixed energy. Another problem of interest is understanding the relationship
between the sojourn times of geodesics and the scattering matrix for manifolds
with cylindrical ends.

The investigator studies questions that are related to wave propagation.
Resonances can be viewed as giving the energy and rate of decay of waves. The
P.I. studies the distribution of resonances and their relationship to the long-
time behaviour of waves. Another area of interest to the P.I. is inverse
scattering theory, which involves recovering information about a an obstacle or
perturbation from measurements made "far away" of waves affected by the
obstacle. Taken in a broad sense, this has found many applications, including
radar, medical imaging, and underground exploration.


