
* 0098565
* Viscosity solution methods in partial differential equations and applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,06/22/2001
* Andrzej Swiech,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2004
* USD 84,000.00

The proposal concentrates on the analysis of certain classes of nonlinear
partial differential equations and their applications. Linking them together is
the notion of viscosity solution. Part of the proposal focuses on equations of
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) type that are related to optimal control of
stochastic partial differential equations. The HJB equations associated with
their control are equations in infinite dimensional spaces. The theory of such
equations is not well developed. The principal investigator (PI) studies them in
the project paying special attention to several equations related to problems of
particular interest. One of such problems is optimal control of fluid flow that
can be reformulated as optimal control of deterministic or stochastic Navier-
Stokes equations. Another problem comes from mathematical finance and is related
to option pricing. It includes analysis of infinite dimensional equivalent of
``Black-Scholes" equation and its nonlinear version, so called ``Black-Scholes-
Barenblatt" equation. HJB equations in Hilbert (or Banach) spaces are the key to
the dynamic programming analysis of optimal control problems of systems driven
by partial differential equations. These HJB equations must be investigated from
the point of view of generalized solutions. Viscosity solutions should provide
the right approach to such equations and the proposed research should be an
important ingredient in setting the stage for optimal control of infinite
dimensional stochastic systems. The PI also proposes to investigate a class of
fully nonlinear non-divergence form uniformly elliptic equations that includes
generalizations of quasilinear equations and certain equations of geometric
type, an important class in the elliptic theory. Such equations have not been
studied systematically, especially when they are discontinuous in the spatial
variable. The equations do not have classical solutions and the PI wants to
extend the theory of so called L^p-viscosity solutions to this class. In
particular the PI plans to investigate the question of regularity of solutions
of such equations. This is a major open problem of elliptic partial differential
equations and the PI proposes several possible new approaches to it that may
give rise to new and interesting techniques.

The notion of viscosity solution is one of the main tools of nonlinear partial
differential equations and it has found applications in areas as diverse as
optimal control, image processing, moving fronts and phase transitions,
statistical mechanics, economics, mathematical finance. The motivation for
studying some problems described in the proposal comes from optimal control,
especially control of stochastic partial differential equations. Their theory is
in a state of rapid development and is fueled by modeling questions coming from
physics, population biology, chemistry, and economics and mathematical finance.
The problem of optimal control of fluid flow is one of the basic engineering
problems and has numerous applications in areas like combustion theory, aero and
hydrodynamic control, Tokomak magnetic fusion, ocean and atmospheric prediction
just to name a few. Problems related to the Musiela model of interest rates come
from the modern theory of option pricing. The research of the project should
contribute to the development of new directions in partial differential
equations and should also have impact on the applied areas mentioned above.
