
* 0099881
* Topics in Linear and Multilinear Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,06/11/2003
* Loukas Grafakos,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 111,579.00

The author proposes to study a variety of problems in harmonic analysis related
to linear and multilinear singular integral operators. More specifically, the
principal investigator proposes to embark on a study of multipliers for
translation-invariant multilinear operators, both broad enough to cover known
examples, but also deep enough to include very singular operators such as the
bilinear Hilbert transform. A key point of the author's research will be the
characteristic function of the unit disc thought of as a bilinear multiplier and
its relation to other important operators in Fourier analysis such as the ball
multiplier and Carleson's operator. A related study of maximal multilinear
multipliers will also be pursued. Deep relations between Carleson's operator in
two dimensions and the maximal disc multiplier will be sought. In particular it
will be investigated whether the analysis developed in the study of the maximal
bilinear disc multiplier will shed light on the problem of almost everywhere
convergence of Fourier series in two dimensions. Problems in linear harmonic
analysis that will be investigated include estimates for rough singular
integrals and sharp inequalities for operators such as the discrete Hilbert
transform and the Balayage operator associated with Carleson measures.

In music, harmonics are simple tones whose oscillations are integral multiples
of a simple basic frequency and these can be used to disassemble arrangements of
complicated sounds. In mathematics, harmonic analysis has a similar objective
i.e. the study of complicated objects via their decomposition into simpler well-
understood basic blocks. Irregularities of signals and images are better located
once these are decomposed into small pieces and studied via Fourier analysis.
For instance, noise and blurring are easily located with the application of the
Fourier transform, but nowadays even more challenging feats can be achieved.
This proposal is concerned with the study of certain linear and multilinear
multiplier operators using decomposition techniques. Multiplier operators are
defined by altering the frequency of signals via multiplication with a fixed and
often nonsmooth function. In practice, the abrupt interruption of radio
communication or television transmission by a meteorological phenomenon are
examples of such nonsmooth multiplier operators. The protection against the loss
of information can be mathematically modeled in a quantitative way
(integrability to a power) which is proposed to be studied here. This
constitutes the first goal of the proposed research. A secondary issue
considered in this proposal is obtaining sharp estimates for some important and
useful inequalities. Sharp estimates enrich our understanding of these
inequalities as they often reflect useful esoteric combinatorial or geometric
information. Furthermore, they provide improved error estimates often needed in
numerical implementation.


