
* 0099366
* Asymptotic structures in Banach spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,03/15/2002
* Edward Odell,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 97,500.00

The geometry of a separable infinite dimensional Banach space X can be studied
and better understood through a study of its spreading models and asymptotic
structure (those finite dimensional bases that can be found inside X, but
arbitrarily spread out). Knowledge of these structures does not always pass
through to infinite dimensional information about X but sometimes, surprisingly,
it does. The author will study a number of open problems of this nature using
the tools of infinite combinatorics, analysis and logic. For example if a Banach
space has only one spreading model, must it contain a copy of one of the
classical Banach spaces?

This project concerns the study of the geometry of normed linear spaces. The
easiest example of such a space is ordinary three dimensional Euclidean space.
However one may, even in two or three dimensions, have other geometries than
Euclidean. For example in the "taxicab" space distances between points in the
plane are computed by traveling the shortest route along roads that run only
horizontally or vertically. In this geometry the set of all points equidistant
from a fixed point is diamond shaped rather than a circle. Applications of such
alternate geometries are numerous in physics, engineering, signal processing and
many other sciences. The state of a system or a signal may be given by a
sequence of numbers and one may have to have a way of computing the distance
between two states or signals to see how close they are. And in these
applications one has to often use finite dimensional spaces of larger dimension
than three or even spaces of infinite dimension. The author will be exploring
the latter case by studying the "asymptotic" structures of these alternate
geometries. This is a method of linking finite and infinite dimensional
structure. The techniques to be used are a combination of analysis, infinitary
combinatorics and logic. The problems that arise could also impact and motivate
development in these latter areas as well.
