
* 0099609
* Cacciopoli Sets, Capacities and Quasiconformal Mappings in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,04/17/2001
* Zoltan Balogh,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 91,400.00

We propose to investigate three fundamental problems arising in Analysis on
Carnot-Caratheodory spaces. The first question is from geometric measure theory.
It is related to Cacciopoli sets and their characteristic locus with
applications to minimal surfaces. The second problem is from non-linear
potential theory and sub-elliptic PDE related to sharp capacity estimates. The
third question concerns the integrability and Hausdorff dimension distortion of
quasiconformal mappings in Carnot-Caratheodory spaces. The fundamental
difficulty in this theory lies in the fact that in Carnot-Caratheodory spaces we
can only work with a restricted number of differential operators (corresponding
to admissible directions) while in Euclidean analysis all possible directions
were allowed. The underlying geometry has a fractal-like character illustrating
well the complexity and the need of new ideas for approaching the above
problems.

Due to their construction by mechanical linkages, robot motions have to satisfy
infinitesimal constrains of admissible directions. Similar differential
constrains appear in thermodynamics between the characteristic quantities
(temperature, pressure, volume, entropy and energy) describing the stage of an
ideal gas. The right mathematical context for studying these and related
phenomena from engineering and physics is the setting of Carnot-Caratheodory
spaces. The present proposal intends to develop the adequate tools of Analysis
for approaching various practical questions in this context.


