
* 0099357
* Multivariable Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2001,06/12/2002
* Raul Curto,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 117,521.00

This research project deals with five areas of multivariable operator theory:
(i) algebraic conditions for existence, uniqueness, and localization of the
support of representing measures for truncated moment problems; (ii) model
theory for 2-hyponormal operators; (iii) structure and spectral theory for
polynomially hyponormal operators; (iv) operator models over Reinhardt and
matrix Reinhardt domains; and (v) a multivariable analog of Apostol's Lemma on
hyperinvariant subspaces for contractions. Concerning the first area, Curto
plans to extend his recent work (joint with L. Fialkow) on flat extensions of
positive moment matrices, which has led to a general framework for the study of
truncated complex moment problems. He plans to apply these methods to study the
case of singular moment matrices, and to continue to analyze the question of
localization of the support of representing measures. Curto expects to settle a
conjecture on the solubility index of a truncated moment sequence, and to
characterize quadrature domains in terms of their moment matrices. As part of
(ii), a model theory for 2-hyponormal operators will be sought, along the lines
of the existing theory for subnormal operators, and using as test ground recent
results on unilateral weighted shifts. In joint work with W.Y. Lee, Curto has
introduced the class of weakly subnormal operators and obtained preliminary
results on its position relative to subnormality and 2-hyponormality, including
a proof that contractive 2-hyponormal operators with closed range self-
commutator are extremal for the family of 2-hyponormal contractions. The third
area is closely related to the first two, in that both originate in Curto's work
on quadratic and joint hyponormality, which eventually led to the solution of
the subnormal completion problem for weighted shifts and to the existence of
non-subnormal polynomially hyponormal operators. Curto will seek a
characterization of polynomially hyponormal weighted shifts, a structure theorem
for quadratically hyponormal shifts, and the detection of non-subnormal
polynomially hyponormal operators through the Pincus principal function. The
fourth area deals with a Sz. Nagy-Foias dilation theory in several variables, by
extending existing results to functional Hilbert spaces over Reinhardt domains.
The suitability of multi-shifts as standard models and the validity of von
Neumann's inequality for special n-tuples will be considered. Curto plans to
extend the description of the spectral picture of multiplication operators
associated with Reinhardt measures to functional Hilbert spaces over matrix
Reinhardt domains. Finally, the fifth area deals with the invariant subspace
structure of commuting contractions on Hilbert space. Two main goals will be
pursued: (a) an extension to the Taylor spectrum of results on spectral
dominance currently available only for the Harte spectrum, and (b) an analog of
Apostol's Theorem in several variables.

Multivariable operator theory is a rapidly evolving area of mathematics, with
deep and significant connections with areas of differential geometry, topology,
complex analysis, and algebraic geometry, and with exciting applications to
engineering, quantum and relativistic mechanics, and computational mathematics.
The theory of truncated moment problems provide easily accessible formulas for
the evaluation of areas and volumes of complex regions, of moments of inertia
and centers of gravity. Dilation theory and invariant subspace theory are
essential tools in the description of algebraic properties of elaborate physical
or engineering systems, and the study of transformations on function spaces has
often led to the solution of problems in control theory, intimately tied to
systems theory and electrical engineering. Our research project is aimed at
resolving some outstanding problems in multivariable operator theory, while
creating recruitment and retention opportunities for women and minorities to
pursue careers in mathematics, by engaging their participation in projects
related to the interaction of mathematics with other sciences.




