
* 0100538
* Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,08/17/2004
* Lai-Sang Young,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical systems are proposed. Each
project contains a cluster of problems with a common theme. The first pertains
to strange attractors with strong dissipation and a single direction of
instability. Extensions of a general theory developed under a previous grant to
arbitrary phase-dimensions are proposed, as are applications to concrete
problems such as nonlinear oscillators. The second project concerns the
statistical behavior of dynamical systems with predominantly hyperbolic
behavior. The focus of the proposed research is on mechanisms leading to various
rates of correlation decay in both discrete and continuous times. The topic of
the third project is lattice dynamical systems. A systematic analysis of the
aggregate behavior of large numbers of dynamical systems coupled together is
proposed. The final project proposes dynamical systems methods of solution for
three unrelated problems on the Schrodinger operator, kinematic fast dynamo and
Navier-Stokes equations.

As a branch of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with the time
evolutions of processes governed by certain underlying laws. A primary goal of
the subject is to develop unifying mathematical theories to explain observed
phenomena and predict future occurrences. In this proposal, the investigation of
a number of models amenable to mathematical analysis and with potential
applications to the physical and biological sciences is proposed. It has been
known for some time that relatively simple laws can lead to complicated
dynamics. The first part of this proposal focuses on systems with chaotic
behavior. Two topics are proposed: an analysis of strange attractors and a
statistical theory of mixing. (Strange attractors are highly complex objects
which capture the long term behaviors of dissipative dynamical systems; they
have been observed frequently in nature and in simulations but have thus far
resisted rigorous analysis.) Other projects proposed include the relations
between aggregate properties of large dynamical systems and those of their
individual components, and a few problems from physics and hydrodynamics which
the principal investigator believes can be solved by the methods of dynamical
systems. Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical systems are
proposed. Each project contains a cluster of problems with a common theme. The
first pertains to strange attractors with strong dissipation and a single
direction of instability. Extensions of a general theory developed under a
previous grant to arbitrary phase-dimensions are proposed, as are applications
to concrete problems such as nonlinear oscillators. The second project concerns
the statistical behavior of dynamical systems with predominantly hyperbolic
behavior. The focus of the proposed research is on mechanisms leading to various
rates of correlation decay in both discrete and continuous times. The topic of
the third project is lattice dynamical systems. A systematic analysis of the
aggregate behavior of large numbers of dynamical systems coupled together is
proposed. The final project proposes dynamical systems methods of solution for
three unrelated problems on the Schrodinger operator, kinematic fast dynamo and
Navier-Stokes equations.

As a branch of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with the time
evolutions of processes governed by certain underlying laws. A primary goal of
the subject is to develop unifying mathematical theories to explain observed
phenomena and predict future occurrences. In this proposal, the investigation of
a number of models amenable to mathematical analysis and with potential
applications to the physical and biological sciences is proposed. It has been
known for some time that relatively simple laws can lead to complicated
dynamics. The first part of this proposal focuses on systems with chaotic
behavior. Two topics are proposed: an analysis of strange attractors and a
statistical theory of mixing. (Strange attractors are highly complex objects
which capture the long term behaviors of dissipative dynamical systems; they
have been observed frequently in nature and in simulations but have thus far
resisted rigorous analysis.) Other projects proposed include the relations
between aggregate properties of large dynamical systems and those of their
individual components, and a few problems from physics and hydrodynamics which
the principal investigator believes can be solved by the methods of dynamical
systems.
