
* 0100576
* Operatory Theory and Systems Engineering
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
* 07/01/2001,04/23/2003
* J. William Helton,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 239,072.00

ABSTRACT NONLINEAR OPERATOR THEORY. The goal is to find canonical "nonlinear
generalizations" of analytic function theory and the related parts of linear
operator theory. Many classical and many new analytic function theorems have a
statement purely in terms of linear operators. The surprising thing is that
these theorems about linear operators do not actually require linearity, and it
has become clear that there will be extensive nonlinear generalizations of them.
This wide open area is close to control theory. COMPUTER OPERATOR ALGEBRA.
Linear engineering systems theory and operator theory are rife with calculations
in a noncommutative algebra. Helton's group with M. Stankus are major providers
of software (called NCAlgebra) for performing general noncommutative
calculations in Mathematica. One phase of the software is at the level of a very
powerful `yellow pad', and contains numerous algorithms they developed. For
example, the "noncommutative convexity" algorithm discussed below will go in. In
another phase there is extensive software implementing noncommutative Groebner
basis algorithms due to Mora and algorithms for sorting and "shrinking" the
output in various ways ( this is crucial in the noncommutative case). Since the
techniques are new, experimentation on traditional problems is important.
NONCOMMUTATIVE INEQUALITIES. Recently, Helton and collaborators made progress on
a theory and resulting algorithm which takes a rational function F of
noncommutative variables Z and outputs a family of inequalities which determine
a domain G of Z on which F is "matrix convex". Decidedly non-trivial is showing
that the domain G determined by the algorithm is "the largest possible" domain
of matrix convexity for F. This is a first attempt at an automatic method for
what engineers now do with Schur complement tricks to convert a design problem
to Linear Matrix Inequalities. OPTIMIZATION OVER SPACES OF ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS.
Qualitative theory, computer algorithms based on this theory, analysis of such
algorithms. These are the key optimization problems which arise in designs of
linear systems where there are competing constraints, or uncertainty in the math
model of the physical system one is trying to control.

The research is directed at several projects in parts of operator theory and
functional analysis related to engineering system theory. Linear operator theory
has had a strong interplay with analytic function theory and engineering for
many decades. Indeed most commercial software (at least in the control
engineering community) for solving analytic function problems is based on this
type of interplay between functions and matrices. One branch of analysis closely
related to applications is classical Nevanlinna-Pick- Nehari theory, or
equivalently commutant lifting theory, a part of the area called operator model
theory. The early development of this was done for the purest of mathematical
reasons, but in the mid 1970's and early 1980's this was shown to be critical to
the design of engineering systems where stability of the system is the key
constraint. This motivated much more mathematical development and now it is one
of the areas of functional analysis most closely associated with control
engineering. For many years (since Norbert Wiener) design tools optimized mean
square performance. The theory above ultimately lead to (commercially
commonplace) tools for optimizing worst case frequency domain performance. The
goal of much of the proposed research is to extend this theory in several
radically new directions and we list the main ones. HIGHLY NONLINEAR
GENERALIZATIONS; the goal is to find canonical "nonlinear generalizations" of
analytic function theory and the related parts of linear operator theory. This
wide open area is closely related to control theory. Many systems which people
wish to control are nonlinear (e.g., jet engines). NONCOMMUTATIVE COMPUTER
ALGEBRA; if a signal goes into a system A, comes out and then goes into B what
we get is BA, while if a signal goes into B and then A what we get is AB. Seldom
does AB equal BA, thus the design of engineering systems requires (heavy)
noncommutative calculations. Helton's group has a broad based effort to develop
methods and theory for computer assistance of such calculations. Inequalities
with noncommuting elements is now a major topic in engineering and Helton's
group is working out systematic methods for treating them.


