
* 0100595
* Nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,05/24/2001
* Francis Christ,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 72,000.00

The proposed research is designed to advance the recent progress on nonlinear
Hamiltonian PDE towards three goals: 1. Extend the local-in-time initial value
methods to solve more complicated PDE. 2. Adapt the initial value techniques to
treat initial-boundary value problems. 3. Construct a global-in-time theory of
nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE. The proposal identifies specific problems whose
solutions contribute to the three goals for which there are methods of attack
emerging from the last decades' spectacular progress. The studies for Goal 1 aim
to extend the sharp 1-dimensional calculus techniques for proving multilinear
estimates in Bourgain's Xs,b spaces by carrying out an incremental research
plan, involving small Xs,b denominators, spatial anisotropy and vanishing
parameters. A technique for recasting initial-boundary value problems as initial
value problems with boundary forcing has recently been developed, in
collaboration with Kenig. The range of applicability of this method is the main
topic of the proposed investigations toward Goal 2. A reinterpretation of the
L^2 conservation law for the KdV equation, obtained in collaboration with Keel,
Staffilani, Takaoka and Tao, has led to a new method for showing global
wellposedness by constructing almost conserved quantities using multilinear
harmonic analysis and the local wellposedness machinery. The third thrust of the
proposed research will exploit these quantities to understand the long-time
behavior of nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.

No specific scientific or engineering application motivates the proposed
studies; rather the intention is to contribute toward a general rigorous theory
of nonlinear phenomena including turbulence, singularity formation, scattering
and recurrence. The widespread applicability of Hamiltonian PDE, across diverse
fields of current scientific and technological significance, demonstrates the
central prominence of the proposed research to our science and engineering
infrastructure.

The proposed research is designed to advance the recent progress on nonlinear
Hamiltonian PDE towards three goals: 1. Extend the local-in-time initial value
methods to solve more complicated PDE. 2. Adapt the initial value techniques to
treat initial-boundary value problems. 3. Construct a global-in-time theory of
nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE. The proposal identifies specific problems whose
solutions contribute to the three goals for which there are methods of attack
emerging from the last decades' spectacular progress. The studies for Goal 1 aim
to extend the sharp 1-dimensional calculus techniques for proving multilinear
estimates in Bourgain's Xs,b spaces by carrying out an incremental research
plan, involving small Xs,b denominators, spatial anisotropy and vanishing
parameters. A technique for recasting initial-boundary value problems as initial
value problems with boundary forcing has recently been developed, in
collaboration with Kenig. The range of applicability of this method is the main
topic of the proposed investigations toward Goal 2. A reinterpretation of the
L^2 conservation law for the KdV equation, obtained in collaboration with Keel,
Staffilani, Takaoka and Tao, has led to a new method for showing global
wellposedness by constructing almost conserved quantities using multilinear
harmonic analysis and the local wellposedness machinery. The third thrust of the
proposed research will exploit these quantities to understand the long-time
behavior of nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.

No specific scientific or engineering application motivates the proposed
studies; rather the intention is to contribute toward a general rigorous theory
of nonlinear phenomena including turbulence, singularity formation, scattering
and recurrence. The widespread applicability of Hamiltonian PDE, across diverse
fields of current scientific and technological significance, demonstrates the
central prominence of the proposed research to our science and engineering
infrastructure.


