
* 0100737
* Discrete and Continuous Extremal Problems in Approximation Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,06/05/2001
* Edward Saff,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 11/30/2001
* USD 96,310.00

Technical Abstract:

The research will primarily focus on three areas: (i) the existence and
determination of asymptotic interpolation measures for multivariate polynomial
interpolation; (ii) inverse problems for the 2D Laplacian; (iii) asymptotics for
minimal energy points on the sphere in n-dimensional Euclidean space. Regarding
(i), the research is expected to result in algorithms for discretization of
certain algebraic curves. Concerning (ii) we will explore a new method based on
best meromorphic approximation for the nondestructive testing of homogeneous
bodies for faults (cracks). Regarding (iii), we shall investigate the limiting
behavior of point sets on the sphere generated by certain minimum energy
criteria and also devise fast algorithms for "near-optimal" point sets. In all
phases of the research, potential theory is expected to be a useful tool.

Non-technical Abstract:

The research will primarily focus on three problem areas: (i) the noninvasive
detection of faults (cracks) in homogeneous media, (ii) near-optimal
configurations of large numbers of sampling points on a sphere, and (iii) the
determination of near-optimal sampling points on certain curves. Regarding (i),
the goal is to develop an efficient algorithm (program) that utilizes only
boundary data to determine the existence and location of cracks inside a
conducting material. Concerning (ii), we shall investigate point sets on the
sphere that arise in the structural analysis of large molecules, and also serve
as well distributed locations (eg. on Earth) for sampling climate data for
global weather models. Regarding (iii), we shall explore point sets on certain
curves that can be used for geometric design and data sampling purposes.


