
* 0100078
* Measures, Dimensions and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,07/29/2003
* R. Daniel Mauldin,TX,University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 163,109.00

The project concerns deterministic and random conformal dynamical systems. This
includes the theory of conformal iterated function systems (IFS) founded by the
proposers , rational functions of the Riemann sphere and entire and meromorphic
functions. We propose to study conformal IFS in a Hilbert space, in particular
to examine the transfinite dimensions of the limit sets . Extending the work
with A. Zdunik to the dimensions greater than 2, we propose to deal with the
Hausdorff dimension of the harmonic measure of the limit set (whose closure is a
topological Cantor set) of an IFS. Developing our rigidity investigations we
intend to prove the geometrical rigidity of higher dimensional limits sets whose
closures are topological disks. We intend to provide necessary and sufficient
conditions for conformal measures of regular IFS to satisfy the doubling
property and as an application we would present a characterization of all
subsets of natural numbers which generate the continued fraction systems with
conformal measures satisfying the doubling property. Passing to rational
functions we propose to deal with no-recurrent maps (more precisely, the
critical points contained in the Julia sets are assumed to be non-recurrent). We
would like to work on the proof of equality of the Hausdorff dimension and box
dimension of these maps, to study various definitions of pressure and the escape
rates. Employing the concept of affine laminations, we propose to develop
together with M. Lyubich the thermodynamic formalism of semi-hyperbolic rational
functions. Together with J. Kotus and A. Zdunik we propose to explore invariant
and geometric (Hausdorff, packing) measures for the members of the exponential
family, as well as meromorphic functions fitting into Walters' thermodynamic
formalism. We intend to deal with recently emerged topic of quantization
dimension relating its theory to the multifractal formalism. Our last sub-
project concerns geometric measures of random IFS, in particular concerning the
existence of an exact packing measure function.

We propose to continue and develop our ongoing research involving measures of
various kinds-Hausdorff, packing, conformal, Gibbs states, invariant measures
absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure, etc., and associated
functions such as capacities and pressure and finally associated dimensions.
These notions are studied from two interlaced viewpoints. One is that of various
dynamical systems and the other is that of geometric measure theory as applied
to recursively generated objects. These approaches naturally meld with one
another and lead to some interesting mixtures of ideas. We have developed an
extensive theory of conformal iterated function systems, the iteration of
infinitely many conformal maps, which may be hyperbolic (uniformly contracting)
or parabolic (at least one map has an indifferent fixed point) and also have
made some applications of it to some well known problems, e.g., continued
fractions and Apollonian packings. There are yet some fundamental outstanding
problems and several others which arise within the context of applications. We
want to extend and develop this theory to cover a more structured iteration of
maps-whose governed by directed graphs or substitutions and random iterations
and an appropriate multifractal formalisn for these systems. This has many
applications not only to the study of rational, entire and meromorphic
functions, but also to newly emerging theory of quantization dimension problems
arising from statistics and engineering. We also intend to apply our theory to
limit sets generated by various cellular automata. This could be very important
for compressing visual images.


