
* 0100517
* Research in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,04/18/2003
* Harold Boas,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 255,000.00

Abstract Boas/Staube

This project has two main scientific components. The first goal is to advance
the theory of the inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann equations on pseudoconvex domains
in multidimensional complex space. Although global regularity of the d-bar
Neumann problem holds on large classes of domains, it fails on the so-called
worm domains. Currently there is no general theory that unifies the known
positive results, much less one that also accounts for the negative results on
the worm domains. Likewise, necessary and sufficient conditions for the stronger
property of compactness of the d-bar Neumann operator are not known. A basic
question to be addressed is how to unify Catlin's approach to global regularity
(via compactness) with the investigators' vector field method. The investigators
expect a new sufficient condition for global regularity to emerge from this
study. They also hope to characterize compactness in the d-bar Neumann problem
by some condition slightly weaker than Catlin's so-called property P. The second
thrust of this project is to develop a new area in multi-dimensional complex
analysis: namely, the study of how the theorems and estimates of the subject
depend asymptotically on the dimension of the space as the dimension tends to
infinity. Two particular problems of interest are the recently developed theory
about extending Bohr's classical power series theorem to higher dimensions and
the question of quantifying how zeroes of the Bergman kernel function depend on
the dimension of the ambient complex space. During this project, the
investigators will train graduate students, and they will supervise a young
mathematician at the post-doctoral level (supported through a VIGRE grant at
Texas A&M University) in his study of the d-bar Neumann problem on domains with
corners. The study of analysis in several complex variables is motivated both by
the centrality of the subject within mathematics and by its inherent usefulness.
For example, one of the basic laws of nature, causality, when transcribed by a
mathematical device called the Fourier transform, immediately gives rise to
analytic functions of several (in this case four) variables. The work in this
project will impact not only the core areas of several complex variables and
partial differential equations, but also other areas of science. For example,
the Cauchy-Riemann equations form a model problem for a subject central to
physics and engineering; Bohr's classical theorem has repercussions in operator
theory; and the Bergman kernel function provides a concrete model for Berezin's
quantization scheme in mathematical physics. In addition to advancing the
frontiers of knowledge through basic research, this project will contribute
significantly to the development of human resources through the scientific
training of highly qualified personnel.


