
* 0100410
* Stability and Finiteness Problems in Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,01/11/2006
* Jacob Sturm,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/28/2006
* USD 83,970.00

The first question motivating the subject of our project is the following: Let f
be a holomorphic function in a neighborhood of the origin of affine n-space. Can
the singularities of f(z)=0 get "worse" under small perturbations of the
function f? By "get worse" we mean: Can the critical exponent of f get smaller,
where the critical exponent is the supremum of all exponents d for which the
absolute value of f raised to the power -d is locally integrable. This question,
and its effective counterpart, play an important role in proving the existence
of Kahler-Einstein metrics on certain Fano manifolds (as has been recently
demonstrated by Demailly and Kollar). We plan to apply our method of "algebraic
estimates" to this problem. A related question which we will pursue is the
following: Let R be a rational function with complex coefficients. How do we
decide if R is in L^p? To what extent is the L^p norm of R a continuous function
of its coefficients? The third motivating question concerns decay rates of
oscillatory integral operators is one which has attracted much aattention is
recent years: What is the best decay rate of such operators? We have been able
to attack this problem in the multilinear one-dimensional case when the phase
function is a polynomial, and have succeeded in finding the best decay rate
(modulo logarithimic terms). Our method employs in an improved version of the
curved trapezoid technique developed by Phong-Stein. We plan to apply this
method to the higher dimensional case and in the case of damped operators. The
main themes of this proposal - oscillatory and singular integrals and the method
of stationary phase - are central to the field of classical analysis, with
foundational results dating back to the nineteenth century: Harmonic Analysis
plays a critical role in the solution of wide spectrum of problems in physics
and applied mathematics - solving the heat equation, wave equation, Laplace
equation, Schrodinger equation all make use of the Fourier analysis technique.
The use of harmonic analysis in X-ray diffraction is indispensible to
determining the structure of large molecules (such as DNA), and the Fourier
transform method in signal processing is at the core of much of the modern
technology involving the transfer of information by electronic means. In modern
applications to a variety of questions, traditional techniques do not suffice
and the need for a more general theory has arisen. In particular, the issues of
bounds and stability for oscillatory integrals and operators, and the related
problem of regularity of Radon transforms have been the focus of much recent
work. The principal investigator, working with D.H. Phong (Columbia University)
and Elias M. Stein (Princeton University), plans to continue investigating this
circle of problems using the tools from geometry and analysis which were
recently developed in our joint work.






