
* 0100540
* Variational Problems Arising in Models for Superconductivity, Thin Film Blistering and Micromagnetics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2001,06/09/2003
* Peter Sternberg,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 198,001.00

In this project, the principal investigator pursues a research program in
nonlinear partial differential equations, the calculus of variations and
singular perturbation theory. The research topics come from three applied
settings: Ginzburg-Landau type models for superconductivity, von Karman type
models for thin film blistering, and a model in micromagnetics. In the area of
superconductivity, the P.I. will focus on the response of samples to large
magnetic fields, with particular attention paid to the bifurcation from the
normal state to a superconducting state. In the area of thin film blisters, the
P.I. will investigate the nature of instabilities of the blistered region
through the analysis of various dynamical models for blister growth and thin
film growth. Finally, in the area of micromagnetics, the P.I. will analytically
explore a model thought to capture a new kind of magnetic wall structure
associated with a geometric constriction within the sample.

This project concerns the behavior of various materials when subjected to
outside fields or when forced to take on specific shapes. The energy of these
systems is generally described through a function, often called an `order
parameter,' whose values indicate what state is taken on by the material under a
given set of circumstances (such as geometry, applied fields, etc.). Through
this type of study, one hopes to gain an understanding of what shapes are
optimal for a given sample in order to enhance or diminish various physical
effects. For example, in the case of a superconductor, one hopes to learn which
shapes are most conducive to producing a supercurrent that conducts without
losses due to resistance. The relevant mathematical tools come from the calculus
of variations and from the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations,
as well as from methods of asymptotic analysis as applied to the previou
