
* 0101561
* K-theory of Operator Algebras and Its Applications to Topology of Manifolds
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2001,03/04/2005
* Guoliang Yu,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 361,962.00

Project Title: K-theory of operator algebras and its applications to topology of
manifolds

Principal Investigator: Guoliang Yu

Abstract: The investigator proposes to study the K-theory of operator algebras
associated to metric spaces and groups, and its applications to topology of
manifolds. The K-theory of such operator algebras are receptacles of higher
indices of elliptic differential operators and have important applications to
problems in differential geometry and topology of manifolds such as the
existence problem for Riemannian metrics with positive scalar curvature, the
Novikov conjecture on homotopy invariance of higher signatures. The methods to
be employed include controlled operator K-theory, infinite dimensional almost
flat bundles, and geometric group theory.

Manifolds are spaces glued together by Euclidean spaces. Examples of manifolds
include spheres and tori. In differential geometry one studies how manifolds are
curved. For example a flat piece of paper has zero curvature while the sphere
has positive curvature. This is why we can not bend a piece of paper into a
sphere. A basic problem in differential geometry is to determine when a manifold
can have positive scalar curvature. Another important problem in mathematics is
the classification of manifolds. By surgery theory the classification problem
for higher dimensional manifolds can be essentially reduced to the Novikov
conjecture. The K-theoretic higher indices of certain elliptic differential
operators can be used to attack the positive scalar curvature problem and the
Novikov conjecture. A key step in this analytic approach is the computation of
the K-theoretic higher indices, which can be essentially reduced to the problem
of computing the K-theory of operator algebras associated to metric spaces and
groups.














