
* 0101529
* Pointwise and Semigroup Methods in Viscous Conservation Laws and Completely Integrable Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2001,05/29/2001
* Jonathan Goodman,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger T. Lewis
* 10/31/2001
* USD 31,000.00

Viscous conservation laws arise in a wide variety of physical applications,
including fluid dynamics, magnetohydrodynamics, and materials science. Of
particular importance are solutions of such equations that are stable and hence
typically correspond with observable phenomena. Unfortunately, establishing the
stability of these solutions has proven to be a quite difficult problem. The
pointwise Green's function approach, however, initiated by Liu and developed by
Liu and his collaborators, has proven quite robust: in applications to viscous
shock waves arising in single conservation laws of arbitrary order, viscous
shock waves arising in systems with second order diffusion, planar viscous shock
waves, degenerate viscous shock waves, and rarefaction waves. We propose to
continue and extend this promising line of research in three directions. First,
new techniques recently developed by Howard and Zumbrun appear suitable for
extension to (i) systems of viscous conservation laws admitting degenerate
viscous shock waves, and (ii) systems of viscous conservation laws with high
order viscosity. Second, we propose to develop further techniques that will
extend the pointwise Green's function approach to the case of viscous
rarefaction waves. Finally, we would like to incorporate new techniques recently
developed in the context of perturbation theory for completely integrable
systems into the study of the necessarily oscillatory dynamics that arise in
viscous conservation laws of order higher than two.

The conservation of such fundamental properties as energy and momentum often
leads to partial differential equations that model some underlying physical
process. For example, the Navier-Stokes equations of fluid dynamics and the
Maxwell equations of electromagnetism follow this paradigm. Of primary concern
are stable phenomena: those whose principal structure is robust to minor
environmental fluctuations. We propose to continue and extend a promising line
of research that has been extraordinarily successful in establishing a clear
criterion for such stability. A direct consequence of the approach is a detailed
understanding of certain fundamental partial differential equations.
