
* 0126746
* Thirteenth International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications (IWOTA2002), August 6-9, 2002, Blacksburg, Virginia
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2002,04/26/2002
* Joseph Ball,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/2003
* USD 15,000.00

0126746 Ball

The International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications (IWOTA) has been
held biannually since 1981 and more frequently in recent years (starting in
1995) in eight countries in North America, Europe and Asia. The IWOTA
conferences offer a rich program on a wide range of the latest developments in
operator theory and its applications. In a combination of plenary lectures by
eminent mathematicians and parallel sessions of invited and contributed talks,
the plan is for this year's conference (to be held August 6-9, 2002 on the
Virginia Tech campus in Blacksburg, Virginia) to cover a wide range of topics,
including operator/system theory, operator/scattering theory, operator
theory/numerical analysis, operator theory/wavelets and signal processing,
operator theory/harmonic analysis as well as topics in Krein space operator
theory and core engineering. These topics form a core of the basic science
behind a variety of applications, including control of industrial processes or
high performance aircraft, tomography and image reconstruction, pulse
propagation in optical fibers, seismology, data compression and reconstruction,
and identification of only approximately known parameters.

The original concept of IWOTA was as a satellite conference for operator
theorists to the broader based international symposium on Mathematical Theory of
Networks and Systems (MTNS), to be held August 12-16, 2002 at the University of
Notre Dame. While this concept is still in place, the scope of IWOTA has
broadened considerably in recent years and IWOTA has now attained an independent
identity as a world-wide conference for recent developments in core operator
theory and its applications. IWOTA's primary objective is to bring together
major researchers in the area of operator theory and related fields. These
meetings provide opportunities for all participants to present their own work in
contributed talks, to interact with other researchers from around the globe, and
to broaden their knowledge of the field by hearing the invited lectures of
eminent mathematicians. In addition IWOTA emphasizes cross-disciplinary
interaction among mathematicians, electrical engineers and mathematical
physicists, and encourages participants to continue on to the MTNS conference
for a further broader interdisciplinary interaction. In addition, IWOTA
encourages and financially supports the participation of young researchers,
i.e., advanced graduate students and recent Ph.D. recipients, for whom the
opportunities offered by expert conferences are particularly important
