
* 0135078
* CAREER: Singularities and Microstructure - Multiple Scale Analysis for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations (PDE), Geometric Problems, and the Physical Sciences
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,01/28/2002
* Shankar Venkataramani,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2004
* USD 306,219.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0135078 PI: Venkataramani, Shankar Institution:
University of Chicago Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: CAREER: Singularities and Microstructure - Multiple Scale Analysis for
Nonlinear PDE, Geometric Problems, and the Physical Sciences

There exist a variety of tools for studying multiple scale behaviors in
nonlinear systems, and the method of choice for a particular problem often
depends on whether the investigator is an analyst, an applied mathematician or a
physicist. An important goal is to effectively merge the various approaches, and
develop new ways of thinking about multi-scale problems. To this end, this
project focuses on investigating five interdisciplinary problems, using ideas
from functional analysis, geometry, topology, matched asymptotics and scaling
arguments, in conjunction with numerical simulations. These problems are (1)
Generalized crumpling: Combining functional analytic methods with
geometric/topological ideas to study singularities and microstructure; (2)
Blowup in Parabolic PDEs: Applying Morse theory to the dynamics of blowup
solutions; (3) Dynamics of microstructure: Studying global bifurcations
involving the change of microstructure in a model system; (4) Pattern formation
and non-equilibrium phase transitions: Investigating multiple scale behaviors in
nonlinear systems in the presence of noise; and (5) Topological transitions in
fluid interfaces: Using tools from PDE to investigate topological transitions in
2 fluid systems.

Many real world systems are interesting precisely because they exhibit different
behaviors on different scales. This is certainly true for living organisms,
geological and geophysical systems, technologically important composite
materials and even social structures and hierarchies. Thus researchers across
many disciplines grapple with the following two questions, which are the essence
of multiple scale analysis: (1) How does the large scale (macroscopic) behavior
emerge out of the collective behavior of the small scale (microscopic) units?,
and (2) What are the rules governing the large scale behavior, and how does this
influence the behavior of the small scale units? The research component of this
project studies these questions in a mathematical setting through problems that
arise in material science and in physics. The overall goal is to meld together a
variety of techniques to develop tools that can successfully handle complex
real-world multiple scale problems. This is combined with an integrated approach
to pedagogy, that features a strong involvement in undergraduate and graduate
research, development of research opportunities for groups that are under-
represented in mathematics and the physical sciences, curriculum development
both at the graduate and the undergraduate level, and development of materials
for scientific outreach to the general public.

Date: December 17, 2001
