
* 0138519
* Partial Differential Equations and Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,03/27/2004
* Joseph Conlon,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 165,500.00

PI: Joseph G. Conlon, University of Michigan DMS-0138519

ABSTRACT This project is concerned with elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations and their applications in statistical mechanics. The
first part of the proposal is concerned with elliptic and parabolic equations in
divergence form where the coefficients are random variables. The author intends
to study the regularity properties of the expectation value of the Green's
function, and the rate of convergence of the solution of the equation to the
solution of the homogenized equation. The second part of the proposal is
concerned with the application of ideas from the theory of divergence form
parabolic equations with random coefficients to Euclidean field theory. The
relationship between elliptic and parabolic equations with random coefficients
and Euclidean field theory was discovered recently by Helffer and Sjostrand. It
was then more fully developed by Naddaf-Spencer. The author intends to apply
some ideas he and Naddaf have developed for random elliptic equations to the
Euclidean field theory situation. In the third part of the proposal the author
proposes to study nondivergence form elliptic equations with random
coefficients, in particular an equation corresponding to Brownian motion with a
random drift. It has been shown by Sinai that in one dimension diffusion with
random drift is strongly subdiffusive for large time. It has been conjectured
that in dimension larger than 2 the scaling limit of diffusion with random drift
is Brownian motion. The author has found a connection between this conjecture
and certain combinatorial problems concerning the existence of cycles in graphs.
He plans to continue his program to solve these combinatorial problems. The
final part of the proposal is concerned with uniformly elliptic equations with
deterministic coefficients. The coefficients can oscillate arbitrarily rapidly
however. The author plans to continue his work to obtain estimates on the
underlying diffusion which are independent of the degree of oscillation of the
coefficients. This part of the proposal is related to the previous parts since
random equations have coefficients which are rapidly oscillating. The goal of
the proposal is to understand properties of the solution to a partial
differential equation when the only information one has is that the coefficients
of the equation are bounded in some way. Within this goal there are two sub-
themes: (a) understanding worst possible behavior, (b) understanding "on
average" behavior -given our knowledge of the coefficients. The sub-theme (a) is
the subject of the final part of the proposal. It is intimately related to
problems of stochastic control theory. Examples of stochastic control theory
abound in the world of engineering and finance. To take a financial example,
consider the problem of valuing a stock option. The classic work of Black and
Scholes shows that the value of the option depends only on the stock volatility.
For a stock with constant volatility they have a formula for the value of the
option in terms of the volatility. The formula is the solution to a partial
differential equation in which the volatility is a coefficient. (a) is therefore
related to the problem of estimating worst possible scenarios for option values
when one can only assume some bounds on stock volatility. The sub-theme (b) has
similar applications to (a). The most exciting of these to this author is that
it offers a way of beginning to understand the problem of turbulence in fluids.
Turbulence is roughly speaking the onset of random behavior in the velocity of a
fluid. It is well known that a fluid will undergo turbulent behavior when
subject to a sufficiently large disturbance. The mathematical problem of
understanding turbulence is well defined. One simply needs to understand the
solutions of a partial differential equation known as the Navier-Stokes
equation. To date there is not even the beginnings of an understanding how to
derive turbulence in a mathematically rigorous way out of the Navier-Stokes
equation. The reason is that the fluid velocity is a coefficient of the
equation. In the turbulent regime therefore the Navier-Stokes equation is like a
partial differential equation with a random coefficient. The sub-theme (b) is
then concerned with the "typical" behavior of the fluid velocity in this
situation.




