
* 0139916
* Low-Dimensional and Symbolic Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2002,06/15/2005
* Michal Misiurewicz,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 126,000.00

Proposal Number: 0139916 PI: Michal Misiurewicz

ABSTRACT

The Principal Investigator will perform research in the theory of dynamical
systems, mainly low-dimensional (both smooth and continuous) and symbolic. He
will apply analytical, topological and combinatorial tools in order to
investigate real and complex systems. A substantial part of the project is aimed
at providing bridges between real and complex, one- and two-dimensional
dynamics. A new class of two-dimensional systems will be considered. Quadratic
laminations will be looked upon from the point of view of combinatorial dynamics
and rotation theory. For other systems attractors, periodic orbits, rotation
sets and topological entropy will be in the center of attention. Moreover,
symbolic systems with an additional local order structure will be studied.

For almost every phenomenon from Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Medicine, Economy
and other sciences one can make a mathematical model that can be regarded as a
dynamical system. Sometimes the study of this system is extremely difficult, but
quite often it can be reduced to the study of a much simpler, low dimensional or
symbolic one. This project is devoted mainly to the investigation of the
properties of these types of systems from the mathematical point of view. The
results that can be obtained are usually much stronger than in the general case
and often lead to much deeper understanding of the original systems.
