
* 0139726
* Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2002,03/03/2004
* Michael Taylor,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 247,741.00

March 11, 2002

PI: Michael Taylor, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill DMS-0139726

********************************************************



ABSTRACT FOR MICHAEL TAYLOR'S PROJECT



Professor Taylor proposes to investigate problems in partial differential
equations, particularly in the areas of wave propagation, boundary problems for
elliptic PDE, and functional calculus for elliptic self-adjoint operators.
Taylor will study wave propagation in fairly rough media, in which rays of
geometrical optics are just barely defined, and in even rougher media, in which
such rays are not uniquely defined. He will examine to what extent wave
propagation in such media behaves like that in more regular media and to what
extent it differs. He plans to pursue the effects of curvature bounds on a
manifold on the nature of such wave propagation, and also investigate
propagation, reflection, and diffraction of waves at a boundary for a rough
medium. Taylor will also continue a program of studying elliptic equations with
rough coefficients on Lipschitz domains. This will include nonlinear equations,
such as arise in the study of harmonic maps between manifolds with rough metric
tensors. In the area of functional calculus, one attack is to synthesize general
functions of the Laplace operator from the solution operator to the wave
equation. A detailed knowledge of wave propagation can then yield highly
nontrivial information on such functional calculus. Taylor is pursuing a variety
of projects in this area, ranging from detailed behavior of eigenfunction
expansions to singular perturbation problems arising in the study of pattern
formation.

Wave motion, from sound passing through air to pressure and shear waves passing
through the earth to radio waves traveling through space, is a ubiquitous
phenomenon, whose mathematical analysis has for a long time been a major part of
mathematics. A variety of partial differential equations have arisen to describe
different aspects of wave motion, and their study continues to stimulate work on
analytical tools to elucidate the behavior of solutions to such PDE. Analyzing a
wave as a superposition of various frequencies gave rise to the area of harmonic
analysis. Localizing the study of a wave simultaneously in space and in
frequency is at the heart of the more recent area of microlocal analysis. Taylor
has been active in developing tools in these areas and using them to produce
results in PDE. Some of his efforts have focused on treating PDE with rough
coefficients and PDE in domains with rough boundary. These arise to describe
waves traveling through complicated media, whose boundaries have many corners
and other irregularities. While harmonic analysis techniques have provided much
insight into partial differential equations, the reverse direction has also led
to significant results in harmonic analysis. Taylor is continuing to investigate
how results on Fourier synthesis of singular functions can be explained in terms
of propagation and focusing of waves.








