
* 0140338
* Analytical and Geometrical Aspects of Non Linear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2002,01/17/2006
* Luis Caffarelli,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2008
* USD 698,514.00

March 11, 2002. PI: Luis Caffarelli [caffarel@math.utexas.edu], University of
Texas, Austin DMS-0140338

Abstract:

Our research focus in a series of phenomena that bring together different areas
of non linear PDE. For instance, a flame front propagating in a layered medium
brings together the interaction of the fast phase transition at the edge of the
flame, with the linking of large scales (front speeds) and small scales
(possibly random , thin layering). Recent models of front formation, bring
together the interaction of optimal allocation,that provides the " variational
framework" for front formation (the Monge Ampere equation ) with the issue of
how vorticity is transported within, and affects the front. Finally, problems in
financial engineering, bring together fully non linear equations ( for instance
as "extremals" or intervals of "trust" when only rough bounds on volatility and
correlations are available) with issues of phase transition , when trading
strategy changes discontinuously at certain values of the parameters,or there
are constraints on the range of trading, and homogeneisation, when the
underlying space changes randomly.

We plan to study several models from different sciences that bring together
interactions of complementary non linear phenomena. A good example would be
flame propagation in a thinly layered material: Observed at short range, the
flame front will "wiggle", moving faster in some of the layers, depending on
their composition. From far away, the flame will appear as a homogeneous front.
Its speed , though, will depend in a very subtle way from both the nature of the
ignition process at the edge of the flame ( free boundary problem) and the
properties of the very fine, ( possibly randomly organized, as it usually occurs
in nature) thin layering. Another example has to do with the formation of
weather fronts: according to some models, globally the front organizes itself
trying to " spread its energy" in an optimal way, and within, vorticity ( the
"rotational component" of wind) is transported in an interactive way with the
front organization. A third example comes from financial engineering when
seeking optimal ( or safest) trading strategies, but , as in most cases, only a
rough knowledge is available of the way different ways in which different
components of the portfolio, or parameters ( interest rates, exchange rates, etc
) interact.This rough or incomplete knowledge, gives rise to non linear
strategies, that couple with constraints in the trading range, discontinuous
trading strategies, etc.


