
* 0140067
* Local Theory of Operator Spaces and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2002,04/10/2002
* Zhong-Jin Ruan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 157,563.00

Abstract Ruan

The operator space theory is a natural quantization of functional analysis. The
major difference between operator spaces and Banach spaces is that one must
consider operator matrix norms and completely bounded maps in the category of
operator spaces. This was first realized by William Arveson in 1969 and was
characterized by the PI in his Ph.D thesis in 1987. Since then the theory has
been quickly developed into a very exciting research area in modern analysis.
This remarkable development is mainly due to the contributions of D.Blecher,
E.Christensen, E.Effros, M.Junge, E.Kirchberg, C.Le Merdy, G.Pisier, V.Paulsen,
H.Rosenthal, R.Smith, A.Sinclair and the PI. Recently, the PI's research has
been mainly centered on the 'local theory' of operator spaces and their
applications. One of his main goals is to find the appropriate quantization of
classical results in Banach space theory, and to apply these results to
C*-algebras and von Neumann algebras, as well as to some other related areas
such as non-commutative harmonic analysis and locally compact quantum groups. In
this proposal, the PI plans to continue his investigation in this direction and
proposes the following four research projects. (1) Investigate the local
properties of non-commutative Lp spaces and their applications to operator
algebras. (2) Investigate the local structure of the operator preduals of von
Neumann algebras and the operator duals of C*-algebras. (3) Investigate the
further applications of operator spaces to Kac algebras and locally compact
quantum groups. (4) Investigate the geometric structure of the 'matrix unit
balls' of operator spaces, and investigate the possible applications of operator
spaces to non-commutative probability and free probability.



The most profound distinction between classical and quantum mechanics is
Heisenberg's principle that one should represent the basic variables of physics
by operators rather than functions. The work of J. von Neumann emphasized that
it is important to pursue the 'quantized' forms of mathematics. Collaborating
with F.J. Murray, von Neumann succeeded in quantizing integration theory during
the 1940's. Since then, mathematicians have tried to quantize many other areas
of mathematics such as topology, differential geometry, analysis and probability
theory. The theory of operator spaces is a natural quantization of functional
analysis, which is a very important field in modern analysis. During the last
fifteen years, the PI together with his colleagues has established the
foundation of operator space theory and has also discovered a number of far-
reaching applications to some related areas in mathematics. In this proposal, he
plans to continue his work on operator spaces and their applications. He expects
that the solutions the proposed research projects will make important
contributions to related fields.
