
* 0200710
* Research on the Anderson metal-insulator transport transition and otherphenomena in disordered systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/2002,04/05/2004
* Abel Klein,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 192,002.00

The subject of this research proposal is the Anderson metal-insulator transport
transition and other phenomena in disordered systems. A new approach to the
Anderson metal-insulator transition based on transport instead of spectral
properties will be investigated. In addition, several related topics will be
investigated. Constructive criteria for localization in random media will be
developed; an application is planned for the Landau Hamiltonian with a random
potential. Local Poisson statistics for the strong insulator spectrum of
Anderson-type Hamiltonians in the continuum will be studied. The spectrum of the
Anderson model on the Bethe lattice will be studied. Localization at low
disorder in one or two dimensions will be investigated.

Fortysome years have passed since P. Anderson's seminal article on localization
of electrons in random media, but our mathematical understanding of the metal-
insulator transition is still very unsatisfactory. In three or more dimensions a
transition is believed to occur from an insulator regime, characterized by
localized states, to a very different metallic regime characterized by extended
states. The energy at which this metal insulator transition occurs is called the
mobility edge. The standard mathematical interpretation of this picture is that
there should be a transition in the spectrum of the random SchrAdinger from pure
point spectrum (localized states) to absolutely continuous spectrum (extended
states). But up to now there are no mathematical results on the existence of
continuous spectrum and a metal-insulator transition (except for the special
case of the Anderson model on the Bethe lattice). A new approach to the Anderson
metal-insulator transition is proposed based on transport instead of spectral
properties. It is motivated by the fact that the intuitive physical notion of
localization has a dynamical interpretation: an initially localized wave packet
should remain localized under time evolution, and delocalization may be
interpreted as nontrivial transport. The main goal of this proposal is to show
the existence of such a transport transition.


