
* 0200169
* Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Related Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2002,08/27/2003
* Robert Jensen,IL,Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 148,569.00



DMS-0200169: Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Nonlinear PDE's PI: Robert
R. Jensen, Co-PI: Emmanuel N. Barron

Abstract:

The study of nonlinear essential supremum functionals is the focus of this
project. In variational problems with such functionals the natural questions of
interest are existence of an absolute (or local) minimizer, i.e., a function
which minimizes the functional on every subdomain, necessary conditions for the
minimizer leading to very nonlinear differential equations, and regularity of
the minimizer. In contrast to the classical calculus of variations, even under
very strong assumptions, regularity beyond continuous differentiability is not
expected, but even this much smoothness is unknown. Virtually every question
posed in classical variational analysis can be posed for supremum functionals--
constraints, relaxation, homogenization, duality--and this can be done for both
scalar and vector valued problems where the results are more difficult. This
subject has placed a new focus on viscosity solutions for fully nonlinear
equations, and a new emphasis on an old area of convex analysis, quasiconvexity.
The motivation for the study of such problems comes from consideration of
physical problems in which the use of the typical energy norm is not adequate,
that is, one must design for the worst case. Supremum norm functionals lack
strong differentiability and the subsequent difficulties associated with this
lack must be dealt with using all forms of nonlinear analysis.

The use of variational analysis in engineering, physics, medicine, economics,
and other fields is well established. Extreme value engineering is an area in
which one seeks to consider the worst case in order to properly design or build
some mechanism. In this project these two disciplines are merged to apply
variational analysis in order to accomodate a worst case analysis. In certain
areas, such as medicine, or structural engineering, it is clear that the worst
case analysis is the only realistic design. For example, an oncological
treatment cannot seek to minimize the average tumor load, but must minimize the
maximum tumor load. A bridge should not be designed to minimize average stresses
but maximum pointwise stresses. Many control mechanisms implemented only when a
maximum indicator is triggered. These are all problems which are applications of
the project considered and in which many new techniques must be developed. The
basic and fundamental results of this area of variational analysis, including
existence and the determination of criteria sufficient to determine the optimal
function, will be studied. The analysis leads to the study of nonlinear partial
differential equations and systems of such equations.
