
* 0200326
* Regularity Theory for Partial Differential Equations with Super-critical Nonlinearities
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2002,04/14/2004
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota - Twin Cities DMS-0200326

*************** Proposal "Regularity Theory for Partial Differential Equations
with Super-critical Nonlinearities" by V. Sverak

Abstract:

In this proposal we suggest to study open problems in regularity theory of the
following partial differential equations: 1. strongly elliptic systems arising
as Euler-Lagrange equations for multiple integrals in the Calculus of
Variations; 2. three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations and some related model
equations; and 3. Complex Ginzburg-Landau Equations and Landau-Lifschitz
equations. The regularity theory for these equations is mainly governed by two
factors: the smoothing properties of the linearized operator, and the tendency
of the non-linear part to produce singularities. In all the cases above there is
a certain critical dimension below which (and, in many cases, at which) the
natural energy estimates for the equations together with smoothing properties of
the linearized operator are sufficient to guarantee regularity of solutions. For
most of the equations above the critical dimension is two. The situation is more
complicated above the critical dimension, when the specifics of each equation
come much more into play, and not many results are known. The research will
concentrate on problems in this relatively unmapped area.

The study of regularity theory for Partial Differential Equations (PDE) is
usually motivated by the following factors: (1) A good regularity theory can
serve as an important check that a PDE is appropriate for modeling a given
phenomena. (2) The more information we have about regularity of solutions of a
given PDE, the better chance we have to design a good numerical method for
calculating its solutions on a computer. It is no coincidence that the equations
for which we can calculate solutions accurately are more or less exactly those
for which we have a good regularity theory. (Confirming that "There is nothing
quite so practical as a good theory".) Roughly speaking, the more we know about
solutions, the easier it is the avoid some of the many pitfalls into which
numerical simulations can fall. The work suggested in this proposal will address
basic open problems in regularity theory for important classes of equations with
strong non-linearities. Many of these equations (such as the Navier-Stokes
equations, or the Landau-Lifschitz equations) are of considerable practical
interest.

***************************************


