
* 0200749
* Riemann--Hilbert Problems in Random Matrix Theory, Approximation Theory, and Integrable Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2002,06/28/2004
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 106,999.00

PI: Ken McLaughlin, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill DMS-0200749

Abstract:

*********************************************************

McLaughlin's research concerns applications of Riemann-Hilbert problems and new
techniques developed for their asymptotic analysis to classical problems in (1)
random matrix theory, (2) integrable systems, and (3) approximation theory and
orthogonal polynomials. In integrable systems, the proposed research will
continue McLaughlin's work on singular limits of integrable nonlinear partial
differential equations. Integrable nonlinear partial differential equations
provide canonical models for a wide variety of physical settings. For some
integrable models, such as the semi-classical limit of the focusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation, the Korteweg-de Vries equation, and the Toda lattice in a
continuum limit, McLaughlin (with collaborators) is developing methods to
understand, predict, and control their behavior. In random matrix theory,
McLaughlin will continue his work on the asymptotic behavior of eigenvalues of
random Hermitian matrices. He will study the asymptotic behavior of the
partition function of random matrix theory. This basic quantity is a partition
function in the classical sense of statistical mechanics, for an interacting
log-gas. The asymptotics McLaughlin proposes to study are as the number of
particles grows. The research will impact upon several areas of mathematical
research, such as the theory of Hankel determinants pioneered by Szego some 70
years ago, the theory of 2 dimensional quantum gravity, and approximation
theory. In approximation theory, McLaughlin will investigate new connections
(recently discovered by McLaughlin and collaborators) between the asymptotic
analysis of Riemann-Hilbert problems and rational approximation. This includes
the classical problems of Pade' approximation. In related work, McLaughlin will
study the asymptotic behavior of discrete orthogonal polynomials, which are
polynomials orthogonal with respect to a measure that is a sum of Dirac masses.

A primary goal of scientific research is to understand and control complicated
phenomena. Such understanding and control of a physical process enhances our
ability for technological advancement. Physical models for complex nonlinear
phenomena often boil down to the study of partial differential equations in
parameter regimes where their solutions exhibit singularly wild behavior. In
other instances, statistical theories with great amount of randomness are
developed to understand complex phenomena. Three examples: laser beams in
optical fibers can explode, or signals they carry can degrade due to noise or
the onset of violent oscillations. Waves in the ocean can organize themselves
into "trains" transporting energy. In the 1950s, nuclear resonance level
experiments indicated a new type of universality, whose mathematical explanation
has only recently been explained. Scientists' ability to predict dramatic
behavior through the analysis of such general nonlinear partial differential
equations, or statistical theories, is limited. However, there is a class of
canonical models, under the heading "integrable models", for a wide variety of
physical settings. Their singular behavior is a guide for the understanding of
some complicated phenomena in nature. Some of these are partial differential
equations, others are statistical models, but the unifying feature of these
integrable models is that researchers are making great progress in their
analysis. McLaughlin's research involves the detailed rigorous analysis of these
models; he (with collaborators) is developing methods to understand, predict,
and control their behavior.






