
* 0200167
* RUI: Determinant Identities, Szego Type Limit Theorems, and Connections to Random Matrices
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,06/17/2002
* Estelle Basor,CA,California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 80,000.00

Determinants of Toeplitz matrices have arisen in many branches of mathematics
and physics. For example, they describe the spin correlation between two sites
in the classical Ising model of a two-dimensional magnet. More recently, they
have been used to describe statistical properties of random matrices, whose
eigenvalues model complicated systems. The asymptotic behavior of determinants
of Toeplitz matrices is described using the Strong Szego-Limit Theorem and its
generalizations. Recently, this theorem was improved in the sense that a new
identity was found for the determinant that allows one to find very good
estimates for the error in the Szego expansion of the determinant. The major
purpose of this project is to extend this identity to other classes of matrices
and operators. This has applications such as finding the distributions of linear
statistics in random matrix theory, as well as finding the level spacing of the
eigenvalues.

Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior that exact predictions
become impossible, so instead average properties of these systems are studied.
For example, the energy level of a particle of a compound nucleus in a slow
nuclear reaction has complicated unpredictable behavior. Random matrix theory
provides mathematical models that allow a simulation of the energy levels of the
particle. One of the tools that is used to study the statistical behavior of the
random matrices and thus of the energy levels, is a determinant of a Toeplitz
matrix. A determinant is a number that yields important information about a
square array of numbers. These Toeplitz determinants occur in many branches of
applied mathematics. One classical use was to study the properties of models of
two-dimensional (or very thin) magnets. Determinants are often hard to compute.
However, there is a result, called the Strong Szego Limit Theorem, which yields
an estimate for such a determinant. Recently, this estimate was improved so that
error terms could be calculated more easily. One major goal of the project is to
extend these results to other classes of determinants. This will yield
information about the energy levels of complicated systems in other types of
models, not covered by the Toeplitz case.
