
* 0200689
* Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2002,05/24/2004
* Xiaojun Huang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 93,000.00

Research will be conducted on a number of problems in Several Complex Variables
and Cauchy-Riemann Geometry. More specifically, the better understanding of
various rigidity phenomena in complex analysis and complex geometry will be
sought. The study the analytic structure of real surfaces in the complex space
of dimension two, and the investigation of its intrinsic connections with many
well-known problems in classical mechanics will be pursued.

Complex numbers and functions of complex variables have become, since the 19th
century, indispensable tools in many areas of mathematics and in its application
to other areas of science and engineering. Indeed, the solutions of many
problems in the applied sciences could ultimately depend on improvements in
these complex analytic tools and a better understanding of their basic
properties. For instance, in material science the standard method for treating
multidirectional stresses in a uniform way is to represent them as complex
numbers or, in more complicated situations, as complex functions. It then turns
out, for instance, that the direction of the propagation of cracks in materials
is related to the properties of certain equations associated with these complex
numbers or functions. Results of the research to be carried out in this project
could lead to the discovery of new properties of solutions of these equations.
