
* 0200699
* Boundary Behavior of Analytic Functions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2002,05/03/2004
* Alexei Poltoratski,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

The research will focus on several problems concerning the boundary behavior of
analytic functions and their applications in functional analysis and
mathematical physics. In analytic function theory the PI plans to study the
interaction between singular and non-singular components of Cauchy integrals
near the boundary of a complex domain. The results will then be applied to study
the resolvent functions of linear operators in perturbation problems. This area
has connections with mathematical models of solid state physics, which provides
most of the motivation. Another part of the project is the study of the
connections between the Beurling-Malliavin theory, inverse spectral problems for
partial differential equations and properties of kernels of Toepliz operators.

Analytic Function Theory is one of the classical yet rapidly developing parts of
modern mathematics. The present stage of its development features many promising
new applications in various parts of mathematics and physics. One of the
cornerstones of Analytic Function Theory is the integral formula named after the
famous French mathematician Cauchy. The importance of this formula is due to the
fact that most analytic functions in complex domains can be defined through
Cauchy integrals. The PI plans to study various properties of Cauchy integrals
near the boundaries of their domains. The results will then be applied in
several areas of mathematics as well as in mathematical physics. The
applications in mathematical physics will concern, among other things,
mathematical models of wave propagation. The general question that will be
considered is how to recover full information about a disordered environment
from the spectrum of the wave operator and partial information on the potential
field.
