
* 0200187
* Greedy Approximation
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,03/18/2004
* Vladimir Temlyakov,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 103,500.00

PI: Vladimir Temlyakov, University of South Carolina DMS-0200187 Abstract:

Nonlinear approximation seeks ways to approximate complicated functions by
simple functions using methods that depend nonlinearly on the function being
approximated. Recently, a particular kind of nonlinear approximation, namely,
greedy approximation attracted a lot of attention in both theoretical and
applied settings. Greedy type algorithms proved to be very useful in various
applications such as image compression, signal processing, design of neural
networks, and the numerical solution of nonlinear partial differential
equations. The theory of greedy approximation is emerging now: some fundamental
convergence results have already been established; many fundamental problems
remain unsolved. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue
investigations of greedy approximation. We propose to continue to study greedy
approximation with regard to bases, where substantial progress has been achieved
recently. We propose to place emphasis on studying the efficiency of greedy
algorithms with regard to redundant systems (dictionaries). Redundancy on the
one hand offers much promise for greater efficiency in terms of approximation
rate, but on the other hand gives rise to highly nontrivial theoretical and
practical problems. We note that there is a solid justification of importance of
redundant systems in both theoretical questions and practical applications.

Approximation theory is a branch of Mathematics that studies methods of
replacing complicated objects by simpler objects. This idea has proved to be
fruitful in many applications to the real world problems. Among these
applications are signal processing, image compression, finance problems, and
many others. As one of the model problems consider image compression. Take for
example an image (picture) on a TV screen. Why should we approximate it? In many
cases we cannot afford to transmit (or store in a computer memory) the whole
information of an image, perhaps because of a high cost for transmission of a
bit of information or limited channel capacity. This is exactly the point where
an application of approximation theory can be fruitful. Clearly, when we replace
an image by its approximant we lose the quality of picture: the more information
we keep the better approximation to the original image we have. As a result we
have an interplay between the reduction of information and the quality of
approximation. In approximation theory we try to find the best (optimal)
solution to this problem. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue
the investigations of methods of approximation which are motivated by these
types of applications. We note that nonlinear approximation is at the current
frontiers of approximation theory. Nonlinear approximation is the only hope at
present for the increase in available approximation power still needed to handle
problems of real practical interest.


