
* 0200788
* Tomography and Integral Geometry
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,04/12/2004
* Eric Todd Quinto,MA,Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 120,725.00



PROJECT: Tomography and Integral Geometry PI: Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
DMS-0200788



ABSTRACT:

Professor Quinto will pursue problems in tomography and the mathematical
analysis of Radon transforms. He will develop and refine singularity detection
algorithms (including limited data Lambda CT and wavelet methods) and apply them
to electron microscopy and limited data industrial and medical X-ray tomography,
with the goal of testing the algorithms on real data and using them in scanners.
Professor Quinto will continue to develop a boundary detection method that is
applicable to Sonar in shallow water, and he will begin to develop these methods
for synthetic aperture Radar. The theoretical underpinnings will be based on
Professor Quinto's pure mathematical research. Radon transforms have an intimate
relation to harmonic analysis, partial differential equations, and complex
analysis, and he will use integral geometry to prove theorems in these fields.
The principal investigator will prove uniqueness and support theorems for Radon
transforms defined by spreads of polynomials, including spherical transforms in
Euclidean space and other settings. He and Professor Agranovsky will use these
results to characterize zero sets of solutions of the wave equation on
crystallographic domains and other sets. Zero sets, where the solution is zero
for all time, are important and difficult to characterize. He will prove
uniqueness theorems for Radon transforms on spheres and other surfaces and use
these to solve Morera and mean value problems on manifolds. He will prove
support theorems for X-ray transforms.

This research encompasses both applied and pure mathematics: tomography and
integral geometry. The pure research will be used to develop, understand, and
justify the applied algorithms, and the applied problems will motivate much of
the pure research. Computed tomography (CT) algorithms will be developed for the
nondestructive evaluation of rockets and other objects. The algorithms will
allow scientists to detect cracks in rocket bodies, air pockets in rocket fuel,
and delaminations in rocket exit cones. Limited data algorithms will be
developed for electron microscopy as a part of a joint industrial project. The
goal is to produce an algorithm that reliably produces accurate pictures for a
SIDEC electron microscope. He will develop pure mathematics that will show how
well the algorithms work and where their limitations might show up. These pure
mathematical underpinnings are required to ensure that his (or any other)
reconstructions are correct and are not lucky guesses. SONAR data can be modeled
as averages over spheres (the spherical wave fronts of the sound) and Professor
Quinto will prove theorems about these averages. He will use these theorems to
develop simple algorithms to map the ocean floor and to find boundaries of
objects in the ocean and to apply to Radar. This pure mathematics is intriguing
in its own right. Professor Quinto will prove theorems about spherical averages
which will be used to understand the wave equation (the equation that describes
how sound and light behave). The wave equation describes the motion of a drum
head, and he will specify which points on the drum do not move at all. Finally,
he will prove theorems he will apply to complex and harmonic analysis, fields in
pure mathematics.


