
* 0200584
* Collaborative Research: Multidimensional and Non-Homogeneous Harmonic Analysis: Bellman Functions, Perturbations of Normal Operators and Two Weight Estimates of Singular Integrals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,04/14/2004
* Serguei Treil,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 153,541.00

Proposal Numbers: 0200713 and 0200584 PIs: Alexander Volberg, Fedor Nazarov, and
Serguei Treil

ABSTRACT Research will be conducted on non-homogeneous harmonic analysis and on
weighted norm inequalities with matrix weights. In previous work by the PIs a
technique for estimating Calderon-Zygmund operators on spaces with non-doubling
measures was developed, and a novel method of Bellman functions was introduced
for problems in Harmonic Analysis. These techniques will be applied to solve
several open problems in harmonic analysis and operator theory and to
investigate new directions, which previously were deemed untractable because of
the lack of technical tools. Special attention will be paid to uncovering new
relations between Operator Theory, Harmonic Analysis and Stochastic Control.
Among the main directions of the proposed research are: - Spectral theory for
perturbations of normal operators and related problems in Harmonic Analysis: two
weight estimates for Hilbert Transform and embedding theorems for the co-
invariant subspaces. - Non-homogeneous T(b) theorems and their applications to
generalizations of analytic capacity (electric intensity capacity); the role of
curvature in higher dimensions. - Bellman function method in stochastic optimal
control and in harmonic analysis; functions with matrix arguments and their
applications to non-commutative problems.

Harmonic analysis investigates complex processes by representing them as a sum
of elementary ones (sinusoidal waves, wavelets) with well understood behavior. A
central part of modern harmonic analysis deals with "singular operators" of one
type or another. Such operators are pervasive in the scientific landscape: they
turn up in mathematical physics, probability, engineering, image processing,
etc. A new way to treat multivariate signals will be discussed. The main
difficulty here is that the mathematical objects arising in such problems are
non-commutative: the product depends on the order of terms, and that complicates
things immensely. A new method based on Bellman functions, which originating in
the stochastic optimal control, will be exploited in harmonic analysis. One
important direction of research is the spectral theory for the perturbation of
normal operators: results in this direction would have important consequences in
mathematical physics. Another direction deals with non-commutative harmonic
analysis, i.e. with treating multivariate signals.
