
* 0202656
* Spectral and Transport Properties of Random Media
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 06/01/2002,05/11/2004
* Peter Hislop,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 116,020.00

Spectral and Transport Properties of Random Media

PI: Peter D. Hislop, University of Kentucky DMS-0202656

Abstract:

This proposal concerns continuing investigations of the principal investigator
into the spectral and transport properties of random media. The basic question
is: How do random perturbations of a background medium, for example, a perfect
crystal, influence the propagation of quantum and classical waves in the medium?
The proposed work concentrates on properties of the integrated density of states
and models related to the quantum Hall effect. Several other models and related
technical problems are discussed. The main aspects of the proposal include: 1)
Continuity and Regularity of the Integrated Density of States; 2) Spectral and
Transport Problems in the Quantum Hall Effect; 3) the Aizenman-Molchanov Method
for Localization, Energy-Level Statistics, and Random Magnetic Fields. The
overall goal of this work is to describe the effect of disorder on the
measurable properties of the system, such as the density of states, the
conductivity, and the edge currents. The proposer also discusses localization
for some previously untreated systems like random magnetic fields and nonlocal
potentials. The proposed methods will contribute to the understanding of wave
propagation in random media.

Our understanding of many basic electronic properties of solids is based on the
simple one-electron model of an electron propagating in a periodic array of
atoms. This simple idea explains many fundamental phenomena such as metals,
insulators, and semiconductors. One of the limitations of this model is that it
predicts infinite conductivity. In 1958, P. W. Anderson proposed disorder as a
mechanism for limiting the ballistic behavior of an electron in a periodic array
of atoms. He argued that the electron wave function should be localized in space
due to multiple and incoherent scattering from the randomly distributed
impurities, with probability one. Disorder-induced localization of states for
many models has now been proved. Some of the work in this proposal involves
applying these ideas to the study of systems with interesting geometries, such
as a strip or a torus, that exhibit the quantum Hall effect. The principal
investigator is interested in the nature of the quantum Hall edge-currents, and
the nature of the electron states for regions with two-edges, such as a strip.
One of the tools for studying these systems is the density of states that
provides a measure of the number of electronic states per unit volume. The
continuity of the density of states measure provides a measure of the
effectiveness of the disorder in breaking degeneracy of the ordered system. Very
little is known about this function. The principal investigator is also
interested in exploring the effect on electron propagation of randomness in the
magnetic field, and the influence of randomness on certain systems with nonlocal
interactions.




