
* 0203975
* The dynamics of surface diffeomorphisms
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2002,05/03/2004
* Andre de Carvalho,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,360.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0203975 PI: Andre de Carvalho

ABSTRACT

The study of 2-dimensional dynamical systems is an active area of research.
Families such as the Henon and Lozi families have been intensively studied in
recent years and many beautiful results have been obtained. However, we are
still far from having a complete understanding of them. In dimension 1, due to
the efforts of many researchers during the past two decades, there is an almost
complete theory. Parallels and differences between the dynamics of families in
dimensions 1 and 2 have been exploited by several authors. The past work of the
PI includes the development of a 2-dimensional analogue of Milnor and Thurston's
kneading theory and the study of braids and braid forcing. The present project
proposes to further the study of dynamics in dimension 2 as well as some aspects
of braid theory and Teichmuller theory. The main topics to be studied are:
Horseshoe braids, Generalized pseudo-Anosov maps and piecewise linear models for
diffeomorphisms in dimension 2, Real and Complex Henon maps and the Pruning
Front Conjecture, Renormalization in dimension 2, and some aspects of infinite-
dimensional Teichmuller Theory.

Dynamical systems is the branch of mathematics that describes systems that
evolve in time. Typical examples are planetary motion, population patterns,
weather prediction or the economy. Since Newton, it is believed that simple
mathematical laws are capable of describing the long term behavior of many of
such systems. The problem is that often such simple mathematical laws lead to
extremely complicated long time behavior.


