
* 0204081
* Continuous Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2002,06/29/2006
* Krystyna Kuperberg,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2007
* USD 184,672.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0204081 PI: Kuperbeg

ABSTRACT

Research will be conducted on continuous dynamical systems on manifolds of
dimension three and higher, with emphasis on compact invariant subsets on which
the flow is minimal. Continuing the work related to the real analytic solution
to the Seifert conjecture on aperiodic flows acting on the three-dimensional
sphere, the PI plans to classify the minimal sets in such flows with respect to
their homological and shape theory properties. Minimal sets shape-equivalent (in
the sense of Borsuk) to a polyhedron often appear in flows as attractors, and
are of special interest. Minimal sets of non-polyhedral shape are usually
approximated by circular orbits or by other movable sets with the so called UV-
property. They have very complicated dynamics around them, which can be
investigated through the structure of the family of the approximating invariant
sets. Circular orbits are extremely important in celestial mechanics as they
appear as paths of movement. Smaller particles, dust, can align along a braided
orbit, and in the continuous case, in a mathematical model, this "orbit" could
be an invariant set, aperiodic but "circle-like", or "graph-like" such as the
well-known Denjoy continua. A volume-preserving dynamical system, associated
with incompressible fluids, imposes restrictions on the flow outside the special
invariant collection and is an important area of study as well.

The theory of dynamical systems was developed in an effort to provide a
mathematically rigorous description of real physical phenomena. It is therefore
closely connected to many domains of science: mechanics, various areas of
physics, biology, and economics. Dynamical systems connect several branches of
mathematics such as analysis, topology, geometry, algebra, and combinatorics.


