
* 0243355
* Harmonic Analysis and Green Functions on Metric spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2002,03/18/2003
* Nageswari Shanmugalingam,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 38,063.00

In this project the principal investigator proposes to develop further the
theory of analysis on abstract metric spaces by studying Green functions on such
spaces. The principal investigator will initially focus on four problems. The
first question seeks to find out whether in the framework of abstract metric
spaces the corresponding harmonic functions satisfy the strong maximum
principle. As a long range goal the principal investigator also hopes to
determine whether the strong maximum principle holds for p-harmonic functions
for general values of p. The second issue is to construct the Martin boundary
for Gromov hyperbolic metric spaces that admit Green functions. It is also
proposed to study some properties of Green functions, including the uniqueness
property and the boundary Harnack principle. These two problems will be studied
for two different constructions of Green functions, one - using the upper
gradients, and the other - the Cheeger derivative. The fourth problem is to
construct and study Brownian motion and the heat equation on abstract metric
spaces.

Potential applications of the research proposed in this project include
connections between probability theory and analysis on abstract metric spaces.
Such spaces arise in applications in physics and engineering, and hence the
questions addressed in the project have a potential impact in physics and
engineering as well.
