
* 0244787
* Nonlinear partial differential equations and applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2003,02/26/2007
* Panagiotis Souganidis,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2007
* USD 237,992.00

PI: Takis Souganidis, University of Texas, Austin DMS-0244787

ABSTRACT

The PI proposes to continue his program to develop methods to study nonlinear,
parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic, deterministic and stochastic partial
differential equations (pde) arising as models in areas like continuum and
statistical physics, biology, ecology, engineering, etc. The emphasis of this
proposal is on the development of (rigorous) theories for (i) weak (stochastic
viscosity) solutions of fully nonlinear, (degenerate) parabolic stochastic
partial differential equations, and (ii) homogenization (averaging) of
nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic partial differential equations in
spatio-temporal randomly heterogeneous media. The randomness is typically
associated with singular dependence on the state variables and lack of
compactness. Overcoming both issues requires the development of new methods and
tools.

Nonlinear stochastic pde are very often used to model complex phenomena, like
turbulent combustion, nucleations, phase transitions at low temperature, etc.,
It is therefore self-evident that there is a pressing need for the development
of a mathematical theory for such equations. The theory of stochastic viscosity
solutions, which is been developed by the PI and Lions, is of fundamental
importance, since it allows for the study of a completely new and, at the same
time, very rich class of nonlinear stochastic pde arising in many of the
aforementioned contexts. As this theory becomes more available, known and
developed, it is expected that it will play an important role also in
applications, since it will provide the necessary tools to analyze previously
intractable models.

The mathematical modeling of phenomena with many scales at the microscopic
level, like turbulence, front propagation in phase transitions, spatial ecology,
polymer growth, composite and perforated materials in mechanics, often
necessitates the use of random pde with oscillating random parameters. At the
macroscopic level these parameters "average out" and the phenomena are then
described by an averaged (homogenized) equation. This leads naturally to
questions of homogenization of nonlinear pde in spatio-temporal stationary
ergodic settings, which, roughly speaking, are the most general settings where
"self-averaging" is to be expected.


