
* 0300487
* Stability of compressible flow in real media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,08/18/2006
* Kevin Zumbrun,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 543,103.00

PI: Kevin Zumbrun, Indiana University DMS-0300487

ABSTRACT

The principal investigator proposes to study stability of compressible flows in
``real'' media featuring often-neglected effects such as viscosity, heat
conduction, electromagnetic dynamics, phase-transition, non-thermoequilibrium,
and chemical reaction, in the physically interesting (usually large-amplitude)
regime where transition to instability may be expected to occur: for example,
multidimensional stability of strong shock and detonation waves, or of classical
shear flows. This involves interesting and nonstandard issues in singular
perturbation theory, dynamical systems and bifurcation, spectral theory of
linear operators, and nonlinear partial differential equations, and should
result in the development of new mathematical tools of general application. The
ultimate physical goal is an understanding of stability phenomena that is both
more complete and more precise than can be obtained within simplified models: on
the one hand resolving philosophical puzzles at the level of mathematical
foundations and on the other yielding quantitative predictions at the level of
practical application. The plan of attack centers around Evans function and
related spectral techniques developed recently in the study of stability of
viscous shock fronts.

The stability of regular flow patterns is an old and central topic in fluid,
gas, and plasma dynamics, deciding which (stable) patterns will typically be
observed, and which (unstable) are only mathematical and not physically
observable solutions. The transition from stability to instability is of
particular importance, since it usually signals the arising of alternative, more
complicated flow patterns close to the original (now unstable) one- this is a
way to understand complicated flows by the study of simpler and better-
understood ones. Despite a large and well-known body of theory on this subject,
dating back to the late 1800's, there are still many aspects that are poorly
understood, particularly for compressive, viscous, or reacting flows. Here, we
propose to study several of these issues arising in compressible gas and plasma
dynamics, and in combustion, applications in which such usually neglected
effects are of considerable practical importance. Our goal is, by including
these mathematically problematic terms, to move existing theory from the
qualitative to the quantitative regime, obtaining new information of use to
practitioners at the same time that we advance the mathematical theory. The
planned activities have both analytic and numerical components, and involve
collaboration with domestic and foreign colleagues and with current and former
graduate students and post doctorates. This may be expected to strengthen and
extend existing networks of cooperation across field and institution, and to aid
in training of graduate and postdoctoral students. The ultimate aim of these
investigations, of quantitative predictions of transition to instability, would,
if achieved, be of direct and practical use at the level of engineering, in
chemical, manufacturing, and other processes.
