
* 0307872
* Workshop on Ergodic Theory; Chapel Hill, NC
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2003,03/20/2003
* Idris Assani,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2004
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT: Prop 0307872 (Conference on Ergodic Theory)

ABSTRACT

As a follow up of the successful workshop we organized on June 08-09 2002, we
are planning a workshop on ergodic theory at the Department of Mathematics at
UNC Chapel Hill on February 14-16, 2003. This academic year coincides with the
retirement year of Prof. Hillel Furstenberg. Hence the main topic at the 2003
workshop will be on problems related to the nonconventional ergodic averages he
introduced in his famous ergodic proof of Szemeredi's theorem on arithmetic
progressions. We expect to bring together 20 invited speakers and 10-15 graduate
students, Post Doc and junior faculty .Each speaker is expected to give in
his/her talk a mix of new results and surveys. Such talks allow junior
researchers to be introduced smoothly to active and well known research areas in
ergodic theory. We will also have talks in other areas of ergodic theory such as
bifurcation theory, finite rank systems and topological dynamics. The list of
those having already expressed their desire to participate includes Prof. H.
Furstenberg, V. Bergelson, A. Leibman, B. Kra (Junior faculty), A. Tempelman to
name a few. As in the first workshop, proceedings of the conference will be
published with Contemporary Mathematics. The workshop will be advertised broadly
to the mathematics community. Advertisements have been made at Howard
University. Others will be posted on the NAM and AARMS lists and web sites. We
expect interested mathematicians from underrepresented groups to participate.
The workshop is partially supported by the Department of Mathematics at UNC
Chapel Hill.
