
* 0307166
* Operator Theory, Free Probability, and Related Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,07/05/2005
* Hari Bercovici,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 189,084.00

ABSTRACT

DMS 0307166- H Bercovici (Indiana Univ)

The proposer plans to study free harmonic analysis in the sense of determining
regularity properties of free convolutions; free convolutions of measures seem
to exhibit greater regularity than their classical counterparts. He also plans
to investigate limit distributions of free processes, particularly those arising
in the mutliplicative theory. The proposer also will look at related problems in
operator theory, particularly at the behavior of eigenvalues of sums of
selfadjoint elements of a von Neumann algebra, and the relationship of these
questions with Littlewood-Richardson coefficients. Other problems in operator
theory will include the classification of families of isometries on a Hilbert
space.

The research in this proposal is aimed first of all at increasing the
understanding of questions arising in current work in the fields of operator
algebras and operator theory. The proposer has in the past investigated
connections between operators and control theory, and the results in his
proposed work may again have connections with more applied areas. In particular,
some of the proposed interpolation problems arose from questions in control
theory, and free probability theory does have connections with physics. The
proposer will involve graduate students in his work, thus continuing to
contribute to the training of a new generation of mathematicians. He will also
participate in the training of postdoctoral associates, thus contributing to a
successful VIGRE program at Indiana University.
