
* 0308708
* Coding Theory and Quantum Computing
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2003,03/12/2003
* Brian Parshall,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2004
* USD 11,990.00

Principal Investigators: Brian Parshall, David Evans, Jeffrey Holt, Olivier
Pfister and Harold Ward Proposal Number: DMS- 0308708 Institution: University of
Virginia

Abstract: Coding theory and quantum computing

The Department of Mathematics and the Institute for Mathematical Sciences at the
University of Virginia will sponsor an interdisciplinary conference on quantum
computing and coding theory at the University of Virginia on May 20-26, 2003.
The conference will begin with an instructional workshop consisting of three
mini-courses presented by senior experts aimed at providing an introduction to
quantum computing and coding theory. The target audience for the workshop will
consist of advanced graduate students and junior faculty. Quantum computing has
connections with many different areas of mathematics, so that the educational
impact of the program on mathematicians attending the conference should be
considerable. The workshop will be followed by a short conference featuring
invited speakers discussing recent developments. Other conference participants
will also have the opportunity to present contributed talks on their work.

One cannot overstate the potential impact of quantum computing. Current methods
of encrypting data for private transmission are secure not because they are
unbreakable but rather because today's computers and algorithms do not have the
speed or efficiency to break the code. When developed, quantum computers will
make current encryption methods insecure and obsolete. These computers will also
provide new means of quickly searching databases of information, which would
have many important applications in biotechnology and data mining.
