
* 0330617
* Conference Support - First East Coast Operator Algebras Symposium; September 20-21, 2003; Nashville, TN
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,06/03/2003
* Dietmar Bisch,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract Bisch The main goal of this project is to gain a deeper understanding
of the structure of subfactors and their standard invariants. The novel planar
algebra techniques will be used to investigate and construct subfactors through
a generators and relations approach to the associated planar algebras. This will
build on prior work of Bisch and Jones in which a complete classification of
singly generated planar algebras subject to a certain natural dimension
condition was given. For instance, the Fuss-Catalan algebras of Bisch and Jones,
whose representations have been used to construct new integrable lattice models
in statistical mechanics, appear as an important part of this classification
program. Annular Fuss-Catalan algebras will be investigated with the ultimate
goal of using them to answer questions related to intermediate subfactors.
Obstructions for compositions of subfactors and rigidity properties of
subfactors will be analyzed. Potential applications of subfactor ideas and
techniques to statistical mechanics and quantum information theory will be
investigated. Ideas from operator algebras and non-commutative geometry have
gained increasing importance in conformal field theory, string theory and
quantum information theory. It has become clear that the symmetries of non-
commutative spaces and quantum physical systems can no longer be understood
through classical mathematical objects alone (such as groups). A subfactor can
be viewed as a mathematical object that captures these new symmetries and
operator algebra techniques can be used to analyze and understand them. A
particular intriguing structure that appears naturally in this context are the
planar algebras, a structure that allows one to compute with very abstract
mathematical objects by simply manipulating planar diagrams topologically. Such
a formalism is tailor-made for applications in statistical mechanics and new
solvable models based on these ideas have already been constructed. One of the
founders of the theory of operator algebras was John von Neumann who in the
1930's discovered that certain algebras of operators on a Hilbert space are the
natural framework for understanding symmetries of quantum physical systems. His
ideas play an important role in quantum mechanics and fundamental laws of nature
such as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle appear as a natural consequence of
von Neumann's abstract theory. The theory of subfactors, which is based on von
Neumann's concepts, had an important impact across several fields in mathematics
and physics with profound applications to knot theory, low dimensional topology,
statistical mechanics and conformal field theory to mention just a few.
