
* 0400940
* Research in Schroedinger Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/2004,06/25/2004
* Dirk Hundertmark,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 93,001.00

DMS-0400940 Title: Research in Schroedinger operators PI: Dirk Hundertmark
(University of Illinois)

ABSTRACT

The PI proposes research in three areas in the spectral theory of Schr"odinger
operators. Firstly, the PI will continue work on bounds for eigenvalue moments
of single-particle Schr"odinger operators, the Lieb-Thirring inequalities. Lieb-
Thirring inequalities are known to be an indispensable tool in the spectral
theory of Schr"odinger operators, especially for the study of macroscopic
Coulomb systems. Besides their original application, they have proven to be
useful in other fields, for example, in non-linear PDE. The objective of the
proposal is twofold: to achieve a good understanding of the scalar case for
small moments and low dimensions, and to develop a general method to lift bounds
from the scalar case to operator-valued potentials. In this way, estimates in
low dimension would have immediate consequences for bounds in higher dimensions.
Secondly, the author plans to study Wegner estimates for the integrated density
of states for singular random potentials. These are important a-priori estimates
in the spectral theory of random Schr"odinger operators. The third problem
focuses on spectral properties of a non self-adjoint matrix Schr"odinger
operator, given by the linearization of NLS around solitons. In particular, the
question of embedded eigenvalues will be studied. These results should lead to a
better understanding of asymptotic completeness for focusing NLS.

The proposed projects aim at some basic questions in mathematical physics, more
precisely, the rigorous study of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Recent
results on Lieb-Thirring inequalities have revived the general interest in this
field and have proven useful in other areas of mathematical physics. It is
expected that they will continue to do so. One aim of this proposal is to find
new tools to establish these kind of inequalities. Random Schr"odinger operators
model the behaviour of electrons in disordered matter. It is a fact from every
day life that highly disordered materials are bad conductors. In the last two
decades, our mathematical understanding of this and related effects has grown
rapidly. But basically all models still have some unrealistic assumptions. An
important a priori estimate for the spectral theory of random Schr"odinger
operators are regularity results (i.e., smoothness) for the so-called density of
states. Despite a lot of attention from several groups working in theory of
random Schr"odinger operators, the regularity proofs are still mainly based on
the old ideas of Wegner. They require strong nd mainly technical assumptions,
excluding most physically relevant rough random potentials. Except for some very
special cases, singular random potentials are still out of reach of the existing
methods. So new ideas and, in particular, a better understand of the underlying
physical mechanism will be required, in order to be able to establish the
regularity results for rough random potentials. The third problem, embedded
eigenvalues for a certain class of non self-adjoint matrix Schr"odinger
operators, is motivated by the study of the non-linear Schr"odinger equation. By
itself it is still a problem in linear functional analysis. However, with the
twist that very a fine and detailed knowledge of the properties of this
linearized operator is needed in order to improve the understanding of the long-
time properties of solutions of the non-linear Schr"odinger equation.
