
* 0400636
* Determining Analytic Properties of Maps from Non-Analytic Data
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2004,06/21/2004
* Sergiy Merenkov,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2006
* USD 75,001.00

The PI proposes to study how certain non-analytic information determines
analytic properties of maps. A conformal map between two surfaces is one that
preserves angles at each point. This is a very restrictive assumption, and it is
interesting to understand to what extent properties of such maps can be deduced
from other topological, combinatorial, algebraic, set-theoretic, or analytic
assumptions. An example is determining the conformal type of surfaces, namely,
whether a surface is conformally equivalent to to a model surface. In the higher
dimensional case, biholomorphic equivalence is used in place of conformal
equivalence. Some specific topics that the PI proposes to study are: surfaces
whose conformal type is determined by combinatorial properties of the associated
net, a question raised by EB Vinberg, and two topics related to questions raised
by L. Rubel, namely, maximal growth functions that have finitely many critical
and asymptotic values, and the study of complex manifolds whose biholomorphic
type can be recovered from the knowledge of associated semigroups of analytic
endomorphisms and the semiconjugation of analytic functions.. These questions
have possible applications in several branches of Mathematics.

While these questions fall squarely within the framework of Geometric Function
Theory. This subject has its roots in applications to the natural sciences and
engineering. Particular examples are Conformal Field Theory and Statistical
Mechanics. In the latter subject, Percolation Theory uses heavily the concept of
conformal invariance and its generalizations, to which this proposal is partly
dedicated.


