
* 0400810
* Quasiconformal Deformation of Self-similar Sets and Fatou Theorems for p-Laplacian
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2004,05/17/2007
* Jang-Mei Wu,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 115,000.00

The proposed research deals with two important areas of analysis: quasiconformal
deformation of fractals and solutions of p-Laplace equations. Analysis on
fractals has been actively pursued in recent years. Quasiconformal mappings, an
intermediate class between homeomorphisms and diffeomorphisms, are natural
candidates for deforming fractals. Mathematically, fractals appear as invariant
sets of iterated function systems. This project provides conditions on the
iterated function system under which these invariant sets are quasisymmetrically
equivalent; conditions for extending such quasisymmetric homeomorphisms to
global quasiconformal mappings; methods of lowering the Hausdorff dimension of
self-similar fractals; and answers to related questions on more general sets.
The PI, in collaboration with J. Tyson, has obtained conclusive results for
Sierpinski gaskets, a special class of fractals. In nonlinear elasticity,
solutions of p-Laplace equation minimize the total energy. When p is different
from 2, due to the nonlinearity and degeneracy, the boundary behavior of
solutions is still largely a mystery. In the late 80's, T. Wolff and J. Lewis
produced unexpected examples showing, when p was not equal to 2, solutions
behave differently from the case when p= 2, i.e., Fatou's theorem fails.
Recently the PI, in collaboration with R. Kaufman, incorporated probabilistic
and discrete ideas into the research program, and made progress by showing that
in the case of the half plane the boundary behavior is worse than previously
known for certain values of p.The PI proposes to investigate the curious
boundary behavior for the full range of p; to study properties of harmonic
measure for the p-Laplacian on boundary of the half plane; and also to continue
her work in the tree setting, where many of the probabilistic ideas originated.

As fractals appear everywhere in nature from ferns to galaxies, it is important
to find out how two seemingly different fractals are related through
transformations, and how the dimension of a fractal changes during the
transformation. The success of the first part of proposal will answer some of
these questions, which should be of interest to biologists, physicists and
mathematicians. Many differential equations based on physical models are
genuinely nonlinear; and finding explicit solutions is usually impossible. To
learn the nature of the solutions, one relies on estimates from partial
differential equations. In this project, ideas from discrete analysis and
probability are brought in to handle some of the difficulties. The success of
this project will provide new tools to study the boundary behavior of a large
class of nonlinear partial differential equations and will have practical
applications to nonlinear hydrodynamics, fluid flow, elasticity and dynamical
systems. Moreover, some questions on trees and on fractals lead naturally to
problems suitable for student research, which the PI plans to direct.


