
* 0400493
* Symbolic Dynamics and Related Topics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2004,09/02/2004
* Michael Boyle,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT Boyle

Symbolic dynamics is a subject that serves as a tool within dynamics and as an
arena for the development of models and examples. The subject has significant
connections with algebra, coding theory and matrix theory and it has strong
roots in probability and ergodic theory, as one of the basic objects
(topological Markov chain or shift of finite type) is the topological support of
a Markov chain and a major tool for application of the thermodynamic formalism.
There remain basic open problems at the heart of the subject as well as new
frontiers. The project is concerned with problems of both sorts, to be addressed
with algebraic, analytic and ergodic theoretic tools, as is demanded by the
nature of the subject. At the core of the subject is the open problem of
classifying shifts of finite type; the ideas involved in the rejection of
Williams' longstanding shift equivalence conjecture leave this problem perhaps
less intractable than before. Related to this is a set of classification
problems for various symbolic dynamical systems. At the heart of this proposal
is work within "Positive K-theory", a setting for both solving these problems
and restructuring the foundations of the subject. Classification is recast as
equivalence of matrices over various rings under multiplication by chains of
elementary matrices subject to positivity conditions. Symbolic dynamics is a
dynamical tool by way of symbolic extensions of given dynamical systems. There
is now a general entropy theory of symbolic extensions, and the proposed
research would provide a still deeper understanding of the possible symbolic
extensions of a system. The proposal also aims to progress on certain problems
involving Zd symbolic actions; the classification of finite state Markov chains
up to good finitary isomorphism; the classification of positively recurrent
countable state Markov chains up to entropy-negligible conjugacy; and the
classification of toral endomorphisms up to measurable isomorphism. The proposed
research is to be done in the context of education, primarily of graduate
students but also undergraduates. A vehicle for this has been the "research
interaction team" of the P.I., meeting in the academic year once or twice weekly
since September 2002. This group includes undergraduate and graduate students,
and others such as visiting faculty or postdocs as available.
