
* 0400054
* Applications of Logic, Set Theory and Combinatorics to the Geometry of Banach Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2004,03/29/2004
* Edward Odell,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 110,880.00

The study of geometry of infinite dimensional normed linear spaces is the
subject of this project. Some such spaces X are elastic, i.e., they stretch to
uniformly absorb all spaces that embed into them. One goal of this project is to
determine if they must actually be universal, absorbing all spaces of their
size. Logic and combinatorics provide some of the tools necessary to attack this
problem. Other problems concerning the notion of "partial unconditionality" in
normed spaces will also be the subject of this project. These turn out to be
related to some fascinating coding problems where one seemingly needs to predict
the future in a nondeterministic way to solve the problem. Other problems will
be attacked using certain machinery that meshes together the finite and infinite
dimensional substructures of a Banach space (a normed linear space without
holes).

(Non-technical description)

This project involves the study of the geometry of normed linear spaces.
Ordinary three-dimensional space in which we live is an example of such an
object. Distance is measured "as the crow flies". However other geometries and
higher dimensions are necessary for applications. A transmitted signal might be
a sequence of 0's and 1's. A corrupted signal might differ from the intended one
in a number of places (0's become 1's or vice versa). One can measure the degree
of correctness of the corrupted signal by counting the number of errors. This
corresponds to a "taxi-cab" distance or geometry in n-dimensional space. For
example in 2-dimensional space we can measure distance by moving only E-W or
N-S, i.e., along roads a taxi-cab could travel. This project will study such
alternate geometries using sophisticated tools of combinatorics and logic.
Often, the goal is to discover nice substructures among seemingly random larger
complicated geometries.
