
* 0400702
* Qualitative Studies of Parabolic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2004,05/26/2004
* Peter Polacik,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 90,000.00

Proposal DMS-0400702

Title: Qualitatitve studies of parabolic partial differential equations PI:
Peter Polacik, University of Minnesota (Twin Cities)

ABSTRACT

The abstract follows:

The project will develop along the following central themes: symmetry properties
of positive solutions of parabolic PDEs, principal Floquet bundles and
exponential separation, large time behavior of solutions of parabolic PDEs and
the dynamics of quasilinear competition-diffusion systems.

Symmetry (radial or reflectional) plays an important role in qualitative
analysis of solutions of PDEs. By now, a fairly general understanding of
symmetry of positive solutions has been achieved for second order elliptic
equations on both bounded and unbounded domains, and for parabolic equations on
bounded domains. For nonautonomous parabolic equations on unbounded domains the
symmetry problem has not been addressed so far. This problem is more intriguing;
standard methods used in earlier symmetry results do not give desired
conclusions. Exponential separation, associated with the principal Floquet
bundle of linearized parabolic equations, is among new techniques that can
facilitate the analysis. The principal Floquet bundle is an interesting topic in
its own right. It is a natural extension of the concept of principal
eigenfunction of elliptic operators to nonautonomous parabolic operators which
has already proved very useful in the study of nonlinear equations. Both its
basic properties and applications are to be further investigated. A better
understanding is needed to make this tool applicable to problems on unbounded
domains, however, ideas related to this concept have already triggered progress
in the symmetry problem. The next topic, large-time behavior, includes in
particular a basic question on the semilinear heat equation, as to whether all
bounded solutions on multidimensional domains converge to an equilibrium. This
has been already been answered (negatively) for spatially inhomogeneous
equations. For homogeneous equations, this long standing open problem will
require new ideas. Competition-diffusion systems that are to be considered in
the project have their origins in ecology. Bifurcations of steady states, their
stability and as complete as possible an understanding of global dynamics is
expected to shed light on coexistence of species (of phenotypes) with different
dispersal rates. While a large class of semilinear systems has already been
successfully treated, more realistic quasilinear systems call for a new
approach.

In less technical terms, the project can be characterized as qualitative or
geometric analysis of solutions of nonlinear evoution equations, such as
reaction-diffusion equations. As a rule, such nonlinear equations can "never be
solved". Letting aside exact solutions which are very rarely available,
approximate methods, even with the presently available computation power, can
seldom provide answers to questions of global nature, for example, questions on
the behavior of solutions on infinite time intervals or collective behavior of
solutions (structural stability). Yet, for the internal development of the
theory of PDEs as well as for improvement of their modeling relevance in other
sciences, such questions are important to ask and answer. For this purpose, many
methods of qualitative analysis of nonlinear PDEs have been developed, mainly in
the last 2-3 decades. The present project relies on these methods, combining
classical PDE techniques with dynamical systems ideas, and, at the same time,
attempts at development of new techniques. Among main objectives of the project
is the description of the large time behavior of the solutions. Spatial profiles
(symmetries) and temporal behavior (asymptotic periodicity, stabilization to
equilibria) will both be examined.


