
* 0400387
* Fourier Analysis: Old Themes, New Perspectives
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2004,02/01/2008
* Loukas Grafakos,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 170,905.00

DMS 0400387 PI: Loukas Grafakos Unviersity of Missouri Fourier Analysis: Old
themes, new perspective

Abstract

Many problems in Fourier Analysis are as old as the subject itself. The quest to
understand some of these problems has pushed the research to such extraordinary
developments that new connections with many other scientific areas have been
discovered and new perspectives revealed. One of these new perspectives is the
multilinear point of view that has significantly refined and enriched our
classical approach of studying problems via the method of freezing variables.
The basic idea in multilinear analysis is that linearly independent functional
parameters are treated as linear variables, allowing a higher degree of freedom
and greater flexibility, which often results in a deeper and more far-reaching
understanding. The principal investigator proposes to embark on an extensive
study of translation-invariant multilinear operators, both broad enough to cover
most known examples, but also deep enough to include special operators of a very
singular nature. This proposal consists of three parts: positive theory,
negative results, and general theory. Proposed work on the positive theory
includes extension of the range of boundedness of the bilinear Hilbert transform
and other multilinear rough singular integrals. Negative results focus on the
disc multiplier outside the locally square integrable case, the bilinear Hilbert
transform on products of integrable functions, as well as the Carleson-Hunt
operator on spaces of nearly integrable functions and certain higher dimensional
versions of all the previous operators. The proposed general theory will focus
on topics concerning multilinear interpolation and extrapolation. These items
provide important tools that simplify the study of the subject.

The main goal of Fourier Analysis is to study complicated objects via
decompositions into simpler pieces. Just as music can be disassembled into
compositions of integral multiples of a simple basic frequency, complicated
operators can be represented by their actions on a spectrum of frequencies.
Fourier analysis provides the tools that relate special (time) and phasial
(frequency) aspects of the same function (signal). Irregularities of signals and
images are better located once these are decomposed into small pieces and
studied via Fourier analysis. For instance, noise and blurring are easily
located with the application of the Fourier transform, but nowadays even more
challenging feats can be achieved. In this investigation, certain operators are
to be studied using decomposition techniques sensitive to both time and
frequency considerations. Such operators are often defined by altering the
frequency of input signals via multiplication by a fixed and often nonsmooth
function. In practice, the abrupt interruption of radio communication or
television transmission by a meteorological phenomenon are examples of such
operators. The protection against the loss of information can be mathematically
modeled as the preservation of integrability and this is proposed to be
investigated here.


