
* 0401084
* Geometric Methods in Representation Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2004,06/15/2004
* Shrawan Kumar,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,999.00

ABSTRACT

The PI intends to continue work in the general area of `Lie Theory and
Geometry.' He proposes the following four projects. Let g be a simple Lie
algebra and let E be the exterior algebra on two copies of g. Then, under the
adjoint action, E has three copies of g sitting in total degree two terms of E.
Let A be the quotient algebra of E divided by the ideal generated by these three
copies of g. Motivated from Supersymmetric Gauge Theory, Cachazo-Douglas-
Seiberg-Witten conjectured (and proved for classical g) that the bigraded
algebra of invariants in A is generated by the unique invariant element of A of
bidegree (1,1) subject to the only relation that its power by the dual Coxeter
number is zero. The aim of the first project undertaken by the PI jointly with
Prof. P. Etingof from MIT is to prove this conjecture in full generality. They
have come up with an interesting link between this conjecture and Cyclic
Homology. The second project in collaboration with Prof. P. Belkale is motivated
by the works of Klyachko, Fulton, Knutson-Tao, Berenstein-Sjamaar and Belkale
related to the celebrated Horn's conjecture on the Hermitian eigen value problem
and its generalization to any semisimple group. The PI proposes to study the
problem of deciding when three or more Schubert cycles in an arbitrary partial
flag variety intersect nontrivially. They have come up with two entirely
different formulations of possible solution; one in terms of representation
theory of the Levi component L of the parabolic, while the other is an inductive
recipe (similar to Horn's inductive definition of his set of inequalities) which
reduces the problem of deciding when three Schubert cycles intersect
nontrivially to the corresponding problem for the group L and so on. Already
some positive results have been obtained by them. The third project concerns
proving a conjecture of V. Ginzburg on the ring of functions on the closure of
the orbit of a principal nilpotent pair. By using Geometric Invariant Theory,
the PI jointly with Prof. J. Thomsen from Arhus has reduced the conjecture to
the study of orbit closure of the line passing through an `associated semisimple
pair.' Moreover, they have made a considerable progress towards the
determination of this closure. The fourth project in collaboration with Prof. C.
Procesi from Rome deals with the cohomology algebra of Springer fibers. It is
proposed to realize the equivariant cohomology of these varieties as the
coordinate ring of an `explicit' affine variety and then obtain the singular
(nonequivariant) cohomology by specialization. The problem of finding affine
models for the equivariant cohomology of Springer fibers has already been solved
by them for the case of special linear groups.

The proposed projects underline the theme of unity in mathematics as they are
expected to derive ideas from several areas of mathematics including Topology,
Algebraic Geometry, Representation Theory and Combinatorics. In addition, the
first project owes its origins in Mathematical Physics and it is expected that
its final solution will have to use ideas from Mathematical Physics in a crucial
manner. All of these projects suggested by the PI represent some of the very
difficult and important problems of current interest which, if solved, should
also help clarify the results in the existing known cases. In addition, it is
expected that the solutions will spawn a lot of activity in the area. The PI and
his collaborators have considerable expertise in the techniques he is proposing
to use and they have successfully used some of these techniques earlier in
solving other problems. All the projects are in collaboration with other
mathematicians from within USA and abroad. The PI has recently written two
books. These books should serve as a basic source for graduate students and
professional mathematicians alike. The PI expects these books (both being the
first in their areas) to become advanced graduate texts thus substantially
promoting teaching and learning. Currently, PI has one student Arzu Boysal
working for her PhD. He has successfully supervised four PhD students earlier.
