
* 0401048
* Regularity Problems for Multiple Integrals and Interfacial Coarsening for Energy-Driven Models
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2004,04/15/2004
* Xiaodong Yan,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 89,100.00

Proposal DMS-0401048 PI: Xiaodong Yan, Michigan State University

Title: Regularity properties for multiple integrals and interfacial coarsening
for energy-driven models

The proposal addresses problems in three main areas. In part one, we are
concerned with regularity property of minimizers of uniformly convex
functionals. The objective is to generalize method used in previous work of
Sverak and PI to construct counterexamples in lower target dimensions, as well
as to understand regularity property of minimizers under further assumptions on
the integrand. The second part deals with regularity property of minimizers for
both compressible and incompressible models from nonlinear elasticity. The main
feature here is the singular behavior of the integrand in the compressible case
and nonlinear nonconvex constraint in the incompressible case. Currently there
is no general method to deal with regularity problems for such integral. We hope
that the simple model problems studied in this project can help to gain insight
into more general cases. The third part addresses interfacial coarsening
phenomenon observed in many energy-driven models from materials science. In
particular, the aim is to provide rigorous analysis on the value of the
coarsening exponent for different models. The analysis is closely related to
deep and interesting issues in calculus of variations, e.g.gamma limit of
singularly perturbed variational problems. The well developed tools from those
areas provide a better vision on the last project.

The questions to be studied are motivated both by classical theory of
optimization and contemporary issues in nonlinear elasticity and materials
science. An outstanding open question in continuum mechanics is to determine
what singularities might exist in surfaces which optimize a collection of
nonlinear constraints. Knowledge of this type can help in the design of exotic
materials. The study of coarsening is important for both bulk and thin film
materials. Such materials are of great practical interest. For example,
superconducting thin film devices are presently being evaluated for possible use
in high-performance microwave filters and other applications.
