
* 0406627
* Local Regularity and Long Time Behavior of Solutions on Non-Linear Evolution Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2004,04/28/2004
* Igor Rodnianski,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 144,000.00

Proposal DMS-04006627

Title: Local regularity and long time behavior of solutions of nonlinear
evolution equations

PI: Igor Rodnianski, Princeton University

ABSTRACT

The focus of this proposal is the study of the local regularity and global
behavior of solutions of the Einstein equations. The local behavior is encoded
in the propagation of local regularity in the scale of the L2 based Sobolev
spaces. We will attack the L2 curvature conjecture, which asserts that a
solution, metric g, of the Einstein vacuum equations Ric(g)=0 can be locally
extended as long as its curvature tensor is bounded in L2. The problem is beyond
the range of application of the standard Fourier analysis based methods and thus
will require development of new analytic tools. The global behavior will be
studied in the context of the problem of stability of Minkowski space in the
wave coordinate gauge. This particular gauge is used in physics to construct the
post-Minkowskian approximations and we hope to provide an additional insight
into validity of these expansions. The stability problem belongs to the category
of global existence for solutions with small data problems for the equations not
satisfying the standard null condition.

The Einstein equations of General Relativity provide the main classical
description of evolution of the physical space-time continuum. The study of
mathematical and physical phenomena arising in General Relativity is of the
fundamental importance. While the physical understanding of the subject has made
rapid advancement and generated a number of outstanding conjectures the rigorous
mathematical picture is yet to emerge. The latter is to a large extent due to a
highly nonlinear nature of the Einstein equations and a lack of the mathematical
tools to deal with it. The development of a satisfactory mathematical approach
lies on the interface between Analysis, Geometry and Partial Differential
Equations.


