
* 0411729
* Constructive Functions Tech-04: An International Conference
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 08/15/2004,08/09/2004
* Doron Lubinsky,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 16,500.00

DMS 0411729

Doron Lubinsky et al

Georgia Tech

Constructive Functions Tech 04



CONSTRUCTIVE FUNCTIONS TECH-O4 will be held November 7-9, 2004 at Georgia
Institute of Technology. This conference will cover all aspects of constructive
function theory: from potential theory, to the theory of orthogonal polynomials
and special functions, to approximation theory and to the interactions with
several areas of classical, functional, and numerical analysis. It will also
emphasize applications of these disciplines to data fitting, curve and surface
fitting, wavelets, and signal and image processing. The conference intends to
provide opportunities for cross fertilization of ideas among these areas.

Constructive function theory, potential theory, the theory of orthogonal
polynomials and special functions, and approximation theory are well-established
branches of analysis which have retained their vitality over many years. Their
recent interactions with other fields have produced many important advances
inside and outside the disciplines. For example, sophisticated applications of
potential theory have permitted solutions to problems that had been open for
decades. The recent Riemann-Hilbert approach by Percy Deift, Xin Zhou and others
to orthogonal polynomials has produced solutions to long- standing problems
related to random matrices, which in turn find applications in combinatorics and
statistical physics. Very recently, there have been great advances in
asymptotics of orthogonal polynomials on the unit circle with strong connection
to the spectral analysis of operators. Barry Simon's 700 page monograph, to be
published by the American Mathematical Society, attests to the vitality of the
area.

One of the main objectives of the conference is to stimulate discussion and
inspire ideas among researchers, and to provide a forum for workers in the
fields to meet and discuss current research. The conference will be broad-based
and this will undoubtedly attract a good mix of academic, industrial, and
government researchers with a strong international component (by the current
count, over 90 researchers have pre-registered on the conference's web site from
26 different nations). We expect around 80 to 100 participants.

The meeting will be completely open, with opportunities for many participants to
present current research. At the same time, we Expect the conference to serve as
a means to acquaint attendees with the state-of-art in several areas of special
current interest through plenary presentations by 18 leading international
experts. One or two problem sessions will also be arranged in order to discuss
important research directions. Lastly, an equally important objective of the
organizers is to secure the participation of young researchers, especially women
and minorities, and doctoral students working in constructive function theory,
potential theory, the theory of orthogonal polynomials and special functions,
and approximation theory and related fields.


