
* 0437404
* Ergodic Properties of Nonuniformly Hyperbolic Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2003,06/21/2005
* Huyi Hu,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 66,064.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0202999 PI: Huyi Hu

ABSTRACT

This project is devoted to the study of ergodic properties of nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems. We focus on almost hyperbolic systems and some related
systems. An smooth dynamical system is almost hyperbolic if it is hyperbolic
everywhere except at a finite set of points. Such systems may have quite
different ergodic behaviors from uniformly hyperbolic systems. In this project
we will study existence of equilibrium states, including SRB measures and
absolutely continuous invariant measures in multidimensional spaces; rates of
convergence to the equilibrium states for both finite and infinite measure
cases, and some related topics such as rates of decay of correlations of the
systems and the central limit theorem; some other ergodic properties of the
systems such as stochastic stability, Gibbs properties, topological conjugation.
We are also interested in using these or similar systems to construct varies
examples of systems that have given properties, for instance, diffeomorphisms or
flows on any manifolds that preserve the Riemannian volume, have nonzero
Lyapunov exponents almost everywhere, and have countably many ergodic
components.

Ergodic theory concerns the statistic behavior of systems. Ergodic properties
of uniformly hyperbolic systems were the main research subject in smooth
dynamical systems from 60's to 80's. The behaviors of such systems are regarded
as chaotic. Now nonuniformly hyperbolic systems become a main research topic in
the field. This project is devoted to the study of ergodic properties of almost
hyperbolic systems and some other related systems. Almost hyperbolic systems are
smooth dynamical systems in which hyperbolic conditions are violated at only
finitely number of points. These systems lie on the boundary of the set of
uniformly hyperbolic systems, and are the simplest but nontrivial nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems. Earlier studies on examples of such systems, such as systems
on the intervals and torus, show that some ergodic properties may change
dramatically. In this project we try to develop some theorems for general almost
hyperbolic systems rather than individual examples.


