
* 0451230
* Combinatorial Ergodic theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2004,05/18/2005
* Bryna Kra,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 53,739.00

Abstract: DMS-0244994: Byrna Kra

Penn State University

Kra proposes research in several areas of ergodic theory and differentiable
dynamics, with an emphasis on applications of ergodic theory to number theory
and combinatorics. The major area of research is the study of ``non-
conventional'' ergodic averages, studying ergodic theorems for averages of
functions where even if the system is ergodic, the limit need not be constant.
The investigator proposes studying polynomial averages, averages for commuting
transformations and averages along other sequences of recurrence. Additional
lines of research are based on her work on circle maps, including connections
between the differentiability of the map, the arithmetic properties of its
rotation number and the dimension of its invariant limit set.

The project studies the long term behavior of systems whose dynamics is too
complicated or too chaotic to be understood locally. Dynamical systems are used
to model problems in natural and social sciences and their study leads to an
understanding of the evolution of the modeled phenomena. The educational portion
of the project aims to contribute to the graduate and undergraduate programs at
Penn State University, with special courses designed to inject research into the
learning process at an early stage. In fall 2003, the PI will develop and teach
a course on topological dynamics and Ramsey Theory in the MASS (Mathematics
Advanced Studies Semesters) program, a long-standing program aimed at talented
fourth-year undergraduates chosen in national competition. The outreach portion
aims to make the Mathematics Department at Penn State a more attractive place
for women to study and work, with the creation of a focus group on women's
issues and support of research projects for undergraduate women.


