
* 0456306
* FRG: Collaborative Research: New Trends in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2005,04/21/2005
* Alex Iosevich,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 474,245.00

Abstract for 0456538 Lacey, 0456306 Iosevich, and 0456490 Magyar

The proposed activity will focus a set of topics of current interest in Harmonic
Analysis: the Kakeya conjecture, the Fourier restriction problem and Carleman
estimates, the smoothing conjecture for the wave equation, and Zygmund's
conjecture on the differentiation along Lipschitz families of lines. Equally
central are newer questions that are being identified and studied, including the
discrete analogues of classical operators, aspects of the Fuglede conjecture,
Fourier integral operators with degenerate canonical relations and new classes
of singular integrals in complex analysis. Past advances in these subjects have
drawn influences from subjects such as Combinatorics, Additive Combinatorics,
and Number Theory to name some prominent areas. In turn, these questions are
making contributions to these same areas. The coordination of the efforts that
this proposal will permit should accelerate advances on this broad range of
topics.



The proposed activities concern central questions that will result in new modes
of analytical technique that bear on questions of, for instance, behavior of
waves in higher dimensions, and different aspects of the subtle distinctions
between discrete, i.e. digital, and continuous objects. In addition, the
projects will draw upon methods and techniques from a range of different areas
of mathematics. The breadth and sophistication of the analytical methods in the
subject sheds new light on the interrelationships between these areas. It also
can be an obstacle to continued research. This project has as an important of
focus the training of graduate students and postdocs in these emerging areas of
research, and the wide variety of techniques used in their analysis. These
efforts will foster a next generation of mathematicians, critical to the nations
scientific infrastructure.
