
* 0456627
* Ergodic Theory Workshop
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2005,06/02/2005
* Idris Assani,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT

As a continuation of the successful workshops we organized on June 2002,
February 2003, 2004 and 2005, we are planning two ergodic (and probability)
workshops in February 2006 and 2007 in the Department of Mathematics at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. These workshops are partially
funded by the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute at Berkeley and are part
of the MSRI network conferences. They are also supported in part by the
Department of Mathematics at UNC Chapel Hill. The main themes of these workshops
are recent progress on the convergence of the ergodic averages and their
connections with number theory and probability. Two possible topics could be the
pointwise convergence of ergodic averages along the squares in L1 and the
recently shown existence of arbitrary long arithmetic progressions among prime
numbers. The organization is similar to the one used in the past workshops. We
are trying to bring together young (graduate students, Post Doc, Assistant
Professors) and senior researchers during the three days of the workshops.
Senior researchers are asked to give semi expository talks to allow junior
researchers to get a good introduction to some active research areas. Younger
researchers and especially PhD students are encouraged to give talks and ask
questions. Problems sessions are presented and discussed during the workshops.

In terms of intellectual merit these 2006 and 2007 workshops provide an
opportunity for young researchers to meet worldwide experts in ergodic theory
and related fields and to have helpful discussions that would advance their
career. Younger researchers will be able to apply for travel support directly
from the conferences websites. Senior researchers certainly have fruitful
exchanges with their fellow mathematicians. In terms of broader impact the
standing of the invited speakers adds visibility to the Department of
Mathematics as a whole. Mathematicians from under-represented groups are being
looked for through advertisements at HBCU or the AARMS web sites and some are
invited to speak. We hope that such workshops will help increase the
participation of mathematicians from under represented groups into the graduate
program at UNC Chapel Hill. As was the case with the previous workshops, we
expect the proceedings of these 2006-2007 workshops to be published by
Contemporary Mathematics. The first proceedings have appeared under the title
"Chapel Hill ergodic theory workshops".


