
* 0456858
* Tomography and Integral Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,06/07/2005
* Eric Todd Quinto,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2010
* USD 93,000.00

ABSTRACT:

Professor Quinto will pursue problems in tomography and the mathematical
analysis of Radon transforms. He will develop and refine tomographic singularity
detection algorithms and apply them to electron microscopy. Professor Quinto has
successfully tested his limited data tomography algorithm on electron microscope
data, and he will use these results as a basis for further refinement with the
goal of incorporating scattering and other effects. He will continue research on
the approximate inverse in three-dimensional SONAR. Professor Quinto plans to
prove uniqueness theorems for a model of synthetic aperture RADAR, research
which is based on his pure mathematical work. Within pure mathematics, the
principal investigator plans to prove uniqueness and support theorems for
spherical Radon transforms. He and Professor Agranovsky will use these results
to characterize stationary sets of solutions of the wave equation. Stationary
sets, where the solution is zero for all time, are very important and difficult
to characterize. He plans to prove uniqueness theorems for Radon transforms on
spheres on real-analytic manifolds and use these results to begin to
characterize stationary sets on rank-one symmetric spaces. He is proving Morera
theorems for the distinguished boundary of polydisks, and he plans to generalize
them to complex manifolds. He hopes to prove inverse continuity for an important
class of local limited data problems or clarify when they do not hold.

This research encompasses both applied and pure mathematics: tomography and
integral geometry. The pure research will be used to develop, understand, and
justify the applied algorithms, and the applied problems will motivate much of
the pure research. A computed tomography algorithm will be developed for
electron microscopy and tested jointly with colleagues at the Karolinska
Institute in Sweden. Our goal is to produce accurate pictures of viruses and
small molecules using an electron microscope. Jointly with a colleague and an
undergraduate student, he will develop an algorithm for emission tomography, a
type of tomography that locates metabolic processes. He will develop pure
mathematics that will show how well the algorithms work and where their
limitations might occur. These pure mathematical underpinnings are required to
ensure that his (or any other) algorithms are as effective as they can be. SONAR
data can be modeled as averages over spheres (the spherical wave fronts of the
sound wave), and Professor Quinto will jointly develop new algorithms for SONAR.
This pure mathematics is intriguing in its own right. Professor Quinto will
prove theorems about spherical averages which will be used to understand the
wave equation (the equation that describes how sound and light behave). The wave
equation describes the motion of a drum head, and he will specify which points
on the drum do not move at all. Finally, he will prove theorems he will apply to
complex and harmonic analysis, fields in pure mathematics.


