
* 0456611
* Investigations in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2005,09/20/2009
* Michael Lacey,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 597,426.00

The PI and Xiaochun Li have recently established the boundedness of a degenerate
Radon transform, in which a Hilbert transform is computed on choice of
directions in the plane. The critical point is that the choice of directions is
only assumed to be smooth, with no geometric condition imposed on the choice of
directions. The method of proof involves an intricate set of phase plane
methods, together with novel Kakeya maximal function. There are several aspects
of this transform that remain poorly understood, and the PI will work to resolve
some of these issues. In a second direction, the PI, with Sarah Ferguson and
Erin Terwilleger have provided the natural extension of the Nehari theorem to
'little' Hankel operators on product Hardy space. Namely, such Hankel operators
are bounded iff their symbol is in product BMO. This is fundamental criteria,
which opens up a range of questions in operator theory in several complex
variables. This range of questions forms the second avenue of investigation that
will be pursued in this project.

The range of problems to be pursued in this project will require the creation of
new techniques in the broad area of analysis. The objects studies arise
naturally in physical processes, such as charge distribution namely the Hilbert
transform, medical imaging, namely Radon transforms, and control theory, namely
Hankel operators. The questions addressed concern how well behaved these objects
are, and the resolution of these questions should yield important insights into
deeper aspects of these objects. These insights have in the past lead to
important advances in signal processing, imaging, and control theory.
Postdoctoral associates and graduate students will also be engaged in this
project, enhancing the scientific infrastructure of the country. The PI and
Xiaochun Li have recently established the boundedness of a degenerate Radon
transform, in which a Hilbert transform is computed on choice of directions in
the plane. The critical point is that the choice of directions is only assumed
to be smooth, with no geometric condition imposed on the choice of directions.
The method of proof involves an intricate set of phase plane methods, together
with novel Kakeya maximal function. There are several aspects of this transform
that remain poorly understood, and the PI will work to resolve some of these
issues. In a second direction, the PI, with Sarah Ferguson and Erin Terwilleger
have provided the natural extension of the Nehari theorem to 'little' Hankel
operators on product Hardy space. Namely, such Hankel operators are bounded iff
their symbol is in product BMO. This is fundamental criteria, which opens up a
range of questions in operator theory in several complex variables. This range
of questions forms the second avenue of investigation that will be pursued in
this project. The range of problems to be pursued in this project will require
the creation of new techniques in the broad area of analysis. The objects
studies arise naturally in physical processes, such as charge distribution
namely the Hilbert transform, medical imaging, namely Radon transforms, and
control theory, namely Hankel operators. The questions addressed concern who
well behaved these objects are, and the resolution of these questions should
yield important insights into deeper aspects of these objects. These insights
have in the past lead to important advances in signal processing, imaging, and
control theory. Postdoctoral associates and graduate students will also be
engaged in this project, enhancing the scientific infrastructure of the country.
