
* 0456748
* Laminations and Low-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2005,05/13/2005
* Alexander Blokh,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2008
* USD 85,000.00

ABSTRACT

The proposal aims at developing new tools in low-dimensional dynamics. Studying
laminations/polynomials requires a combination of techniques which already
allowed us to show the existence of wandering gaps of laminations and should
lead to the description of dynamics of an individual polynomial, and to the
description of the combinatorial analog of the boundary of the connectedness
locus (i.e., the Mandelbrot set for high degree polynomials). For the cycles of
polynomials we plan to develop the rotation theory analogous to that for
interval maps, and a version of the Sharkovskii theorem. We continue developing
theory of c-tent plane maps which combine expansive properties of tent maps with
properties of complex quadratic maps and should play the same role for quadratic
complex maps as tent maps play on the interval. We also deal with Milnor
attractors for conformal measures of complex maps, and work on some problems in
interval dynamics.

Some natural processes/maps are described by low-dimensional dynamical systems.
The project aims at solving a few problems helping describe these maps, as well
as their families. Among non-invertible maps in dimensions higher than 1 the
best in terms of their properties are complex polynomials, and we plan to study
the families of their combinatorial analogs for dimensions higher than 2, as
well as individual polynomials in terms of the coexistence of their cycles
(periodic processes). We also study so-called c-tent map, Milnor attractors, and
some problems for map of the interval.


