
* 0500608
* Partial Differential Equations and Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, COFFES
* 07/15/2005,07/13/2005
* Joseph Conlon,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 96,001.00

Partial Differential Equations and Statistical Mechanics.

Joseph G. Conlon University of Michigan

Abstract

This research project is concerned with partial differential equations of
elliptic and parabolic type, especially equations with random coefficients.
There are deep connections between equations with random coefficients and
statistical mechanics, in particular particle systems. In recent work the
principal investigator and co-authors have investigated connections between the
one dimensional nonlinear stochastic Fisher-Kolmogorov-Petrowski-Piscunov (FKPP)
equation and certain particle systems. Their work introduced new techniques
which, if more fully developed, should yield the proof of some conjectures of
physicists concerning the wave speed of the stochastic FKPP equation. A major
goal of the project is to obtain the proof of some of these conjectures. In
another direction the PI plans to continue his research on linear stochastic
elliptic and parabolic equations, in particular with the equations governing
random walk in random environment. He has already established some unexpected
connections between this problem and certain results in combinatorics related to
graph connectivity. These arose in the study of the formal perturbation theory
for the problem. The main goal in the current project is to prove an inequality
for the effective diffusivity constant. He expects to uncover some new
connections with other areas in the study of this problem also. The final part
of the project is concerned with problems in partial differential equations
which occur in finance. The principal investigator plans to continue working
with his graduate student on a model for efficient management of an insurance
company. Mathematically the problem is a problem of stochastic control theory. A
satisfactory analysis of the problem will include existence and uniqueness
proofs and a detailed study of the free boundary which occurs.

The purpose of this research project is the rigorous mathematical analysis of
certain partial differential equations. These equations govern the behavior of
many processes which occur in physics and engineering. During the last thirty
years they have also been used in finance in the systematic study and pricing of
financial instruments which depend on market volatility, such as options. The
principal investigator plans to do an in depth study of some problems related to
physics-engineering applications and also some problems with applications in
finance. The financial application is concerned with a simple model of an
insurance company which holds a risky portfolio and wants to maximize payout to
investors. The physics-engineering application is concerned with understanding
the dynamics of phase boundaries which occur for example in chemical reactions.
Both the financial and the physics-engineering models are the simplest possible
prototypes. Nevertheless, sophisticated mathematical techniques are needed to
understand their basic properties.
