
* 0500988
* Stability of Shock Waves and Related Structures in Combustion Models, Thin Film Flows, and General Conservative Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2005,05/09/2005
* Peter Howard,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 92,961.00



Stability of Shock Waves and Related Structures in Combustion Models, Thin Film
Flows and General Conservative Systems.

Abstract of proposed research Peter B Howard

Under this award the stability of nonlinear waves arising in the context of
regularized and partially regularized conservation laws will be studied. In
particular we shall investigate the stability of degenerate viscous shock waves
such as arise in combustion models, the stability of compressive and
undercompressive viscous shock waves that arise in models of thin film flows,
and more generally, compressive, over- and undercompressive viscous shock waves
that arise in systems such as the compressible Navier--Stokes equations with
only partial regularization. We shall also investigate the stability of
rarefaction waves in related systems, and the stability of rarefaction-
compressive patterns that arise in combustion theory as well as the
undercompressive-compressive patterns that arise in the study of thin film
flows. The methods to be used involve the application of Green's functions and
the Evans function.

The broader impact of this research lies in the insight gained into our models
and the physical processes on which they are based. Through a study of
stability, we characterize such fundamental aspects of our systems as the types
of physically observable phenomena that can arise and the long time behavior of
solutions. We also gain critical insight into the accuracy with which our models
capture the underlying physics they represent. In addition, the techniques
developed should find application in the analysis of a range of related systems.








