
* 0500781
* Square Integrable Automorphic Forms: Liftings and Arthur's Conjecture
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,03/07/2007
* Wee Teck Gan,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 149,995.00

Abstract Gan

The investigator proposes to study arithmetic questions arising in the theory of
automorphic forms in the context of the Langlands program. One such problem is
the construction and classification of arithmetically interesting cusp forms on
reductive groups, and relating them to certain influential conjectures of
Arthur. The investigator intends to exploit the exceptional theta
correspondence, as well as some recent generalizations of theta correspondences,
for the construction of some of these cusp forms. He is also interested in
exploiting p-adic methods for the construction of classical automorphic forms.

The theory of automorphic forms is one of the main themes of modern mathematical
research. Besides being a beautiful subject in its own right, it is intimately
connected with other important areas of mathematics such as number theory (the
study of properties of numbers, with applications to cryptography) and
representation theory (the study of symmetries, with applications to physics).
Often, it has surprising applications to concrete problems, such as the
construction of Ramanujan graphs which are of great interest in communication
and network theory. The investigator's research is aimed at elucidating the
connections of automorphic forms with number theory and representation theory.


