
* 0500983
* Nonlinear Subelliptic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,07/03/2006
* Juan Manfredi,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 93,333.00

ABSTRACT A major part of the success in the linear and quasi-linear theory comes
from interpreting derivatives in the generalized sense of distributions,
allowing for a more powerful calculus. Distributions do not seem, in general
well suited to non-linear problems because they cannot be multiplied. Jets are
generalized (local) point-wise derivatives that allow for the interpretation and
calculation of non-linear functions of derivatives. In this proposal, the PI
presents a project to use jets to develop some basic Analysis tools in general
state spaces. Typically, in these spaces higher derivatives with respect
different parameters do not commute, as in the Euclidean case, but rather
satisfy more complicated algebraic relations. Jets adapted to the geometry of a
state space endowed with a family of vector fields satisfying a non-degeneracy
condition are called sub-elliptic jets. Basic analysis topics like Taylor
developments and maximum principles have to be adapted to conform to the new
sub-elliptic geometry. Topics studied include: sub-elliptic extensions of the
uniqueness theorem of R. Jensen for viscosity solutions, regularity for the sub-
elliptic p-Laplacian, sub-elliptic convex functions, and Cordes sub-elliptic
estimates.

The derivative is a basic tool in mathematical analysis, used to measure the
growth and decay of functions. Knowledge of the derivative of a function allows
for its recovery by means of integration. When trying to model complex
scientific phenomena it is often necessary to write down equations satisfied by
derivatives, and derivatives of derivatives, of functions with respect to
several parameters. These equations are called partial differential equations.
In this proposal the PI proposes to develop tools to study partial differential
equations written in terms of vector fields. These equations have applications
to problems in Robotics, Control Theory and Mathematical Finance.


