
* 0500270
* Nonlinear Second-Order PDE in Infinite Dimensional Spaces and Optimal Control of Stochastic PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2005,07/06/2005
* Andrzej Swiech,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 77,999.00

Nonlinear Second-order PDE in infinite dimensional spaces and optimal control of
Stochastic PDE.

Andrzej Swiech Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract

The project concentrates on fully nonlinear second-order partial differential
equations (PDE) in infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces. This is a relatively new
area which has attracted a lot of attention in recent years. Primary examples of
such equations are equations of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) type that are
associated with optimal control of stochastic PDE. Linear, so called Kolmogorov
equations, that give an analytic description of infinite dimensional diffusions,
also fall into this category and have been studied intensively, primarily in
connection with equations coming from mathematical physics, fluid dynamics,
option pricing, and population biology. The research of the project will focus
on several fundamental issues related to the general theory of viscosity
solutions in Hilbert spaces, together with applications and the study of some
particularly important equations. The general questions include the development
of tools like Perron's method, the method of half-relaxed limits, finite
dimensional approximations, and the development of a viscosity solution theory
for Kolmogorov and HJB equations associated with three dimensional stochastic
Navier-Stokes (NS) equations. Applications will include optimal control of
stochastic PDE (including stochastic NS equations), large deviations, and
mathematical economics and finance. The research on HJB equations associated
with stochastic NS equations may help answer some open questions about three
dimensional stochastic NS equations themselves. Moreover fully nonlinear
integro-PDE in Hilbert spaces that are connected to the emerging field of
infinite dimensional jump-diffusion processes will also be investigated. This
research will include the study of infinite dimensional integro-Black-Scholes
and integro-Black-Scholes-Barenblatt equations related to option pricing in the
jump diffusion version of the Musiela model of forward rates. Finally questions
related to viscosity solutions of finite dimensional fully nonlinear stochastic
PDE will be studied.

Understanding the theory of second-order PDE in infinite dimensional Hilbert
spaces is the first step in the development of the dynamic programming approach
to optimal control of systems governed by stochastic PDE. This project contains
a program of research that focuses on the development of new basic tools for
such equations. It spans areas as diverse as partial differential equations,
functional analysis and operator theory, probability, stochastic processes,
stochastic PDE, mathematical finance, and control theory. The research will have
significant impact on several areas of mathematics outside the field of
nonlinear PDE like optimal control of stochastic PDE, large deviations,
stochastic NS equations, and mathematical finance. Moreover it has a potential
to stimulate research in related fields like engineering, atmospheric sciences,
finance, and economics, in particular in fluid dynamics, and the theory of
bondmarkets. It should also help attract and train graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars.




