
* 0501067
* Non-Homogeneous Harmonic Analysis, two weight estimates, and spectral problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2005,03/05/2007
* Alexander Volberg,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 277,410.00

ABSTRACT.

PI's propose to concentrate their efforts on several classical problems in
Analysis and Spectral Theory that remained unsolved for the last 20--50 years,
due to the lack of appropriate technical tools. Among the problems are:

* bilipschitz equivalence for higher dimensional analogues of analytic capacity;

* two weight estimates for the Hilbert Transform;

* well-posedness of the inverse scattering problem for the discrete Schrodinger
operator,

i.e., uniqueness of the inverse nonlinear Fourier transform;

* selected problems of noncommutative harmonic analysis

Although the problems span several different areas of analysis and mathematical
physics, our recent research revealed striking connections between the proposed
problems. To put it briefly, they all are unified by the fact that in all of
them the same type of singular kernels (usually the Cauchy kernel) appears.
Also, the problems share the same difficulty, the kernel got "spoiled'' by
multiplication by virtually arbitrary functions (weights). Recent developments
in the non-homogeneous harmonic analysis, which treats exactly this type of
situations, made successful solution of the proposed problems plausible.

Harmonic analysis investigates complex processes by representing them as a sum
of elementary ones (sinusoidal waves, wavelets) with well understood behavior. A
central part of modern harmonic analysis deals with "singular integral
operators" of one type or another. Such operators are pervasive in the
scientific landscape: they turn up in mathematical physics, probability,
engineering, image processing, etc. While the theory of singular integral
operators is now well developed (starting with works of Calderon and Zygmund and
continued by numerous researchers after them), it deals with the operators
defined on a nice "smooth" set, like the usual Euclidean space. However, in many
problems one needs to investigate such operators on a "bad" set, like surfaces
with singularities and even on more pathological sets. The non-homogeneous
harmonic analysis was introduced by the PI's to deal exactly with such
situations: recent solution by X. Tolsa of the famous subbaditivity problem for
the analytic capacity is one of the most impressive applications of this PI's
theory of nonhomogeneous analysis. PI's propose to attack several classical
problems, where the framework of the non-homogeneous harmonic analysis appear
naturally.


