
* 0501043
* Scattering Theory for Linear and Nonlinear Waves and Soliton Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,08/04/2006
* Avraham Soffer,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 115,877.00

Scattering Theory for Linear and Nonlinear Waves and Soliton Dynamics. Avraham
Soffer

Abstract: The analysis of nonlinear evolution equations is the goal of this
work. Nonlinear evolution equations which describe wave propagation are of
fundamental importance in many fields of science and engineering. The nonlinear
Schroedinger equation appears naturally in the study of many body quantum
system, nonlinear optics and more. Mathematically, one is interested in finding
the large time behavior of solutions for all initial data in a given class of
functions, typically a Sobolev space. The previous works on evolution equations
which have many channels of scattering , by the Investigator and collaborators,
have led to major new tools which are now applied to different types of
equations.

Under suitable assumptions on the class of allowed nonlinearities one can now
state the general conjecture about the large time behavior of the nonlinear
Schroedinger equation. One expects that for all initial data in the standard
Sobolev space, the asymptotic behavior will be given by a combination of
independently moving solitons and a free wave. While this result is beyond our
current capabilities, substantial progress has been made in the last few years,
by the Investigator his collaborators and others, culminating in the proof of
the above conjecture for small perturbations of widely separated solitons. It is
planned to develop new techniques to deal for the first time with large
perturbations of soliton states.

This effort will draw on many and diverse fields of mathematics, including
harmonic analysis, phase space methods of scattering theory, nonlinear analysis
and more. The advances in this direction are expected to play an important role
in our understanding of one of the most important nonlinear dynamical systems of
wave interactions. It applies to Bose Einstein condensates in solid state
physics, optical solitons in fibers and other optical devices, in the study of
nonperturbative solutions to Quantum Field Theory and more. It also inspires and
will inspire more new directions of research in the mathematical analysis of
dispersive wave equations, and its relation to harmonic and spectral analysis.
