
* 0501300
* Geometric Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,07/03/2007
* Ronald Coifman,CT,Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 353,656.00

Harmonic analysis on sets is an area that has been under intensive development
since the 1980's. The first results concerned the behavior of singular integrals
on sets in terms of the geometry of the sets. The model operator, and impetus to
the theory, was the Cauchy integral with the model geometric setting being a
Lipschitz curve. This theory has witnessed an explosive growth in terms of
understanding the relation between L2 estimates in terms of the multiscale
geometry of the underlying set. One of the realizations of the 1990's was that
there is an L2 theory of geometry in terms of so-called Beta numbers, and that
there is a "dictionary" that translates theorems on geometry of sets into
theorems on wavelets, and vice versa. While the theory of Beta numbers also gave
a good understanding of the multiscale structure of e.g. a data set, it only
provides a certain framework for the understanding of the geometry, and does not
encompass a theory analogous to Fourier series or the study of heat flow. It is
the development of such a theory, along with its relations to the already
understood multiscale aspects, that is now required to provide a deeper
understanding of harmonic analysis on sets. For example the problem of building
local coordinates that capture most of the statistical behavior of (mostly)
lower dimensional subsets has not been well developed mathematically, though
many proposed methods have been studied. We propose to relate the top down
methods (e.g. Beta Numbers and corresponding geometry) to bottom up methods of
diffusion geometries.

This new method of studying harmonic analysis on sets is based on the use of
certain eigenfunctions related to the set. These eigenfunctions, coming from
naturally defined matrices, allow the introduction of "local coordinates" on the
set by picking the n largest eigenvalues, and using the corresponding n
eigenfunctions as coordinates. The method proposed has a close relation to the
theory of so-called prolate functions, as the resulting eigenfunctions have
similar properties. This is in sharp contrast to the method of Coifman, Jones,
and Semmes for defining Haar type L2 frames on sets resembling Lipschitz curves.
The method of the proposal gives different functions with which one can
naturally define local coordinates and study (approximate and correctly defined)
heat flow on sets. Professors Jones and Coifman propose to study these methods
and develop a theory that can be combined with previous results to relate top
down behavior to bottom up behavior. This is done from the point of view of
computational efficiency and the development of fast algorithms. They also
propose to study the various geometrical descriptions to provide new methods of
attacking older problems in harmonic analysis. In doing so, they aim to break
new ground and broaden the applicability of other earlier methods.
