
* 0503870
* Statistical properties of finite and infinite physical measures
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2005,07/21/2008
* Huyi Hu,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2009
* USD 93,700.00

This proposed research addresses statistic properties of dynamical systems with
finite or infinite physical measures. These properties include rates of
convergence to the equilibriums, rates of mixing, statistic stability, and
stochastic stability. We focus on almost hyperbolic systems and some related
systems. A smooth dynamical system is almost hyperbolic if it is hyperbolic
everywhere except at a finite set of orbits. It is known from examples in one
dimensional noninvertible maps that such systems have quite different statistic
properties from uniformly hyperbolic systems. Moreover, the systems with finite
physical measures and those with infinite physical measures have very different
statistic behaviors. The latter ones are statistically deterministic, though
they are topologically chaotic. The first goal of this project is to extend the
results to more general cases such as invertible systems and higher dimensional
systems and study some new properties such as stochastic stability. The second
goal is to find similar properties in other nonuniformly hyperbolic systems.

This project is devoted to the study of statistic properties of nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems, in particular, almost hyperbolic systems. A smooth dynamical
system is almost hyperbolic if it is hyperbolic everywhere except at a finite
set of points. These systems lie on the boundary of the set of uniformly
hyperbolic systems, and are the simplest but nontrivial nonuniformly hyperbolic
systems. Statistic properties of such systems may be very different from those
of uniformly hyperbolic systems. We will try to extend some known results to
more general cases that include existence of SRB measures and infinite SRB
measures for almost hyperbolic systems in higher dimensional spaces, rates of
convergence to the equilibriums and rates of mixing for invertible systems. We
will also explore some new properties such as statistic stability and stochastic
stability for almost expanding maps on the interval and almost hyperbolic system
on the torus. Further, we will try to find the properties, such as infinite
physical measures, polynomial decay of correlations, in some other nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems.
