
* 0527082
* Ergodic-Theoretic Properties of Actions of Discrete Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2004,03/28/2005
* Alexander Gorodnik,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2008
* USD 72,296.00

In this project, the PI will study the actions of Lie groups and their discrete
subgroups from ergodic-theoretic point of view. Note that only few results about
statistical properties of orbits of large nonamenable groups are known. A part
of this project addresses the question about the distribution of orbits of
lattices in Lie groups acting on homogeneous spaces. The methods, which utilize
the equidistribution properties of unipotent flows (due to Ratner and others),
apply to a large variety of natural actions of lattices. Since the methods based
on the Ratner theory do not provide effective estimates on the rate of
convergence, it is intended to develop a different approach that gives effective
error terms. The expected results of the proposal have several potential
applications to number theory. In particular, we plan to investigate
distribution of values at integer points of systems consisting of linear and
quadratic forms. Another direction of research is the study of mixing properties
of large groups of automorphisms of nilmanifolds.

The main objective of this project is to investigate distribution of orbits of
large discrete and continuous groups of motions on various spaces. Questions
about asymptotic distribution of families of mathematical objects appear in many
different areas of mathematics: ergodic theory, number theory (e.g.,
distribution of prime numbers), geometry (e.g., distribution of closed geodesics
on a compact surface), PDE (e.g., distribution of eigenvalues of the Laplace
operator), and others. When a family of the objects exhibits very complicated
behavior, statistical properties of this family provide important insights into
its structure. In this project, we use methods of the theory of dynamical
systems to derive results in number theory on the distribution of integer
points. Our study uncovers promising interplay between ergodic theory and number
theory simultaneously enriching both of these areas of research. This subject
and its connections with many other branches of mathematics provide an excellent
introduction for graduate as well as undergraduate students to active research
and can be used for presentations accessible to audiences of different levels.
