
* 0532393
* Atlas of Lie Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2005,05/12/2005
* Jeffrey Adams,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 118,145.00

The problem of computing the set of irreducible unitary representations of a Lie
group is one of the main unsolved problems in representation theory. There are
two primary goals of this proposal. The first goal is to compute the unitary
dual of real and p-adic Lie groups, by a combination of mathematical and
computational techniques. In particular we plan to develop a set of software
packages for computing structure theory of Lie groups and unitary
representations.

The impact of the project is addressed by our second goal, which is to make
information about Lie groups and representation theory accessible to the general
mathematical audience. This will be done through a web site which will contain
interactive tools for accessing data about Lie groups and representations. The
software we will develop will be publicly available, and provided with extensive
documentation and a well designed user interface. The project will also have an
impact on education by providing a mechanism for new researchers to learn about
the field and make contributions to it. In ad- dition, it will generate many
mathematical and computational problems which will be tractable to non-experts,
and will centralize and organize the state of the field to make it more
accessible. We hope this project will have as much or more of an impact in Lie
theory as the Atlas of Finite Groups has in finite group theory.
