
* 0540084
* Properties at Averaging Operators, and Applications to Fourier Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2004,07/06/2005
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 48,945.00

The PI will conduct basic research on Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential
Equations, focusing on problems in harmonic analysis in Euclidean spaces
centered around Lebesgue norm inequalities. One subject of ongoing research
(partly joint with M. Christ) is the mapping properties of Generalized Radon
Transforms -- a vast class of averaging operators over lower dimensional
submanifolds. Satisfactory results in some cases have been obtained by the PI,
via the application of techniques developed by Bourgain, Wolff, and others for
the Kakeya problem. Generalized Radon transforms are still poorly understood,
except in special cases, and Kakeya-related methods have a great deal more to
offer. Understanding generalized Radon transforms is an important ingredient in
the analysis of summability of multi-dimensional Fourier nseries and integrals,
of more general oscillatory integrals, and of linear and nonlinear wave
equations. Other related problems, including the Fourier restriction phenomenon
and issues in Geometric Measure Theory such as the packing of submanifolds into
Euclidean space, will also be investigated.

Fourier analysis has always found wide applications in natural sciences and
engineering. It underlies a powerful and diverse array of tools currently widely
used in applications, and offers the promise of further applications in the
future. The proposed research deals with foundational issues which may
ultimately help to underpin such future applications. Summability theory of
multi-dimensional Fourier series and related oscillatory integral problems are
irreplaceable tools in the study of a wide class of PDEs, in which the current
state of knowledge is incomplete. The proposed research will contribute to the
general understanding of these problems. The planned research is related to
certain discrete problems of interest in Combinatorics and Number Theory, which
in most cases remain wide open.
