
* 0551846
* Small Representations and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,04/13/2006
* Gordan Savin,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 128,600.00

Gordan Savin is continuing his work on algebraic aspects of analysis, with
applications in number theory. The main tools of this research are minimal
representations (discovered by Kazhdan and Savin) which have been successful in
dealing with certain aspects of Langlands conjectures. Indeed, several instances
of Langlands conjectures, out of reach of standard methods, can be obtained
through use of minimal representations.

Analysis, broadly defined, deals with functions satisfying certain differential
equations. Analysis of differential equations, in general, is a very hard
problem. For example, differential equations coming from the dynamics of fluids
are notoriously difficult. One possible reason for this is a lack of symmetries.
On the other hand, if there are plenty of symmetries to work with, then the
corresponding analysis is easier, since algebraic tools can be used.

This research deals precisely with situations when a large group of symmetries
is present. The main purpose of this research is to construct small
representations of groups of Lie type. Smallness, roughly speaking, refers to
the fact that it is possible to combine together many symmetries acting on a
relatively small space. Importance of having small representations can be
illustrated with the following example. One of the most famous (and most
notorious) groups is the Reisz-Fischer Monster. Yes, this group is huge and
hence its name, but the size is not the main difficulty here. The main problem
is the lack of small representations. Indeed, the group of permutations of 60
letters - nobody would consider this group a ``monster'' - is in fact bigger
then the Riesz-Fischer Monster. However, this group of permutations can be
written down (i.e. represented) by means of 60 by 60 matrices. The monster, on
the other hand, requires use of (roughly) 2000 by 2000 matrices. It is our hope
that the small representations will be a fruitful tool that can be used to
answer some relevant questions in analysis and number theory.
