
* 0552388
* Random Matrices, Integrable Systems and Related Stochastic Processes
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,03/30/2006
* Harold Widom,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 99,961.00

The main activity of the project is the analysis of new limit laws and their
associated integrable differential equations that appear in a variety of
stochastic processes. These stochastic processes include the Airy process, the
Pearcey process and its higher order generalizations, a nonintersecting Brownian
excursion path model, and a class of interacting particle systems called the
asymmetric exclusion process. The main methods to be employed are a combination
of ideas and techniques coming from random matrix theory, integrable systems and
operator theory. An operator theory application to integrable systems would
establish new limit theorems for a class of operator determinants providing
solutions to the cylindrical Toda equations in so-called critical cases. The
methods are related to those used in the study of truncated Wiener-Hopf and
Toeplitz operators.

Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior that exact predictions
become impossible. Random matrix theory provides mathematical models that allow
a simulation of such behavior and predictions that allow comparison with
experiment. This was its original motivation, but it has since had significant
applications in other areas of mathematics, science and technology, in such
diverse subjects as communications, probability, statistics, number theory,
condensed matter physics, and engineering. One can anticipate that ideas from
random matrix theory and techniques developed in part by the PI and his
collaborators will be instrumental in the study of the stochastic processes
describe above. Further, the project should provide, through the integrable
differential equations, implementable numerical algorithms to compute properties
of these processes. This last aspect is most important for applications.
