
* 0554832
* Greedy Approximations with Expansions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,04/19/2006
* Vladimir Temlyakov,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2009
* USD 116,917.00

Abstract

Sparse representations of a function are not only a powerful analytic tool but
they are utilized in many application areas such as image/signal processing and
numerical computation. The backbone of finding sparse representations is the
concept of m-term approximation of the target function by the elements of a
given system of functions (dictionary). Since the elements of the dictionary
used in the m-term approximation are allowed to depend on the function being
approximated, this type of approximation, known as nonlinear approximation, is
very efficient when the approximants can be found. Nonlinear approximation seeks
ways to approximate complicated functions by simple functions using methods that
depend nonlinearly on the function being approximated. Recently, a particular
kind of nonlinear approximation, namely, greedy approximation attracted a lot of
attention in both theoretical and applied settings. Greedy type algorithms
proved to be very useful in various applications such as image compression,
signal processing, design of neural networks, and the numerical solution of
nonlinear partial differential equations. The theory of greedy approximation is
emerging now: some convergence results have already been established; many
problems remain unsolved. The fundamental question is how to construct good
methods (algorithms) of approximation. The purpose of the proposed research is
to design and study general nonlinear methods of approximation that are
practically realizable. The proposed research will develop algorithms that are
provably efficient with respect to convergence and rate of convergence.

The goal of the proposed research is to carry out fundamental mathematical and
algorithmic study to significantly increase our ability to process (compress,
de-noise, etc.) large data sets. The main technique that will be used in
achieving this goal is based on nonlinear sparse representations. Understanding
how to process large data sets is one of the great scientific challenges of this
decade. It is key to designing systems to efficiently analyze data and extract
essential information. The scientific discipline, which studies the process of
replacing large data by smaller and simpler data, is the approximation theory.
It has a myriad of existing and potential applications in both the defense and
civilian sectors. For instance, managing large data bases such as security data
bases obtained through surveillance requires processing of the data sets in
order to speed up extraction of significant features or specific information.


