
* 0555826
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2006,04/15/2008
* Panagiotis Souganidis,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2008
* USD 209,526.00



Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications Abstract of Proposed
Research Panagiotis E Souganidis

One of the most challenging problems in applied sciences is the modeling of
phenomena with many degrees of freedom (scales), which are expected to have some
averaged (macroscopic), perhaps random, behavior. The multi-scales and
complexity of the problems in nature often necessitate the use of random media.
In many applications, it is also common to have only ``statistical'' (random)
and not ``exact'' (deterministic) information. In addition, the modeling of the
fluctuations of the physically relative quantities leads to equations with
``singular'' (white noise type) dependence on some of the variables. In this
context, random homogenization and stochastic partial differential equations
become the natural mathematical objects. The randomness is associated with
singular dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness, two facts
that give rise to challenging mathematical problems. Overcoming them requires
the development of new methods and techniques. In biology, recent experiments at
the molecular scale have led to new sophisticated mathematical models. Novel
tools and ideas are needed to study these problems further and to identify all
the relevant regimes/scales of the parameters, which affect the experimentally
observed behavior.

The PI proposes to continue his program to develop methods to study nonlinear
deterministic (parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic) deterministic and stochastic
partial differential equations arising in models in areas such as continuum and
statistical physics, biology, engineering, etc. The emphasis of the proposal is
on the development of theories for (i) weak (stochastic viscosity) solutions of
fully nonlinear, (degenerate) parabolic stochastic pde, (ii) the homogenization
of nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic pde in spatio-temporal random
media, (iii) the study of properties (regularity, error estimates) of viscosity
solutions, and (iv) the analysis of some models in mathematical biology.




















