
* 0555869
* Nonsmooth methods in geometric function theory and geometric measure theory on the Heisenberg group
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2006,08/23/2006
* Jeremy Tyson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2009
* USD 99,700.00

Abstract Tyson

The proposed research centers on a suite of problems at the interface between
differential geometry, geometric measure theory and geometric function theory in
the Heisenberg group and more general sub-Riemannian (Carnot-Caratheodory)
spaces. The unifying theme is the development and application in this context of
effective tools from nonsmooth metric geometry. One series of problems focuses
on the geometry of submanifolds with possible application to the celebrated
Heisenberg isoperimetry conjecture of Pierre Pansu. Sub-Riemannian analogs of
the classical machinery of differential geometry have recently been introduced
by Garofalo et al, Pauls, and Franchi et al, among others. In joint work with
Capogna and Pauls, the PI will further develop this machinery in order to gain a
more intrinsic understanding of the geometry of Carnot-Caratheodory
submanifolds. This investigation is currently limited to surfaces given either
intrinsically or extrinsically, as level sets of or parameterized by highly
regular functions. Dimension jump phenomena and the size of the characteristic
set for graphs of weakly regular functions will be investigated by the PI's
graduate student John Maki in his thesis. A second line of research focuses on
sub-Riemannian geometric function theory and fractal geometry. This includes the
search for effective symmetrization procedures, existence, extension and
regularity problems for quasiconformal maps, metric regularity of rough domains
(John and uniform domains, domains satisfying a quasihyperbolic growth
condition), and the structure of self-affine tilings. Finally (joint with Z. M.
Balogh), the nonsmooth first-order calculus of Cheeger-Keith will be
investigated in connection with exotic metrics on the Heisenberg group with an
eye towards constructing new examples of spaces on which such calculus can be
developed.

Sub-Riemannian geometry is the "geometry of constrained motion"; it provides a
mathematical model for any physical situation in which allowable motion is
subject to a priori geometric constraints. Historically, its roots lie in
Carnot's work on thermodynamics, but the subject has progressed significantly
beyond these motivating questions to a central position in modern nonsmooth
geometric analysis, and has recently seen remarkable applications in numerous
areas, including robotic path planning, remote control of satellites, digital
image reconstruction and computer vision, neurobiology, and the mathematics of
finance. There are direct links between one aspect of the proposed research
(sub-Riemannian differential geometry of submanifolds and the isoperimetric
problem) and emerging models for the function and structure of the mammalian
visual cortex. Nonsmooth techniques and methods are essential in geometric
analysis in view of the incompleteness of classical spaces of smooth functions
and sets; solutions to differential equations and variational problems cannot be
guaranteed unless the domain of definition is widened to a suitably large family
of (nonsmooth) candidates (although in hindsight, smoothness for such solutions
can often be established a posteriori). The proposal includes an outreach
component, joint with Capogna and Pauls, involving cross-training of graduate
students and postdocs, a series of conferences, workshops and summer schools,
expository articles and monographs, and an online forum for researchers in sub-
Riemannian geometry aimed at developing a North American presence in this
exciting field on par with the established centers of study in Europe and
Australia.




