
* 0600888
* Vector-Valued Analysis with a Flair from the Geometry of Banach Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2006,05/02/2011
* Maria Girardi,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2012
* USD 114,917.00

0600888 Girardi

Abstract

A large part of analysis is framed in the language of classical Banach
(function) spaces (such as: Lebesgue spaces and Sobolev spaces), as well as the
bounded linear operators between these spaces (such as: Fourier multiplier
operators and Calderon-Zygmund operators). The Principle Investigator will
extend results for such operators from the classical setting (i.e., between
scalar-valued function spaces) to operator-valued setting (i.e., between Banach
space-valued functions spaces). Such extensions have applications in, among
others, spectral theory and partial differential equations (e.g., regularity
theory). Such extensions will also lead to results in martingale theory, which
serves as a bridge between several areas of mathematical analysis, such as:
harmonic analysis, stochastic analysis, and the geometry of Banach spaces. In
these extensions, the geometry of the underlying Banach spaces (e.g., Fourier
type and uniform convexity) will play a key role.

A Banach space is a space of vectors that has, among other things, a way to
measure the distance between two vectors. The most basic example of a Banach
space is the three-dimensional space around us. In scientific applications
(e.g., in: physics, engineering, and signal processing) the movement of
particles or shapes in space over time (such as waves in the ocean) is described
by functions, which together with their distances, give rise to more
sophisticated Banach function spaces. The properties of such functions modeling
these natural phenomena are described by differential equations, which can be
viewed as operators between Banach spaces. Recent applications have led the
experts to work in Banach space-valued, rather than real-valued, Banach spaces.
Motivated by such applications, the Principle Investigator will research such
operators in this Banach space-valued setting.


