
* 0600927
* Statistical and geometric properties of dynamical systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2006,06/07/2006
* Michael Field,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 307,380.00

Abstract proposal DMS-0600927

The project primarily deals with statistical and geometric properties of smooth
dynamical systems, especially non-uniformly hyperbolic maps and flows. There are
several interrelated topics in the proposal. A top priority is the extension of
our understanding of statistical properties, such as the large deviation
principle and the almost sure invariance principle for vector valued
observables, to non-uniformly hyperbolic systems, in particular those modeled by
a Young Tower. As part of this program, the investigators will study the
regularity of group-valued measurable solutions to sub-cohomological equations
and the implications of such regularity for optimal periodic orbits (periodic
orbits on which Birkhoff averages of an observable are optimized). Geometric
methods play an important role in the proposal. Recently, the investigators
obtained results on the Whitney regularity of measurable solutions to
cohomological equations on dynamically defined Cantor sets and it is proposed to
extend this work to higher dimensions. The theory of equivariant transversality
will be extended and applied to Hamiltonian and reversible systems, a setting
important for applications. Finally, it is proposed to continue with the
development and application of new methods for the analysis of mixing for
hyperbolic flows. The investigators have already developed new invariants
leading to a proof that every smooth hyperbolic flow can be approximated by a
stably (rapid) mixing flow. It is proposed to pursue this investigation to
obtain an improved understanding of exponential mixing for hyperbolic flows a
topic of considerable significance in physics.

Many physical systems, even those modeled accurately by deterministic
differential equations, often behave in an apparently random and unpredictable
way -- the phenomenon of deterministic chaos. Examples range from weather
systems and fluid turbulence to electronic circuits and animal populations.
Chaotic or complex systems of this type are often best understood in terms of
the statistical properties of observations on the system. Complex systems may
possess extra geometric structure, such as reversing symmetries or energy
conservation, which can alter the expected properties of the physical system as
well as provide a means for understanding the system. The proposal aims to
deepen our understanding of complex systems, by investigating their statistical
properties and exploiting new geometric methods to study their behavior. Results
of the research will be broadly disseminated in the scientific literature and in
lectures. The research will also contribute to the mathematical education of
graduate students at the University of Houston, in part by lectures of the
investigators, and in part by students working on this and related subjects
under their guidance.






