
* 0600887
* von Neumann Algebras, Free Probability and Free Entropy
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,04/19/2006
* Junhao Shen,NH,University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 67,760.00

The research objective of this project is to further develop "noncommutative"
(or "free") probability theory and to find its applications to the subject of
von Neumann algebras. John von Neumann introduced the concept of a von Neumann
algebra in the 1930's to provide a natural framework for the study of
noncommutative objects, initially in the context of quantum mechanics. The study
of von Neumann algebras is often viewed as the study of "noncommutative measure
spaces". Over the last seventy years, this has turned out to be a rich and
fertile field of study, with a large number of concrete objects, unexpected
properties and challenging and central open problems. Noncommutative probability
theory (or free probability theory) in the context of noncommutative measure
spaces was developed by Dan Voiculescu in the 1980's. Interesting for its sake,
it was able to solve several important problems in the area of von Neumann
algebras. We wish to further develop free probability theory; with a view to
attacking other problems in the area of von Neumann algebras. In particular, we
wish to compute the free entropy dimensions of von Neumann algebras by computing
their free orbit dimensions; to search for new von Neumann algebras that have no
Cartan subalgebras (Dan Voiculescu showed that free group factors have no Cartan
subalgebras); to investigate maximal injective subalgebra problems of von
Neumann algebras from the point view of free probability theory; and to find
full factors that have Kadison's Similarity Property by using G. Pisier's
similarity length. Main motivation for the introduction of von Neumann algebras
is to obtain a more rigorous mathematical formulation of the basics of quantum
mechanics. From a probabilistic point view, free probability theory has some
surprising applications in the area of von Neumann algebras. Free probability
theory gives us deep insights into many other open problems in the area of von
Neumann algebras, such as the classification problem of von Neumann algebras,
the generator question and decomposability. Further investigation of the links
between these two fields, free probability theory and von Neumann algebras, is
both necessary and urgent. This project aims to develop new tools in free
probability theory aiming at problems in the area of von Neumann algebras. The
solutions to these problems will provide us with new ways to classify von
Neumann algebras. The significance of the project lies in the fact that new
developments in the theory of free probability and von Neumann algebra have
always had profound applications to several fields in mathematics and physics
such as statistics and quantum mechanics. Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activities: The project is the continuation of principal investigator's prior
work in free probability theory, in generator problem of von Neumann algebras
and in maximal injective subalgebras of von Neumann algebras. Broader Impact of
the Proposed Activities: The project will take place at a location that
strengthens the broader impacts of research development in the University of New
Hampshire. The research group of Operator Algebra and Operator Theory in the
University of New Hampshire consists of several well-established mathematicians.
Joint-workshops will be organized to focus on helping graduate students to learn
the subjects.
