
* 0600974
* Dynamical Systems: Theory and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,03/27/2010
* Lai-Sang Young,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 575,000.00

Research topics within the theory of dynamical systems and on its applications
are proposed. Four projects are described. The first proposes to leverage
techniques developed for low dimensional systems to analyze (infinite
dimensional) systems defined by evolutionary partial differential equations.
Expected results include methods for detecting strange attractors in physical
and mechanical systems. The second project is about networks of dynamical
systems. It seeks to systematically relate the aggregate behaviors of such
systems to those of their individual components and to the coupling. The third
topic lies in the interface between dynamical systems and nonequilibrium
statistical physics. One of the objectives here is to shed light on the notion
of local equilibrium for systems with deterministic microscopic dynamics. The
fourth and final topic is about large deviations, an important statistical
property for dynamical systems. A scheme expected to resolve the issue for a
large class of nonuniformly hyperbolic systems is proposed.

This proposal addresses several topics at the frontier of research in dynamical
systems, a branch of modern mathematics concerned with time evolutions of
natural processes. Its main focus is the analysis of systems with high
complexity, due either to multiple degrees of freedom or to chaos within the
system. It is systems of this kind that are most often encountered in
applications. The proposed methods of investigation include geometric analysis,
probabilistic techniques and numerical simulations. A larger aim of the proposed
work is to integrate dynamical systems ideas into other core areas of
mathematics such as partial differential equations, and to build connections
with other scientific disciplines such as statistical physics and the biological
sciences. The resulting cross-fertilization is expected to be beneficial to all.
In terms of educational value, the proposed research will provide ample training
for emerging mathematicians, as it will involve directly the postdoctoral
associates and Ph.D. students of the Principle Investigator.


