
* 0600101
* Research in Harmonic Analysis with applications to Geometric Measure Theory and PDE's
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2006,04/13/2006
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2010
* USD 129,617.00

ABSTRACT

Dr. Erdogan will conduct basic research on harmonic analysis, geometric measure
theory and partial differential equations, focusing on problems in harmonic
analysis in Euclidean spaces centered around Lebesgue norm inequalities. One
subject of ongoing research is the restriction estimates for the Fourier
transform. Recently, the PI has obtained satisfactory results in some cases,
which imply new partial results in the direction of Falconer's distance set
conjecture -- a long standing open problem in geometric measure theory. These
results also imply new Strichartz type estimates for the wave and Schrodinger
equations. Another example of ongoing research is the mapping properties of
Generalized Radon transforms (GRT) -- a huge class of averaging operators over
lower dimensional sub-manifolds of Euclidean spaces. By applying the techniques
of Bourgain, Wolff and others developed for Kakeya problems, he obtained (part
of it jointly with Christ) interesting results in some cases. In recent years,
the PI studied the dynamical properties of Schrodinger evolution (joint with
Killip and Schlag). He will continue his investigations on various problems from
mathematical physics, and the connections with harmonic analysis. Harmonic
analysis has always found wide applications in natural sciences and engineering.
It underlies a powerful and diverse array of tools currently widely used in
applications, and offers the promise of further applications in the future. The
proposed research deals with foundational issues, which may ultimately help to
underpin such future applications. The study of the mapping properties of GRT
has various applications in engineering. For example, the X-ray transform (which
is a particular GRT) applied to the density function of a patients body is
essentially the data obtained by magnetic resonance imaging. The study of GRT is
also an important ingredient in the analysis of sumability of multi-dimensional
Fourier series and integrals, of more general oscillatory integrals, and of a
wide class of partial differential equations. The proposed research would make a
contribution to the general understanding of these problems. The planned
research is also related to certain discrete problems of interest in
combinatorics and number theory, which in most cases remain wide open.


