
* 0601016
* RUI: Hamiltonian Instability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2006,04/04/2006
* Marian Gidea,IL,Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2010
* USD 97,334.00

This research is devoted to dynamical systems, with emphasis on Arnold
instability and chaotic phenomena in Hamiltonian systems. A quintessential
example of instability in Hamiltonian systems was described by Arnold in 1964:
it represents a simple mechanical system, consisting in a pendulum and two
rotators with a weak coupling, whose trajectories wander `wildly' and
`arbitrarily far' from their points of departure in the phase space. This
example gave rise to a conjecture, referred as Arnold instability, stating that
such a behavior occurs in rather general systems. The first objective of this
project is to investigate this conjecture on some general models and identify
various geometric and topological mechanisms of instability. Perturbations of
integrable Hamiltonian systems will be considered. Under certain non-degeneracy
assumptions, there exist families of KAM tori that posses invariant manifolds;
the invariant manifolds give rise to connecting orbits between nearby tori, but
separating gaps also appear. The main goal is to find diffusing trajectories
that move along the connections that link these tori and also move across the
gaps, traveling a uniform distance as the size of the perturbation tends to
zero. Some of these trajectories should be able to make chaotic excursions. The
methodology of this research will be based on a topological technique of
correctly aligned windows, reinforced with geometric approximation theory and
variational methods. The main goals of this research are to overcome the large
gap problem, obtain optimal estimates on the diffusion time, relax the
transversality and non-degeneracy assumptions on the system, and study the
existence of diffusion for large perturbations. The second objective of this
project is to apply the knowledge gained from the study of Arnold instability to
the three-body problem. The goal is to understand the geometric mechanisms that
produce chaotic motions and find optimal trajectories with prescribed
itineraries. The objectives of this project will be addressed both theoretically
and numerically.

The general context of this research is the study of the cumulative effect of
small perturbations applied periodically to a stable system. This study
originated from a question that goes back to Netwon, Lagrange and Laplace,
whether the Solar System in the distant future will keep the same form as it is
now, or will undergo a catastrophic change. If in some perturbed systems, like
the Solar System, stability is predominant, in some other systems instability is
typical. The Arnold instability can be viewed as a recipe on how to increase the
energy of physical systems with small periodic forcing. Arnold instability ideas
applied to the three-body problem have potential applications to spacecraft
dynamics, in designing fuel efficient space missions exploring various regions
of the Solar System. The techniques outlined in this project can also be used in
studying the dynamics of planets orbiting systems of binary stars, and of mass
transfers in tight binary star systems (e.g. Algol in Betta Persei). Other
possible applications include heart pacemaking, plasma confinement, and
accelerator physics. Additionally, this project will enhance the knowledge and
professional development of students and K-12 educators. It will directly engage
students, including members of underrepresented groups, in research activities
and mathematics education.




