
* 0603891
* Summer Symposium in Real Analysis XXX
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 12/15/2005,12/13/2005
* Mark McClure,NC,University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2006
* USD 13,680.00

Abstract

During June 13-17, 2006, The University of North Carolina at Asheville will host
the 30th annual Summer Symposium in Real Analysis. The intellectual merit of
this project is due largely to the dissemination of current ideas in real
analysis. The focus of the Asheville Symposium will be lectures by both leading
experts and energetic new researchers. The program of principal lectures
includes hour long talks by Yang Wang of Georgia Tech, Miklos Laczkovich of
Eotvos Lorand University, Manav Das of The University of Louisville and Alicia
Miller of The University of Louisville. Together these researchers have made
important contributions to harmonic analysis, fractal geometry, and topological
dynamics. There will also be time for a number of shorter 20-minute
presentations and time set aside for collaboration.

The Summer Symposium in Real Analysis has broader goals than the dissemination
of mathematical research. In particular, the conference has traditionally been a
warm environment for young researchers and teachers. This is one reason the list
of invited speakers strikes a balance between senior researchers of outstanding
credentials and promising, young researchers. We will also hire several
undergraduates to assist in a variety of matters and who will attend the
conference themselves. This broad impact extends internationally. Indeed, the
past dozen years has seen an increasing vibrance in Real Analysis coupled with
greater international correspondence; the Summer Symposium has played a central
role in these developments. The broad importance of the topic has historically
attracted considerable participation from liberal arts colleges, as well as
research institutions. It seems that the Summer Symposium is a very natural
candidate for this specific type of grant.
