
* 0606947
* Workshop in Dynamical Systems and Related Topics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2006,04/06/2006
* Yakov Pesin,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2009
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract This award continues the partial (but essential) support of NSF for
the fall meetings of the Workshop in Dynamical Systems and Related Topics for
the years 2006, 2007, and 2008. This represents the Penn State half of the Semi-
annual Workshop in Dynamical Systems and Related Topics, cosponsored for the
last 15 years by the dynamics groups of Penn State and Maryland; the Maryland
half is held each spring. The conference covers essentially all topics in
dynamical systems, with a particular (but not exclusive) area of emphasis in
most meetings. In the years 2006, 2007, and 2008 a Geometry session will be
added to address growing activity in the borderline between dynamics and
geometry. The goals of the conference are to promote the communication of
mathematical results; to facilitate interaction and progress in dynamical
systems and related fields; to nurture the sense of community and common mission
in these fields; and to contribute to the training of graduate students and
recent Ph.D. recipients and to their integration into the dynamics community. In
particular, the conference includes special sessions with about 8 short talks by
graduate students who received some interesting new results. Over the years the
conference has enjoyed the participation of many prominent mathematicians, as
well as (we see now) future leaders. A history of past programs can be found at
www.math.psu.edu/research/dynsust/dw.html and
www.math.psu.edu/research/dynsust/dw-archive.html.

In general terms, the field of dynamical systems studies the way in which
systems change over time, especially, how typical trajectories of a system
behave over time, and when properties of interest in a system are stable under
perturbations of the system. Because so many mathematical structures can be
considered in terms of how they change over time, dynamical systems uses a broad
range of mathematical disciplines (including differential equations, functional
analysis, geometry, probability theory and many others). Conversely, the
dynamical approach has contributed significantly to progress in some of these
fields, at a deep and nonobvious level. A recent example -- in number theory! is
the dynamical influence on the work of Green and Tao which showed that the prime
numbers contain arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions. In addition, various
practical problems are fruitfully studied from the viewpoint of dynamical
systems, including current applications in weather forecasting and the
computation of orbits of space "voyagers". Another example is study of "chaos":
modern methods of rigorous mathematical description of "chaos" are based on
Pesin's Theory developed by Ya. Pesin, a member of the Penn State Center for
Dynamics and Geometry and on pioneering works of J. Yorke, a member of the
Maryland dynamics group.


