
* 0617854
* Harmonic Analysis with Applications to Mathematical Physics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 09/01/2005,02/09/2006
* Wilhelm Schlag,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 85,460.00

PI: Wilhelm Schlag, California Institute of Technology DMS-0300081

---------------------------------------------------- Abstract:
--------------------------------------------- This proposal deals with several
problems on the interface between mathematical physics and harmonic analysis.
The author intends to pursue his work on Schroedinger equations with both
deterministic and random potentials. Some questions remain on discrete
Schroedinger operators on the line with quasi-periodic potentials, whereas the
case of potentials given by non-independent but more strongly mixing dynamics
than quasi-periodic presents many serious challenges and more needs to be done
in this area. For time-dependent equations questions remain concerning
dispersive estimates, both for time-dependent and time-independent potentials.
For the latter, it is unknown whether or not the usual dispersive estimate holds
for potentials that decay faster than an inverse square power, at least for
dimensions two and larger. The author recently established this in one
dimension, but in two dimensions dispersive estimates under the assumption of
strong polynomial decay are unknown. He believes, however, that dispersive
estimates in the two-dimensional case under the assumption of sufficiently fast
decaying potentials is an accessible problem. The main interest in linear
estimates lies with nonlinear applications. One example is given by the proof of
asymptotic stability of weakly interacting multi-soliton solutions, which was
recently established by Rodnianski, Soffer, and the author. It relied heavily on
dispersive estimates for charge transfer models. Much remains to be done in this
area, both in terms of nonlinear Schroedinger equations in general (global
solutions for the critical defocusing three-dimensional equation), as well as
questions concerning the dynamics of nonlinear bound states (solitons). In
addition, the author intends to work on problems in harmonic analysis or
applications thereof to problems outside of mathematical physics.

Much of the success of science and engineering lies with its effective use of
mathematical tools, both in terms of modeling and numerical studies on
computers. Mathematicians play an important role in developing those methods and
making them available to scientist and engineers. This proposal aims at
addressing mathematical problems that for the most part originate in
mathematical physics. The aforementioned nonlinear Schroedinger equations arise
in various applications, e.g., optics. A bound state (soliton) for such a
nonlinear equation represents a particle or beam that travels without
disintegrating. An important issue is to understand the stability or instability
of such an object. I.e., do they persist under small perturbations or not?
Clearly, any commercial application of a soliton in optical media will require
stability of the soliton. It turns out that the theoretical understanding of
these issues is very difficult, often requiring new insights into mathematical
problems. This proposal aims at addressing such problems.
