
* 0627842
* CAREER: Perturbation Problems in PDE Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/18/2006,06/20/2007
* Chongchun Zeng,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2009
* USD 282,435.00

PI: Chongchun C. Zeng, University of Virginia DMS-0239389
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This project is concerned with various perturbation problems in the dynamics of
some Hamiltonian or near Hamiltonian PDEs, such as nonlinear wave equations and
nonlinear Schroedinger equations, etc. The main issues include: a) finding
correct formal asymptotics and their rigorous justification when singular
perturbations are present; b) studying the dynamics in neighborhoods of special
orbits representing typical qualitative properties, such as periodic, quasi-
periodic, homoclinic/heteroclinic orbits. Three types of interrelated problems
involving perturbations will be investigated: 1) Regular Hamiltonian
perturbations of systems with homoclinic orbits to saddle-centers, e.g.
perturbations of sine-Gordon breathers. 2) Perturbations containing highest
order derivatives. With this type of perturbations to PDEs, the nature of the
systems can be changed dramatically, e.g. loss of finite speed propagation
and/or disappearance of solutions backward in time. Impact of both dissipative
and conservative perturbations on the dynamics will be studied. 3) Hamiltonian
motions with fast oscillations. Averaging method and formal multi-scale analysis
are applied in deriving the limiting wave or Schroedinger maps. In addition to
justifying the convergence on various time scales, the structural stability will
be studied, which are in the form of normally elliptic type geometric singular
perturbation problems.

Many well-known evolutionary PDEs, as mathematical models, are approximations of
real world dynamical systems. In order to have better understanding of the
original problems, we need to study not only these PDEs, but their perturbations
as well, which may include factors like small viscosity or weak elasticity, etc.
On the other hand, while there are some special well-understood ones, it is
usually rather difficult to study the qualitative properties and temporal
asymptotic behavior of many evolutionary PDEs. Rigorous and formal asymptotic
analyses provide effective ways to study the dynamics of systems close to those
special ones. This proposal focuses on certain regular and singular perturbation
problems related to waves, ferromagnetism, etc., involving rapid oscillations,
strong dissipation, strong dispersion etc. In conjunction with this, it is also
proposed to incorporate several aspects of this research into curriculum
development. This effort will include an application-minded reform of some
current courses and the development of a new graduate PDE dynamics course
presenting the dynamical system point of view for PDEs. In addition, research
and education will be woven together through the development and improvement of
seminars and vertically integrated work groups.


