
* 0630818
* Problems in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2006,12/08/2006
* Xiaochun Li,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 15,902.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0140376 PI: Xiaochun Li

ABSTRACT

Research will be conducted on a variety of problems in harmonic analysis arising
in the study of multilinea singular integral operators. These problems are
related, but not limited, to the study of the Carleson operator and the bilinear
Hilbert transform. Recently a significant breakthrough on the bilinear Hilbert
transform was made by the inspiring work of Lacey and Thiele. It turns out that
the time-frequency analysis is a powerful tool to solve problems related to the
study of multilinear operators. Moreover, although this is still under
investigation, the analysis of these problems gives us hopes to solve other
important and difficult problems in the field, such as the Hilbert transform
along vector fields, the Kakeya problem, and Carleson's maximal operator of the
partial sums of Fourier series in two dimensions. It will also be very
interesting to see how to use this delicate analysis to solve some problems in
other fields such as partial differential equations, number theory, etc.
Actually, multilinear operators have been used in the study of partial
differential equations, since they naturally appear in series expansions of
solutions of many equations.

Harmonic analysis is not only an area of theoretical mathematics, but also an
applicable area lying at the heart of the intersection of fields as diverse as
optics, signal processing, meteorology, and music. The main them in Harmonic
analysis is about disassembling and assembling complicated objects into simpler
well-understood pieces, by analogy to decomposition of intricate musical pieces
into arrangements of a few basic notes. In signal processing, harmonic analysis
is used to detect irregularities of signals and images. The Fouriertransform is
a very useful tool to locate these irregularities. The appearance of a nonsmooth
symbol inthe study of multiplier problems is analogous to physical phenomena
where the frequencies of signals are altered by an abrupt operation, such as the
interruption of radio communication or television transmission by meteorological
phenomena. Such a sudden and unexpected operation causes the loss of
information. To avoid the loss of information or to retrieve the original data
is the main topic of the theoretical research proposed here.
