
* 0637383
* Workshop on Harmonic Analysis and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 11/15/2006,11/06/2006
* Gestur Olafsson,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/2007
* USD 17,603.00

Abstract Olafsson

This project deals with a variety of problems in modern harmonic analysis. It
combines ideas and problems from abstract harmonic analysis and representation
theory on Lie groups related to symmetric spaces with tools and questions well
known from classical Euclidean harmonic analysis. Our list of problems includes
a detailed study of series of representations occurring in the regular
representation on Pseudo-Riemannian symmetric spaces and, in particular,
geometric realizations of those representations using tools from complex
analysis. Part of this study is the interplay between special functions and the
spherical character of representations occurring discretely in the regular
representation. Our study also includes compactification of symmetric spaces,
application of representation theory to special functions, in particular,
Laguerre functions and polynomials. On the other hand the proposal includes
problems related to wavelet theory, function spaces on cones and other symmetric
spaces, in particular, Besov spaces. The proposed work combines methods and
ideas from several areas of mathematics: Complex analysis, group actions on
manifolds and function spaces, in particular, Besov, Fock, and Hardy spaces, and
classical harmonic analysis. It even borrows some ideas from applied
mathematics. Parts of the proposed work will be done in collaboration with our
students as well as specialists in USA and Europe.

Harmonic analysis has its origin in the work of Fourier on the heat equation,
which led him to consider the expansion of a periodic functions into
superposition of trigonometric functions. This can be interpreted either as the
spectral decomposition of the differential operators with constant coefficients,
or as decomposition of regular representation into irreducible representations.
In short, the subject of harmonic analysis is to study functions or function
spaces by decomposing the functions into simpler functions. In the theory of
differential equations this decomposition means to write an arbitrary functions
as a sum or integral of eigenfunctions. In several applications, as in image
processing, the wavelets shows up as the basic atoms used to approximate or
represent the signal. If we have a symmetry group acting on the system, then we
would like to write an arbitrary function as a sum of functions that transforms
in a simple and controllable way under the symmetry group, leading to
representation theory of the symmetry group. Both aspects usually involve the
study of integral transforms and the corresponding kernel function.
