
* 0645807
* CAREER: Expander Graphs: Interactions between Arithmetic, Group Theory and Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/30/2013
* Alexander Gamburd,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Expanders are highly-connected sparse graphs widely used in computer science. In
the mid-eighties Margulis, Lubotzky, Phillips and Sarnak used deep results from
the theory of automorphic forms (Selberg's 3/16 theorem, proved Ramanujan
conjectures) to give explicit constructions of expanders as Cayley graphs of
finite groups with respect to very special choices of generators. A basic
problem, formulated by Lubotzky and Weiss, is to what extent being an expander
family is a property of the groups alone, independent of the choice of
generators. The first project of the principal investigator will be devoted to
addressing this problem and constructing new robust families of expanders using
recently developed tools from additive combinatorics. The second project of the
principal investigator builds on the recent joint work with Bourgain and Sarnak,
in which expanders were used to obtain novel sieving results towards non-abelian
generalizations of Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions. The
general problem addressed in the second project involves sieving for primes (or
almost-primes) on an orbit of a group generated by finitely many polynomial
maps; application of combinatorial Brun sieve depends crucially on the expansion
property of the "congruence graphs" associated with the orbit. The third project
of the principal investigator is devoted to studying from a unified point of
view one of the basic conjectures pertaining to expander graphs and one of the
basic conjectures in the theory of Quantum Chaos. A basic conjecture in the
theory of expander graphs asserts that many families of groups are expanding
with respect to random choices of generators (Independence Conjecture for random
generators). A basic conjecture in Quantum Chaos, formulated by Bohigas,
Giannoni, and Shmit, asserts that the eigenvalues of a quantized chaotic
Hamiltonian behave like the spectrum of a typical member of the appropriate
ensemble of random matrices. Both conjectures can be viewed as asserting that a
deterministically constructed spectrum "generically" behaves like the spectrum
of a large random matrix: "in the bulk" (Quantum Chaos Conjecture) and at the
"edge of the spectrum" (Independence Conjecture). The principal investigator
will work on proving these conjectures in the context of the spectra of elements
in group rings.



Expanders are highly-connected sparse graphs widely used in Computer Science, in
areas ranging from parallel computation to complexity theory and cryptography.
In the early seventies, following Pinsker's observation that random sparse
graphs are expanders, Margulis gave the first explicit group-theoretic
construction of expanders; in the late eighties Margulis, Lubotzky, Phillips and
Sarnak constructed celebrated Ramanujan graphs (optimal expanders from spectral
point of view) using deep number-theoretic results. In the ensuing years the
scope and depth of applications of expanders has dramatically increased; over
the past decade several completely new and unexpected lines of development have
emerged and the field has undergone explosive growth. The principal investigator
plans to pursue three projects centered on expanders and involving mutually
beneficial interactions between arithmetic, group theory and combinatorics. The
first project is devoted to constructing new robust families of expanders using
recently developed tools from additive combinatorics. In the second project
expanders will be used to obtain novel sieving results, thus partially repaying
the debt of computer science to number theory. The third project is devoted to
studying connections between expander graphs and random matrices. The principal
investigator will direct research by graduate students on the problems related
to the three projects described above and will design and teach graduate courses
in additive combinatorics and random matrix theory, as well as an undergraduate
course devoted to applications and constructions of expander graphs. He will
also direct undergraduate research projects, involving a mix of numerical
experimentation, analyzing data, background reading, and theoretical work. In
addition, the principal investigator will organize meetings bringing together
Bay Area researchers and graduate students for a day of talks and informal
discussions, leading to long-term collaborations in research and education.


