
* 0649363
* Applications of Dynamical Systems to Statistical Physics, Geometry, and Population Biology/Demography
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2006,09/20/2006
* Howard Weiss,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2007
* USD 10,623.00

ABSTRACT Weiss

This proposal is to study several applications of dynamical systems to
statistical physics, geometry, and population biology/ecology. (i) The pressure
and free energy are the two fundamental objects of study in the statistical
physics of lattice spin systems. However, even for the simplest lattice spin
systems, the information about the microscopic potential that the free energy
captures is subtle and poorly understood. The PI has started a program to study
whether, or to what extent, natural classes of Holder continuous potentials for
certain one-dimensional lattice spin systems are determined by their free
energy. We also plan to investigate striking similarities between the rigidity
of free energy and fascinating rigidity problems in spectral geometry and number
theory. (ii) Little is known about the dynamics of the geodesic flow on
positively curved manifolds. The PI plans to continue studying the relations
between positive curvature and complicated dynamics of the geodesic flow. (iii)
The PI has started a program to systematically study the global dynamics and
bifurcations for nonlinear Leslie models where the fertility rates and survival
probabilities have various natural functional forms as functions of the
population size.

(i) The pressure and free energy are the two fundamental objects of study in the
statistical physics of lattice spin systems. Lattice spin systems provide an
important and illuminating family of models in statistical physics, condensed
matter physics, and chemistry. For instance, phase transitions correspond to
non-differentiability for some derivative of free energy. However, even for the
simplest lattice spin systems, the information about the microscopic potential
that the free energy captures is subtle and poorly understood. The PI has
started a program to study whether, or to what extent, potentials for one-
dimensional lattice systems are determined by their free energy. We hope this
work will provide new insights into this important, yet mysterious, quantity.
(ii) Essentially all demographic and animal population models in current use are
based on the linear Leslie model. Many population biologists, ecologists, and
demographers are now looking to nonlinear population models for more accurate
population forecasting. The PI has started a program to systematically study the
global dynamics and bifurcations for nonlinear Leslie models where the fertility
rates and survival probabilities have various natural functional forms as
functions of the population size. One of our ultimate goals is to create a
``population modeling toolbox'' which could be used by a wide range of
population modelers to more accurately predict animal populations.


