
* 0653678
* Geometry and Ergodic Theory of Rational Maps
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2007,06/07/2007
* Jeffrey Diller,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 116,819.00

The principal goal of this proposal is to understand the dynamics of rational
self-maps of complex manifolds in terms of the induced linear actions on
cohomology groups. The idea is to realize expanding eigenvectors geometrically
as invariant positive closed currents carried by the manifold and, by
intersecting currents, to produce and understand measures of maximal entropy for
the maps. It is also proposed to push beyond ergodic theory for some families of
rational maps with extra geometric structure and give more detailed, pointwise
descriptions of dynamics.

Mathematical laws for an evolving system typically prescribe the way the system
changes. If the present state of the system is known, then such laws tell one
what happens in the following instant. However, the distant future of the
system, while in principle predictable from the same laws, is in practice often
impossible to know: computations involved in making predictions can be
overwhelming, or the computations can amplify small uncertainties in data about
the present, so that predictions become hopelessly vague. Miraculously in such
situations, one can often employ less direct means to obtain a rough
probabilistic picture of the future. For instance, detailed knowledge of today's
weather and the laws of physics will allow one to know the particulars of
tomorrow's weather with some confidence, but they will avail one little in
predicting the weather a year from tomorrow. Nevertheless, knowing only that
today's date is Jan 1st, one can reasonably bet that it will be chill! y a year
from today in Minneapolis. Understanding trends of this sort from a mathematical
standpoint is called ergodic theory, and that is the subject of the research
described in this proposal. It is devoted particularly to ergodic theory of
systems known as `rational maps'. Such systems are cleaner and more abstract
than weather forecasting, but they are nevertheless very rich and applicable in
practical situations where computers are used to solve complicated equations or
to optimize the outcome of a particular process.
