
* 0653813
* Topics in Reaction-Diffusion and Fluid Mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,03/04/2010
* Alexander Kiselev,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 132,000.00

Topics in Reaction-Diffusion and Fluid Mechanics

Abstract of Proposed Research Alexander Kiselev

The investigator intends to study a variety of mathematical questions that
arise in the modeling of fluid flows and the interaction of flows and diffusion
processes. They involve issues in dynamical systems, spectral theory and the
existence and regularity of solutions of certain partial differential equations.
One problem is to understand the enhancement of diffusion by fluid flow by
studying certain advection-diffusion partial differential equations. The PI will
investigate the link between the geometric and dynamical properties of flows and
their efficiency in enhancing diffusion. Another topic is the existence and
properties of the dissipative quasi-geostrophic and Navier-Stokes equations. A
particular interest is the derivation of some new inequalities for the solutions
of these equations and the investigation of the effects of nonlinear terms in
the partial differential equations of fluid mechanics.

The equations to be studied model important physical processes yet their
mathematical properties are not well understood at present. They include issues
in combustion, atmospheric and ocean modeling, aerodynamics and astrophysics as
well as many biological models including morphogenesis. It is hoped the results
will lead to better understanding of fundamental issues in science and
engineering ranging from front formation and propagation to turbulence.
