
* 0653088
* Quasiconformal Analysis and the p-Laplacian
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2007,03/24/2009
* Jang-Mei Wu,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2011
* USD 207,429.00

This project investigates fundamental questions in quasiconformal analysis and
nonlinear potential theory. Specific topics include the branching of
quasiregular maps, quasiconformal Jacobians, and the boundary behavior of
p-harmonic functions. Quasiregular maps are geometrical generalizations of
analytic functions from the complex plane to Euclidean spaces. Problems on
branching properties of smooth quasiregular mappings lie at the intersection of
geometric function theory and topology, and, they have close connections to the
existence of snowflake embeddings, quasiconformal decomposition and extension,
and refinement of quasiconformal structures on compact manifolds. The
quasiconformal Jacobian problem studies the possibility of, and the method for,
reconstructing quasiconformal maps from assigned volume ratios. Both
quasiconformal and quasiregular maps have the characteristic of bounded
distortion and are solutions to equations related to the n-Laplacian. When p is
different from 2, because of the nonlinearity and the degeneracy of the
p-Laplace equation the nature of its solutions is still largely a mystery. A
recent example of the principal investigator and her collaborators suggests that
solutions to the p-Laplacian may exhibit even worse behavior than previously
shown by Wolff and Lewis. In this project, the principal investigator will
continue to investigate the dimension of the support of the p-harmonic measure,
the size of the associated Fatou sets, and the growth of solutions to the
p-harmonic equation when the boundary functions exhibit rapidly increasing
frequencies. Methods from probability will be used to handle some of the
analytical difficulties. This project brings together several areas of
mathematics, and if successful, will provide new tools for attacking difficult
problems in geometric analysis and potential theory.

Objects that do not have smooth structure appear naturally in physics and
biology. Quasiconformal mappings, having bounded distortion, are very suitable
for studying nonsmooth structures. Recently, there have been exciting
discoveries in applying quasiconformal mappings to study images of brain
cortical surfaces and to determine the conductivity of a body. The p-Laplacian
occurs both in the porous medium equation from fluid dynamics and in nonlinear
elasticity. For this reason it has applications to many physical problems. The
project in this proposal deals with intrinsic properties of functions of bounded
distortion and solutions of nonlinear equations. The findings will likely play
an important role in the aforementioned applications.
