
* 0653439
* Uniformization and Rigidity of Sierpinski Carpets and Schottky Sets
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2007,04/27/2007
* Sergiy Merenkov,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2011
* USD 110,000.00

The aim of the project is to investigate the geometric properties of Sierpinski
carpets and related sets under quasisymmetric maps. Standard Sierpinski carpets
are obtained from a square in the plane using simple iterative procedures. The
first step involves a subdivision of the square into smaller squares and the
removal of the interior of one or more of these smaller squares that do not
touch each other or the original outer square. The procedure is repeated on each
of the smaller squares that remain, and the steps are repeated infinitely. The
topological properties of Sierpinski carpets have been well understood since the
1950s, especially after Whyburn gave a topological characterization of such
sets. For example, all standard Sierpinski carpets as just described are
homeomorphic to each other. However, under quasisymmetric maps, which are maps
between metric spaces closely related to quasiconformal maps, Sierpinski carpets
exhibit much more rigidity. For example, there are pairs of standard Sierpinski
carpets that are not quasisymmetrically equivalent. The two most important
questions for Sierpinski carpets addressed in the project are the questions of
uniformization and rigidity. Regarding uniformization, the project studies
whether a given space is quasisymmetrically equivalent to a model space, and as
to rigidity, it investigates whether two given spaces are quasisymmetrically
equivalent.

The project addresses questions in the area of analysis on metric spaces (sets
in which there is a notion of distance). The techniques used to attack these
questions originate in complex analysis. Complex analysis, in turn, has roots in
physics and engineering, in particular in fluid mechanics and electrical
engineering, and historically has provided tools and methods for attacking
problems that arise in those areas. Within mathematics the Sierpinski carpets
under investigation in the project arise in analysis as sets of fractal
dimension, in dynamics as Julia sets, in the theory of Kleinian groups as limit
sets, and in geometry as boundaries at infinity of Gromov hyperbolic groups, to
mention a few examples. If carried out successfully, the project would have
implications for the theory of Gromov hyperbolic groups that are studied in the
area of mathematics known as geometric group theory. In particular, the
principal investigator hopes that the project would provide clues to the
Kapovich-Kleiner conjecture, which is a classification statement for Gromov
hyperbolic groups whose boundaries are continuous deformations of standard
Sierpinski carpets. Applications of fractal sets, such as Sierpinski carpets,
have been found in physics, engineering, and more recently in atmospheric
science and geoscience. For example, fractal shapes have recently been used to
create fractal antennas that not only have unprecedented frequency coverage and
versatility but also are very compact. The principal investigator hopes that
understanding geometric properties of fractal spaces will lead to a better
understanding of fractal physical objects or objects modeled on fractal spaces,
such as fractal antennas, and that this in turn will lead to other applications.
