
* 0654120
* Problems in several complex variables and partial differential equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/11/2007
* Kenneth Koenig,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 105,818.00

The principal investigator will study several basic questions concerning
regularity properties of solutions to the Cauchy-Riemann equations in
multidimensional complex analysis, and in the process he will clarify the
relationship between certain natural operators associated with a domain in
n-dimensional complex space and their counterparts on the boundary of that
domain. One part of this project will address maximal hypoellipticity for the
d-bar Neumann problem and analyze the problem of transferring Lp or Holder
estimates from the interior to the boundary for (smooth, bounded) pseudoconvex
domains with subelliptic boundary Laplacian. The project will also focus on the
more degenerate situation when subellipticity does not hold (i.e., will
investigate regularity issues for the d-bar Neumann problem and boundary
Laplacian on weakly pseudoconvex domains), particularly the connections among
global (ir)regularity, exact regularity, and a priori estimates.

This project will make a significant contribution to the answer of the following
broad question: How are the regularity properties of solutions to a system of
partial differential equations (with prescribed boundary conditions) on a given
domain related to the ones for an associated system on the boundary? Some of the
methods introduced by the principal investigator should have applications to
systems of partial differential equations that arise in the physical sciences.
The study of the interior and tangential d-bar problems in several complex
variables has in the past often led to substantial advances in analysis, such as
the discovery of the first examples of local nonsolvability of linear partial
differential equations and the development of pseudodifferential operators.
Moreover, such problems have many connections to harmonic analysis and algebraic
geometry. By clarifying some poorly understood aspects of partial differential
equations that arise in complex analysis, this research may inspire new ties to
other branches of mathematics and science.
