
* 0700634
* Analytic Methods in Complex Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,05/11/2007
* Dror Varolin,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 120,002.00

The project considers several exciting developments in complex analysis and
geometry, focusing in particular on problems unified by the use of Hilbert-space
methods as tools. The underlying theme behind many of the problems under
investigation is the issue of interpolating functions, or more generally cross
sections, on subspaces. In this way, one can study functions on the spaces by
applying the principle of mathematical induction with respect to the dimension
of the space. One of the main problems encountered in regard to the theory of
interpolation and sampling (the same theory that gives us digital music and
movie technology) is how to interpolate or sample data when the missing
information has more than one degree of freedom. This same problem represents a
fundamental gap in many problems in algebraic geometry. While some partial
results are known, this project aims to uncover the key idea underlying the
possibility of such interpolation and sampling.

Many of the problems to be addressed by this project, though fundamental to the
fields of complex analysis and geometry in higher dimensions, require the
creation and development of new ideas and techniques. These new techniques will
help to forge links between different areas of mathematics and will establish
pathways to other areas of science, advancing knowledge not only in complex
analysis and geometry, but also in algebraic and differential geometry, partial
differential equations, topology, mathematical physics, and engineering systems
and signal analysis. The collection of ideas that will be pursued lie close to
the foundations of complex analysis and geometry. Consequently, there are many
problems related to those met in the project that can serve as good thesis
problems and problems for young Ph.D.'s. The principal investigator has three
graduate students at the moment, and the research undertaken in the project will
directly affect them. Because certain components of the research are especially
amenable to elementary considerations, one finds in them problems that can teach
basic research ideas to undergraduates and even to talented high-school
students. The principal investigator has previously supervised REU students and
enjoys the process. Stony Brook also has a high-school outreach program with
which he will be involved. The principal investigator will continue to
disseminate his work through publication, teaching of graduate courses,
lecturing at conferences and seminars, and visiting colleagues in departments
across the globe. He is also working on a book that presents a lot of background
material in complex analytic geometry in a way suited to graduate students and
complex analysts less familiar with geometric methods. Finally, he is certain
that some of the results of this project will eventually find their way into the
toolboxes of engineers.
