
* 0700517
* Analysis on Faddeev, Skyrme and Some Complex Fluid Models
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,04/29/2011
* Fang-Hua Lin,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 599,996.00

Analysis on Faddeev, Skyrme and some Complex Fluid Models

Abstract of Proposed Research Fang-Hua Lin

This award will support research on two different projects that are important
and interesting both mathematically and scientifically. One project is to study
the particle-like solutions in both the static and evolutionary equations of
Faddeev and Skyrme models. We also plan to study the discrete analogs of these
problems (or lattice-models) and to explore the connections between the discrete
and continuous models. The second project will be a theoretical study of the
hydrodynamics of viscoelastic fluids, and micro-macro models, of polymeric
fluids. These problems involve multiple scale phenomena and are modeled by
nonlinear coupled systems of partial differential equations of both hyperbolic
and parabolic types.

Skyrme and Faddeev models use continuously extended, topologically
characterized, relativistically invariant, locally concentrated, soliton-like
fields to model elementary particles. These particle-like solutions display the
features of some fundamental phenomena that arise in high energy physics,
biological sciences and astronomy. Indeed, it was recently shown that Faddeev
models can capture the knotted structures of field configurations; something
that has not been yet done for any other classical field models. A primary
object of the proposed research is to conduct a systematic mathematical study of
both static and dynamic models. .Another objective is to investigate the
analogies between these particle-like solutions in a large scale field with the
analysis of other natural phenomena which may contain many scales such as
complex fluids and biological fluids.
