
* 0700281
* Complex analysis and Geometry in Infinite Dimensions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/05/2011
* Laszlo Lempert,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 469,948.00

The project's focus is on complex analysis and geometry in infinite-dimensional
manifolds. The latter topic especially represents largely uncharted territory.
The principal investigator will explore it by considering fundamental results of
the finite-dimensional theory and asking how they generalize to the infinite-
dimensional setting. In some cases one already has a sense of what the
generalization should be, and the challenge is actually to prove it; in other
cases even the terms in which to formulate a generalization must be discovered.
Two notions are central to the project. One is the concept of a complex loop
space. Such a space is obtained by starting with a (finite-dimensional) complex
manifold. The collection of all loops in this manifold is an infinite-
dimensional complex manifold known as a complex loop space. The other central
idea is that of a cohesive sheaf, an infinite-dimensional generalization of the
all-important coherent sheaves of the finite-dimensional theory that the
principal investigator and a collaborator have recently introduced. A large part
of the project is the study of these two notions, especially their confluence:
namely, cohesive sheaves over loop spaces, and their cohomology groups. The
project will also seek applications in other areas of mathematics for the
results that the project expects to obtain.

The location of a point or point-mass in three-dimensional space can be
described by its coordinates, that is, by three numbers. Accordingly, since
Descartes we have known that curves and surfaces in space can be described by
functions of three variables. Now to specify the position of a more complicated
object, say a Frisbee, the three coordinates of its center of mass do not
suffice. The orientation of its axis also has to be given, which will involve
two more numbers. In the end, one needs five numbers to specify the position of
the Frisbee, and one says that all possible positions of the Frisbee constitute
a five-dimensional space (or manifold). The flight of the Frisbee through the
air then corresponds to a curve in this manifold. Studying the positions of even
more complicated (for example, hinged) objects, one is led to even higher
dimensional manifolds, and, if the object lacks any rigidity -- think of a
rubber band -- to infinite-dimensional ones. The project is concerned with
fundamental properties of such infinite-dimensional manifolds and of the
attendant functions of infinitely many variables. A main goal is to understand
how local information on these manifolds and functions can be assembled into
global information. The mathematical construct that tells us to what extent this
is possible is called a sheaf cohomology group, and such groups will be the main
objects of the research. Various components of this work have first arisen in
other parts of mathematics and in theoretical physics (quantum field theory and
string theory), so the project, if successful, should have some relevance to
those disciplines. However, this is going to be fundamental research, and the
principal investigator does not expect immediate applications outside
mathematics. On the other hand, graduate students will be involved in the
research. The project will thus contribute to the training of future researchers
and educators.
