
* 0700995
* Hankel and Toeplitz Operators in Noncommutative Analysis, Schur Multipliers, and Perturbation Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,03/24/2009
* Vladimir Peller,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 240,000.00

The principal investigator is going to continue his research in noncommutative
analysis. An important role in this research is played by Hankel and Toeplitz
operators with matrix-valued or operator-valued symbols. Recent developments of
mathematical analysis and its applications show that it becomes very important
to study operators acting on spaces of vector and operator functions. In
particular, Hankel operators will be used to study the very important problem on
the degree of superoptimal approximation of rational matrix functions. This
degree coincides with the dimension of the space of minimal realization and is
very important in applications in control theory. The principal investigator is
going to continue his work in perturbation theory and use his approach to
multiple operator integrals based on integral projective tensor products and
Schur multipliers. He is also going to work on Wiener-Hopf factorizations of
unitary-valued matrix functions of class VMO (functions of vanishing mean
oscillation) and on estimates of the resolvents of Toeplitz operators with
matrix-valued symbols. The project is also going to apply Toeplitz and Hankel
operators to characterize vectorial stationary Gaussian processes satisfying
various regularity conditions. The principal investigator is currently at work
on a book on perturbation theory.

The anticipated results of the project will be very important in applications in
control theory, systems theory, statistics, and applied mathematics. The
principal investigator has already successfully applied his results in
noncommutative analysis to problems in control theory and statistics. He has
also successfully applied methods of systems theory to solve important problems
in pure mathematics. The proposed activity will result in a deeper collaboration
between pure mathematicians, applied mathematicians, statisticians, and
engineers. The results of the proposed activity will be broadly disseminated via
the internet, journals, lectures and talks at various conferences, seminars,
etc. This will also lead to teaching new advanced graduate and undergraduate
courses and recruiting strong graduate students and will broaden the
participation in this research of different ethnic groups, including ethnic
minorities.
