
* 0700758
* Operator Theory Arising from Systems Engineering
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,04/06/2011
* J. William Helton,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 504,278.00

The research of this project deals with functional analysis and operator theory
related to engineering systems theory. A very wide range of problems in
engineering can be formulated and studied in terms of matrix inequalities.
Furthermore, many linear system control problems have matrices as their natural
variables and thus require an understanding of polynomials and rational
functions in noncommutative variables. Of special practical importance is
"convexity," for in its presence local minima (which can be found
computationally) are in fact global minima (the ones that you really want to
find). Yet more tractable are linear matrix inequalities. A surprising finding
of the principal investigator and a collaborator that resulted from a previous
grant is that any matrix inequality based on a convex noncommutative rational
function is equivalent to a linear matrix inequality determined by the same
function. In the current project the principal investigator will work on
extending the classical (commuting) theory of polynomial inequalities (commonly
called semialgebraic geometry) to noncommutative polynomials. He will explore
aspects of this subject that pertain to convexity and curvature, develop
computer algorithms based on this theory, analyze such algorithms, and look for
connections with other branches of mathematics.

The first line of mathematical models in engineering for nearly all things that
move is a "system" ; namely, a box with inputs and outputs. Even if these are
not linear, the first step in a design is often linearization, so the
mathematics of linear systems plays a major role in areas such as control for
planes, cars, satellites, structures in earthquakes, oil refineries, machine
tools, flowing fluids, and much else. The biggest advance in linear systems
engineering during the 1990s was the realization that most linear control
problems convert directly to matrix inequalities. Many different types of matrix
inequalities surfaced in twentieth-century mathematics, but the ones that
dominate today in engineering systems usually require that a polynomial or
rational function of matrices be "positive semidefinite," a technical property.
Many engineering matrix inequalities are "ill-behaved," but there is a classical
core of problems in which such inequalities convert to "well-behaved" linear
matrix inequalities. The latter are computationally tractable and provably free
from false optima (which can lead to unsafe designs). It is algebraic formulas
like these that are programmed into modern computer packages in systems
engineering. The goals of this project are the following: to test mathematically
and computationally whether a given set of matrix inequalities is well behaved,
to understand how to convert bad matrix inequalities into nice ones, and to
develop corresponding computer algorithms. The principal investigator also
devotes significant effort to promoting interactions between mathematicians and
engineers. In addition to working with his own graduate students, he runs a
modest computational lab in the summer that is staffed by students. Although
many of these students go on to obtain Ph.D.'s in pure mathematics, the lab
experience and exposure to engineering broadens them considerably.
