
* 0701171
* Topics in Nonlinear Functional Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2007,07/25/2012
* Roger Nussbaum,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 125,000.00

Abstract for NSFDMS-0701171 (Nussbaum) Topics in Nonlinear Functional
Differential Equations Nussbaum proposes a study of two related areas: (a) the
dynamics in the large of nonlinear differential-delay equations with state
dependent time lags and (b) questions about maps F:C--->C, where C is a closed
cone in a Banach space and F is continuous, homogeneous of degree one and order-
preserving in the partial ordering induced by C. The differential-delay
equations to be studied are of the form (1) ax'(t)=f(x(t), x(t- r_1), x(t- r_2),
...,x(t- r_n)), where a>0 and r_j may depend on the history of the function x or
r_j :=r_j (x(t)) may simply be a function of x(t). A special class of maps of
the type described above in topic (b) is provided by "generalized max-plus
operators", which Nussbaum and J. Mallet-Paret have shown are intimately related
to equation (1). Even very special cases of equation (1) remain terra incognita.
One may mention, for example, the equation (2) ax'(t)= -x(t) - (k_1)x(t -r_1)
-(k_2)x(t -r_2), where a>0, k_j >0, r_j :=max(0, a_j +(c_j)x(t)), a_j >0 and c_j
is unequal to 0. Areas which will be investigated include (a) periodic solutions
of equation (1) (existence, stability and uniqueness), (b) singular
perturbations, e.g., limiting behaviour of periodic solutions of eq. (1) as
a--->0, (c) regularity of solutions (real analyticity? Gevrey class?), (d)
Poincare-Bendixson theory for equation (1) and (e) studies of cone-preserving
maps F:C--->C, both in their relation to differential-delay equations and to
other applications. A wide variety of of scientific phenomena, notably in
mathematical biology, but also in optics (e.g., semiconductor lasers) and
control theory, have been modeled by differential-delay equations with multiple
and/or variable time lags. Although our main focus is theoretical, we believe
that progress in understanding important model equations like eq. (1) and eq.
(2) above will provide insight into equations which arise in applications. The
importance of an underlying theoretical framework is already apparent in
numerical studies of eq. (2) which suggest a wide variety of dynamical behaviour
depending on the parameters. In equations from applications, which typically
have many parameters, the need for a theoretical framework is even more acute.
