
* 0701140
* Research in dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2007,06/27/2009
* Keith Burns,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 139,777.00

Burns will be continuing his studies of partially hyperbolic dynamical systems.
This area has seen great progress in the last decade after the breakthrough work
of Pugh and Shub, who established ergodicity for volume preserving perturbations
of the time one map of the geodesic flow of a surface of constant negative
curvature. A series of papers, culminating in recent work of Burns and
Wilkinson, has established ergodicity for a very general class of volume
preserving partially hyperbolic systems. This work appears to have pushed
current techniques to their limit, but still falls short of a complete
understanding of when volume preserving partially hyperbolic systems are
ergodic; new ideas are needed. Burns will continue to study this question as
well as various special examples of partially hyperbolic dynamical systems, in
particular compact group extensions of hyperbolic basic sets. He will also
consider geometrical questions about the geodesic which are closely related to
the work on partial hyperbolicity.

Partially hyperbolic dynamical systems are important because they model
phenomena which occur in nature and because, at least in some examples, it is
possible to completely understand the mechanisms which create the observed
phenomena. Partial hyperbolicity is to be expected in systems which have a fast-
slow dynamics in which one aspect of the systems operates on a short time scale
and other aspects operate on a longer time scale. There is now a good
understanding of how partial hyperbolicity gives rise to highly chaotic
behaviour in many situations.
