
* 0701768
* Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,04/30/2009
* Alexander Its,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2010
* USD 252,299.00

The research project is focused on the analytical aspects of the theory of
integrable systems related to the Riemann-Hilbert and isomonodromy methods. The
problems under consideration include: (a) the investigation of the double
scaling limits in the theory of random matrices and orthogonal polynomials and
their applications to the two-dimensional quantum gravity and enumerative
topology; (b) the asymptotic analysis of the Toeplitz and Fredholm determinants
and the multiple integrals associated with the correlation functions of exactly
solvable quantum field and statistical mechanics models; (c) the related aspects
of the global asymptotic analysis of the solutions of integrable differential
equations of the Painleve' and KdV types.

The theory of integrable systems is an expanding area which plays an
increasingly important role as one of the principal sources of new analytical
and algebraic ideas for many branches of modern mathematics and theoretical
physics. At the same time, it provides an efficient analytic tool for the study
of some of the fundamental mathematical models arising in modern nonlinear
science and technology. Specifically, the research directions indicated above
deal with the mathematical models which form the theoretical basis for the
following fields: condensed matter, high energy and plasma physics, nonlinear
hydrodynamics, high-bit rate telecommunication systems, and information science.
A special attention in the project is given to the analysis of the distributions
of random matrix theory which govern statistical properties of the large systems
which do not obey the usual laws of classical probability. This kind of systems
appear in many different areas of applied science and technology including heavy
nuclei, polymer growth, high-dimensional data analysis, and certain percolation
processes. Simultaneously, the random matrices are playing increasingly
important role, as an extremely powerful analytic apparatus, in several pure
theoretical domains such as the string theory, enumerative topology and certain
fundamental aspects of number theory.
