
* 0701121
* Mappings of real submanifolds in complex space, CR geometry, and analytic PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,04/08/2009
* Peter Ebenfelt,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 199,671.00

The aim of this project is to study geometric and analytic aspects of generic
real submanifolds in complex manifolds (or, more generally, in manifolds with a
CR-structure) and their mappings. Basic questions that will be investigated
include the existence, uniqueness, and regularity of CR-mappings between given
CR-manifolds, as well as geometric questions that arise in connection with this
study. The objective is to obtain a deeper understanding of mappings in CR-
geometry, and their role in complex analysis and PDE. One part of the project
will focus on these problems in the context of nontrivial CR-mappings of a Levi-
nondegenerate hypersurface into another of higher dimension. The principal
investigator expects that this research will lead to a better grasp of how the
local CR-geometry of such hypersurfaces (which, in principle, is completely
encoded in the Chern-Moser CR-curvature tensor) affects geometric properties of
CR-mappings (e.g., various notions of nondegeneracy and rigidity). The principal
investigator will also study geometric properties of CR-mappings between more
general CR-manifolds. A particular geometric property of interest is
transversality. The principal investigator will try to extend some of his recent
transversality results (joint work with Rothschild) for mappings between CR-
manifolds of the same dimension to the situation where the target manifold has
higher dimension than that of the source manifold. This case appears
significantly different from the equidimensional case. The principal
investigator anticipates that this study will involve the development of
substantially new methods, which in turn will enhance our understanding of
mappings into higher dimensional spaces.

The study of real submanifolds in complex manifolds is central to complex
analysis and to other areas of mathematics and physics. In this research, tools
from a wide range of areas such as real and complex analysis, partial
differential equations, and algebraic geometry are used and further developed.
The principal investigator is hopeful that the investigations carried out in
this project will enhance our understanding of the geometry of real submanifolds
and partial differential equations in complex space, which will benefit research
in adjacent areas of mathematics as well as in areas of theoretical physics. He
expects the project to provide interesting research topics for graduate
students. The seminar activity that results from the project should prove
stimulating for both students and other researchers.
