
* 0701272
* Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,06/02/2009
* Jalal Shatah,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 213,803.00

Nonlinear Waves

Abstract of Proposed Research Jalal Shatah

This project will develop new geometric and analytical methods for
systematically obtaining energy estimates and proving regularity of solutions
for nonlinear hyperbolic equations. Geometric methods are ones that arise either
from variational principles or from the geometric nature of the problems.
Analytical methods are ones that arise in studying existence, uniqueness,
regularity, and long-time behavior of solutions to nonlinear hyperbolic
equations. The project will also involve the study of singular limits of
solutions to parameter dependent equations. We shall concentrate on the analysis
of free boundary value problems arising in fluid flows, with and without surface
tension, on problems in magneto-hydro-dynamics and on problems arising from the
study of minimal surfaces in Minkowski space. The three major goals of this
project are: 1. to identify geometric and physical quantities whose control is
sufficient to prevent the waves from breaking down and ensure global regularity
of solutions; 2. to derive geometric and analytical criteria for stability of
fluid interfaces; 3. to investigate the transition from Kelvin-Helmholtz
instability to Rayleigh-Taylor instability; 4. to study the transition from
compressible to incompressible interface problems; 5. to study the regularity of
the free boundary for plasmas surrounded by a vacuum and the interface problem
between hot and cool plasmas; and 6. to develop new techniques of deriving
asymptotic equations for small-amplitude, high-frequency perturbations for
singularly perturbed wave equations. These problems are prototypical for the
study of free boundary regularity and rapidly-oscillating solutions in
hyperbolic equations. Their resolution should be an important contribution to
our understanding of this area. They are a cohesive set of problems that will
require new methods and techniques that may well be useful in other area of
PDEs.

Fluid interface problems arise in many physical, medical, and engineering
models. Problems involving fluid-vacuum interfaces arise in the study of water
waves and astrophysics including the shape of stars. Problems involving fluid-
fluid interfaces arise in multi-phase fluid flows while problems involving
fluid-deformable structure interfaces arise in biomedical modeling such as cell
deformation. Interface problems in magneto-hydro-dynamics are central to the
theoretical and practical study of producing energy by fusion. The free boundary
problems to be studied in this project may shed light on the instabilities
present in the magnetic fields used for confining plasmas. We will also study
the interface between hot and cool plasmas, i.e., the transport barrier. A
systematic mathematical analysis of these problems should help us understand how
various types of instabilities originate. The identification of ill-posed
problems should also be very beneficial for modeling considerations and
applications.
