
* 0701070
* Geometric and Analytic Problems in Several Complex Variables and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,06/12/2009
* Linda Rothschild,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2012
* USD 303,718.00

Real surfaces or submanifolds in multidimensional complex spaces exhibit a rich
local as well as global geometry. The interplay between real and complex
geometry and analysis is a fundamental ingredient in studying these objects.
Techniques from differential and algebraic geometry, as well as real and complex
analysis and partial differential equations, will be used in the proposed work.
The principal investigators plan to determine when two such manifolds are
equivalent under invertible holomorphic transformations. They will look for new
constructive criteria to build such mappings and to determine their convergence.
They also plan to classify mappings from one surface in a multidimensional
complex space into another embedded in a complex space of higher dimension. Of
particular interest are those hypersurfaces defined by quadratic equations and
admitting large symmetry groups. The latter will serve as models to discover
more general phenomena and formulate basic properties of the manifolds under
consideration. In particular, they will focus on determining when it is possible
to reduce the biholomorphic equivalence problem to solving systems of polynomial
equations with complex coefficients. They also plan to determine when a formal
mapping sending a real submanifold into another is necessarily convergent. In
addition, they will attempt to categorize those submanifolds for which such
mappings are determined by finitely many derivatives at a given point. They
expect that this study will lead to the discovery of new geometric, analytic,
and algebraic invariants of these submanifolds. The principal investigators will
initiate new studies of overdetermined systems of nonlinear partial differential
equations of first and higher order. They will study the properties of solutions
of such systems in order to classify all possible submanifolds with prescribed
Cauchy data.

Several problems discussed here have attracted the attention of many
mathematicians and physicists since the beginning of the twentieth century,
starting with the work of Henri Poincare and Elie Cartan. A number of
fundamental problems remain unsolved to the present time. The study of the
geometry of real manifolds in complex spaces is central to the field of several
complex variables and to other areas of science, including geometry,
mathematical physics, and engineering. Progress on the problems proposed by the
principal investigators will likely have impact on these areas as well.
