
* 0701056
* Well-posedness of moving interface problems in perfect fluids
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/11/2007
* Steve Shkoller,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 126,000.00

Well-posedness of moving Interface Problems in Perfect Fluids

Abstract of Proposed Research Steve Shkoller

The Euler equations with, or without, surface tension are recognized as a
suitable model for multiphase fluids flows with moving interfaces at large
Reynolds number, and serve as the basic mathematical model even when other
physical phenomena are coupled to the fluid motion. Despite more than two
centuries of mathematical analysis of these complicated nonlinear equations, the
local well-posedness of these systems of moving boundary PDE for inviscid
compressible and incompressible fluids remains a significant challenge. This
includes a single mass of fluid moving in vacuum as well as multi-phase
immiscible fluids separated by surfaces of discontinuity. Recently, the PI of
this proposed research effort has developed a novel approach to well-posedness
theories for moving interface problems in fluids such as the 3D incompressible
free-surface Euler equations with or without surface tension on the boundary,
and coupled fluid-structure interaction problems. The fundamental idea relies on
new anisotropic smoothing operators which permit approximations of the Euler
equations that retain the geometric structures of transport and boundary
regularity, and for which existence of smooth solutions is provable. The
proposal addresses the well-posedness of the motion of a compressible gas in
vacuum, modeled by the free-boundary compressible Euler equations with density
vanishing at the boundary; well-posedness of vortex sheets and surfaces of
discontinuity; and well-posedness for the motion of a relativistic fluid in
vacuum, modeled by the Euler-Einstein equations. No irrotationality
simplifications will be made in the analysis so that the full range of fluid
motion can be considered.

Multiphase fluid flows with moving interfaces, modeled by the Euler equations,
play a central role in a multitude of physical and engineering applications,
ranging from the creation of hurricanes due to wind blowing on top of the ocean
surface to the atomization of liquid fuel jets in combustion chambers to the
motion of astrophysical bodies such as gaseous stars. The analytical
understanding gained from this work may have important ramifications in the
understanding of basic physical phenomena, which is heretofore, poorly
understood. In addition to basic wave motion and mixing that occurs in the
motion of interfaces between water and air, other conventional examples include
the interface between air and helium under shock wave interaction, the
Richtmyer-Meshkov instabilities between two gases, the behavior of a gas bubble
in a liquid in a shock wave, and liquid fuels which are usually burned by first
atomizing a fuel jet to increase the surface area and hence the evaporation
rate. We can also add the prediction of spray behavior, for which the initial
atomization is both the most critical and the least understood aspect of the
spray. Understanding the short-time nonlinear balance that occurs in the
Rayleigh-Taylor instability should be quite important for the understanding of
jets, which become unstable when capillary effects are large due to waves longer
than the diameter, thus breaking up into a stream of relatively large drops.
