
* 0701271
* Nonlocal instabilities for the planar 3-body problem
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/04/2009
* Vadim Kaloshin,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 253,455.00

The Newtonian three-body problem consists in studying the dynamics of three
point masses moving in Euclidean space and mutually attracted under Newtonian
gravitation. The description of instabilities in this system is one of the
classical problems of mechanics. This project investigates instabilities for the
model of the Sun-Jupiter-Asteroid system, assuming that the third body (the
asteroid) has zero mass, that the second (Jupiter) is tiny in comparison with
the first (the Sun), and that all three bodies move in a plane. Using the well-
known Mather theory, the principal investigator seeks a mathematical proof of
instability for this system. The stability of the Solar System is a fundamental
issue in astronomy and mathematics. The general belief is that the system is not
stable. As a first step toward understanding the physical situation it is
extremely important to look for instabilities within mathematical models of the
Solar System. The main thrust of this project represents an attempt to shed
light on the complicated behavior of a mathematical model for the Sun-Jupiter-
Asteroid system. The fundamental question for this model is whether a trajectory
of the asteroid can be unstable (in oversimplified terms, whether its positions
relative to the Sun and Jupiter can change a great deal over time). The
principal investigator will try to find such instabilities and give a detailed
mathematical description of them. This could eventually lead to a deeper
understanding of instabilities in the entire Solar System, since the Sun and
Jupiter are the bodies in it that have the largest impact on the motion of most
of the planets.
