
* 0701046
* Isentropic Euler Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2007,05/11/2007
* Michael Westdickenberg,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2011
* USD 126,000.00

Isentropic Euler Equations.

Abstract of Proposed Research Michael Westdickenberg

This project is to investigate certain properties of the solutions of the
isentropic Euler equations. They are a system of hyperbolic conservation laws
that model the dynamics of compressible fluids. Part 1 of the project will
investigate the global existence of spherically symmetric solutions of the
multi-dimensional isentropic Euler equations, assuming only the natural bounds
of finite mass and total energy. A compactness framework will be developed that
can also be applied to other situations where the geometry of the problem plays
an important role, such as nozzle flows and shallow water flows over complex
topographies. It is well-known that the main difficulty in the analysis of
hyperbolic conservation laws comes from the occurrence of jump discontinuities,
ie shocks. The second and third part of this project will therefore focus on
issues related to shock formation. After a shock appears, the important issue is
how does the solution continue? Since weak solutions are typically non-unique, a
selection criterion is required to single out the relevant behavior among all
possible continuations. Part 2 of this project will propose a new variational
selection principle for the multi-dimensional isentropic Euler equations and
study its implications. The selection principle is inspired by the
interpretation of certain parabolic equations as abstract gradient flows on
spaces of probability measures. Part 3 of this project will probe the regularity
of weak solutions of conservation laws, both in terms of the function spaces to
which they belong, and in terms of the fine structure of singularities. One goal
is to show that shocks are located in a codimension-one rectifiable set, and
that the conserved quantities admit strong traces along the shock set.

Important processes in both the natural sciences and engineering can be modeled
by multi-dimensional systems of hyperbolic conservation laws. They are first
order partial differential equations in divergence form. Typically these
processes exhibit some sort of propagation and interaction of waves and
conservation of certain quantities such as mass or momentum. Since these
phenomena are ubiquitous in nature, systems of hyperbolic conservation laws can
be found in fields as diverse as physics, geophysics, environmental sciences,
meteorology, epidemiology, and biology. In this project, we will study the
particular equations which model the dynamics of inviscid, compressible fluids,
and which are a system of hyperbolic conservation laws. These equations have a
long and rich history starting with the work of Daniel Bernoulli and Leonard
Euler in the eighteenth century. Despite their enormous importance for both
theory and applications, and the fact that their numerical treatment has reached
a high level of sophistication, the mathematical theory of the Euler equations
is still incomplete. It is the goal of this project to better understand this
fundamental system of conservation laws.
