
* 0701059
* Deformations of Finite n-Harmonic Energy
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,04/24/2007
* Jani Onninen,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 110,000.00

This project features new classes of mappings between domains in Euclidean
n-space. They grew out of recent studies of the variational integrals that arise
in nonlinear elasticity and as a synthesis of ideas from multidimensional
geometric function theory, in particular, from quasiconformal geometry. There
has been considerable interest recently in extending the classical theory of
complex harmonic functions to higher dimensions. Analysis and connections with
geometric function theory underpin a growing confidence that n-harmonic
deformations of domains in Euclidean n-space represent a better generalization
of holomorphic functions than classical harmonic mappings. There are several
natural ways that n-harmonic deformations arise in analysis. One of those is the
mathematical model of nonlinear elasticity pioneered by Antman, Ball, and
Ciarlet. To describe it in simplistic terms, the theory of elasticity studies
deformations of a material body onto a given domain, the deformed configuration
that minimizes the so-called stored energy functional. Classical Teichmuller
theory, with its extremal mappings between Riemann surfaces, offers a similar
perspective. Broadly speaking, this theory is concerned with a distortion
function with the smallest possible supremum norm. The principal investigator's
approach is to minimize the integral-norms of the inner distortion, which in
turn reduces to the study of n-harmonic mappings. The first natural questions,
both from the theoretical and practical points of view, are whether the
n-harmonic energy is finite and, if so, whether it assumes a minimum value among
all homeomorphisms. Both of these questions are quite difficult, because no
boundary conditions are imposed on the mappings, and only fragmentary answers
exist thus far. One might expect that the energy minimizers would be
noninjective. The principal investigator has discovered, however, that under
natural additional assumptions the minimizers are homeomorphisms. The key here
is the technique that Iwaniec and he developed when studying n-harmonic
minimizers. In these studies the interplay between analysis and geometric
topology is crucial.

Modern mathematics in general and mathematical analysis in particular rely more
and more for their development on physical and geometric intuition. In recent
years this trend has become more pronounced and has led to increased efforts by
pure and applied mathematicians to abandon extreme generalizations and abstract
concepts. This project, which lies at the interface of geometric function theory
and nonlinear elasticity, is aligned with those efforts. It will certainly
establish connections with many other areas of mathematics and with physics,
some of which are already in place. It will entail serious collaborative
research. Finally, it will broaden the participation of undergraduates in
research activities.
