
* 0701552
* Topics in Banach Space Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 06/01/2007,05/31/2007
* Stephen Dilworth,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 115,193.00

This project will investigate some problems in Banach space theory which are
motivated in part by applications to signals processing and data compression.
Elements of a given Banach space can be approximated by linear combinations of
elements drawn from a Schauder basis or from a redundant system such as a frame
or a dictionary. The approximants are typically selected by a greedy algorithm
such as the Dual Greedy, X-Greedy , or Thresholding Greedy Algorithms. The
project will study the convergence of such algorithms in the norm or the weak
topology of the Banach space. An important open problem in this area is to show
that the X-Greedy Algorithm converges in Lebesgue spaces. Convergence results
for greedy algorithms are connected to geometrical properties of the underlying
Banach space such as uniform smoothness or the Kadets-Klee property. They are
also connected to ``partial unconditionality'' properties of the underlying
system such as quasi-greediness. An important related problem in Banach space
theory which will be studied is to show that certain absolute constants (the
Elton constants) which arise naturally in the study of partial unconditionality
are uniformly bounded. A second set of problems in this project concerns
coefficient quantization in Banach spaces. The goal is to replace arbitrary real
coefficients (with respect to some underlying system) by coefficients that are
selected from a finite ``alphabet'' using some algorithmic procedure. Building
on recent results in the case of a Schauder basis, existence of systems with
desirable quantization properties will be connected to the geometry of the
underlying Banach space. A Banach space is a collection of ``vectors'' which can
be added together or multiplied by numbers to form other vectors. There is a
concept of ``distance'' between vectors which is analogous to the everyday
notion of distance between points in the three-dimensional Banach space which we
inhabit. There is a wide range of Banach spaces of importance in both pure and
applied mathematics which can be distinguished from each other by
``geometrical'' properties such as ``smoothness'' or ``convexity''.
Mathematicians have found that Banach spaces provide the appropriate framework
in which to formulate major areas of mathematics such as Harmonic Analysis,
Partial Differential Equations, and Functional Analysis. Banach spaces are also
used by scientists and engineers to model problems in applied areas such as
fluid mechanics, signals processing, image compression, and the pricing of
financial derivatives. An individual vector belonging to a given Banach space is
usually identified by an infinite string of numbers called ``coefficients'' .
The problem of data compression is to select the most significant coefficients
and to discard the rest. The problem of analog to digital conversion is to
``quantize'' the selected coefficients by binary numbers in such a way that the
quantized vector is a good approximation to the ``target'' vector. The geometry
of the underlying Banach space will play an important part in the development of
effective algorithms for implementing such procedures. In this project we will
investigate these and other problems concerning Banach spaces and their
geometrical properties.
