
* 0701018
* Partial Hyperbolicity and the Structure of Diffeomorphism Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2007,07/07/2009
* Anne Wilkinson,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 260,381.00

The proposed research extends two aspects of the principal investigator's
previous research program in smooth dynamics. In the first, her work with
collaborators has led recently to a proof of a "Boltzmann Ergodic Hypothesis"
for partially hyperbolic systems: the typical conservative partially hyperbolic
system is ergodic. In other recent work, the principal investigator and her
collaborators have shown that typical conservative diffeomorphisms with minimal
differentiability have trivial centralizers; that is, they have no smooth
symmetries. The project has two main components: (1) extending the previous work
of the principal investigator and her collaborators on the ergodicity of
partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms to a broader context, including dissipative
systems and nonuniformly partially hyperbolic systems; (2) a study of the
dynamical properties of smooth group actions on manifolds from the perspectives
of genericity and rigidity. For one example, the principal investigator proposes
to extend previous work with her collaborators in the conservative setting to
show that the typical diffeomorphisms with minimal differentiability have
trivial centralizers.

In the past few decades, the topic of partially hyperbolic dynamical systems has
emerged as one main direction in which the theory of complicated ("chaotic")
dynamical systems has extended beyond the classical setting of hyperbolic
dynamics. This research has been driven in part by the realization that many
practical applications of dynamical systems to experimental phenomena require a
much broader theory. In a parallel development, the typical (or generic)
properties of smooth systems have begun to emerge, as increasingly sophisticated
perturbation techniques have been developed. The principal investigator's
research over the last decade has focused on the fundamental qualitative
features -- e.g., ergodicity (statistical "chaos"), lack of symmetries, and
other hallmarks of orbit complexity -- that might be displayed by a typical
smooth dynamical system. The proposed research will make foundational advances
in understanding when to expect chaos in a given family of systems, such as
those that arise in practice in predicting global weather patterns or the
trajectories of extraterrestrial bodies. The material resulting from this
research proposal will be widely disseminated, through talks at conferences,
online preprint servers, and publication in scholarly journals. A significant
component of this grant is devoted to graduate-student training on the Ph.D.
level.
