
* 0701802
* Harmonic Analysis and Nonlinear Dispersive Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,05/23/2007
* Atanas Stefanov,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2011
* USD 114,000.00

Harmonic Analysis and Nonlinear Dispersive Equations

Abstract of Proposed Research Atanas G Stefanov

This project centers on the use of methods from Fourier analysis to analyze
certain nonlinear partial differential equations arising in mathematical
physics. Our primary interest is on dispersive equations with either
Schroedinger or wave operators as the leading order terms. In particular the
Maxwell-Schroedinger, Maxwell-Klein-Gordon and the Maxwell-Dirac systems will be
studied. Only ``rough'' initial data will be assumed. This is more realistic
physically and requires more careful use of the underlying conservation laws. We
want to obtain results about the well-posedness, regularity and asymptotic
behavior of the solutions of these equations.. We expect that new tools from
Fourier analysis, spectral theory and gauge theoretic methods will be developed
and used to prove these results.

The current proposal will produce new mathematical tools to study nonlinear
dispersive equations, which are mathematical models for important processes,
such as magnetization of materials, propagation of light in optical medium and
related phenomena of quantum mechanics. Some of these models arise in the study
of quantum mechanical systems and nonlinear optics, while others have purely
geometric origins. Better mathematical description of the properties of the
solutions of these equations, especially their asymptotic behavior in time and
space, will greatly improve our understanding of the properties of these
nonlinear field theories and help in the development of technologies that use
them.


