
* 0703421
* Invariant measures and symbolic coding for dynamical systems with hyperbolic behavior
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/23/2007
* Ilie Ugarcovici,IL,DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 88,930.00

The Principal Investigator proposes three directions of continued and future
research. The first project will study symbolic coding procedures for flows on
homogeneous spaces. Based on previous joint work with S. Katok, the PI intends
to continue the study of symbolic coding for noncompact surfaces of constant
negative curvature with finite volume and their connections with continued
fractions algorithms. Another objective is the existence of a feasible symbolic
coding (multidimensional shift space of finite type) for dynamical systems
obtained from higher rank abelian actions of Lie groups with the goal of
obtaining a better understanding of the possible invariant measures for such
actions. The novelty of this approach is the fact that the invariant measures
will be obtained from the symbolic representation of the corresponding action.
In recent years, questions from number theory, statistical mechanics and
computer science have been solved using the above mathematical tools and
results. A second direction of research is in the area of non-uniformly
hyperbolic dynamical systems (or systems with nonzero Lyapunov exponents). The
PI plans to study the existence of invariant measures of maximal entropy and to
establish precise asymptotic estimates for the number of periodic orbits for
such systems with additional dynamical properties (like invariant cone
families). A third direction of research is on applications of the theory of
chaotic dynamical systems to population models. In previous joint work with H.
Weiss, complicated (chaotic) behaviors and several bifurcation routes have been
documented for a class of density dependent population models with fertility
rates depending exponentially or polynomially on the total population. The goal
of the current project is to prove rigorously the existence of chaotic
attractors and physical measures for such systems.

A successful outcome of the first project will find important applications to
number theory and statistical mechanics, while the second project will deepen
the theoretical understanding of systems with nonzero Lyapunov exponents, and
will be beneficial to those scientists that try to explain the existence of
complicated behavior in physical models. The outcome of the third project will
have an impact on population biologists and demographers, since it will
rigorously demonstrate that chaotic behavior is a certainty in several classes
of population models. The results will help developing better suitable
mathematical models for population projections. The proposed research topics
will also contribute to the mathematical education of undergraduate and Master's
students at DePaul University, in part by lectures by the investigator, and in
part by students working on some of these topics and related subjects.




