
* 0705027
* Problems in Complex Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/20/2009
* John Fornaess,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2012
* USD 336,000.00

The principal investigator plans to work on various problems in complex
analysis. There are two main parts to the project. The first focuses on several
complex variables, the second on complex dynamics. However, the line between
these two areas is not clear-cut. Within the several complex variables portion,
the central concept is the Cauchy-Riemann equation. The problems are concerned
with either deriving estimates for this equation, or improving understanding of
key concepts basic to it, or applying estimates for this equation to function
theory. The second part of the project deals with complex dynamics. Its
objective is to obtain an understanding of foliations by Riemann surfaces. These
arise naturally from flows of holomorphic vector fields and lead to basic
questions about currents. (The latter could just as well be thought of as
belonging to several complex variables.) The principal investigator has a long-
standing collaboration with Sibony in which the two develop the theory of
complex dynamics. Most recently they have carried out some investigations of
Riemann surface laminations. These occur in the iteration of a holomorphic map,
in that its associated Julia set might have a lamination along which the map is
more regular than it is in other directions. (Of course, laminations are also an
interesting topic in their own right.) Until now it has been necessary for the
study to impose extra conditions, such as hyperbolicity, on the singular points.
The plan is to continue the study while allowing for more general singularities
and to search for ergodic properties of the laminations. In two dimensions,
positive closed currents can be approximated by currents of integration of
Riemann surfaces. It would be useful for the study of dynamics in higher
dimensions to have a similar geometric interpretation of currents. The PI and
Sibony propose to work on this topic with Coman. The case of immediate interest
is that of currents in three dimensions of bidimension (1,1).

Mathematical analysis is an important tool for studying the world from a
quantitative perspective. But already when one tries to find roots of polynomial
equations, it becomes clear that complex numbers and complex analysis are
needed. Hence it is important to develop complex analysis, which can then be
used to build up other areas of mathematics (e.g., algebraic geometry, number
theory). This project explores various aspects of complex analysis. The plan is
for the principal investigator to work with two senior mathematicians, Diederich
and Sibony. Together the three have a good overview of the fields of several
complex variables and complex dynamics, which benefits not only their joint
projects but also their work with younger mathematicians. They will work with
two midcareer mathematicians (Coman and Lanzani) and with a group of postdocs
(Heier, Herbig, Lee, Sahutoglu, Siano, and Wold). The project will also involve
a number of graduate students, including five women, from both the University of
Michigan and other institutions.
