
* 0742740
* Multilinear Operators in Harmonic Analysis and Ergodic Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,07/23/2007
* Ciprian Demeter,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 58,698.00

ABSTRACT

This proposal describes research plans that are aimed at answering an array of
questions in ergodic theory and harmonic analysis that are of great interest in
modern analysis. The main common feature of all these problems resides in their
multi-linear nature. Of particular Interest, when dealing with a multi-linear
operator acting on some product of Lebesgue spaces, is to understand the range
of indices for which it is well behaved. In this proposal the focus is mainly on
almost everywhere convergence, and thus inherently on the boundedness of the
associated maximal operators. An important instance of multi-linearity is
represented by the combinatorial averages such as Furstenberg's nonstandard
averages and the averages on cubes. The convergence of such averages has deep
implications for various Ramsey-type problems on integers and even on general
abstract groups. A second type of multi-linear operators we plan to investigate
is represented by the weighted averages and series, such as the ones appearing
in the so-called ``return times theorems''. The analysis of these objects
reveals striking connections between dynamics and time-frequency analysis, in
particular between Birghoff's point-wise ergodic theorem and Carleson's result
on the point-wise convergence of Fourier series.

This proposed research is at the cutting edge of what is now being done in
dynamical systems, harmonic analysis and arithmetic combinatorics. It is
expected that the resolution of the questions advanced in this proposal will
further the mathematical community's understanding of the connections between
these areas, in particular between processes in harmonic analysis and their
analogue in ergodic theory. The nature of this research makes it also likely for
our investigation to shed yet more light on some of the tools that are used in
other areas of science, such as signal processing. The research project that is
proposed in this grant will lead to interactions between the PI and
mathematicians from other universities with whom part of the investigation might
be conducted.
