
* 0758043
* Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,04/19/2010
* David Hoff,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 194,073.00

This project will address various mathematical questions relating to the
existence, regularity, qualitative features, and large-time behavior of
solutions of certain systems of partial differential equations. These systems
are closely related mathematically, all sharing common features with the Navier-
Stokes equations of multidimensional, compressible fluid flow and arise in a
variety of applications, including the flow of compressible fluids and gases,
shallow-water theory, magnetohydrodynamics, and the modeling of self-gravitating
stellar systems. The primary goal of the project is to achieve precise,
mathematically certain statements about these models by applying techniques from
the fields of analysis and partial differential equations. This research seeks
to impact the underlying physical science by validating the models, setting
limits on the range of applicability of the models, or in some cases even
invalidating the models under consideration. At the intellectual level it
applies a reasoning process quite distinct from that in which laboratory data is
compared with predictions based on numerical simulations. Indeed, the
mathematical mechanisms which insure well-posedness of realistic models nearly
always have physical counterparts; this means that the challenge to analyze
these models with strict mathematical rigor is also a challenge to understand
the physical phenomena at a newer, deeper level. Additionally, by identifying
the correct framework in which a mathematical model is well-posed and the
mathematical mechanisms which make it so, this research can point the way to the
effective design of methods for generating approximate solutions by computer
simulation.

This project will address various mathematical questions relating to important
physical models of compressible fluids and materials. These models arise in a
broad range of applications, including supersonic flight, dynamic meteorology,
combustion processes, and stellar dynamics. While the main goal in constructing
these models is to achieve a predictive capability, the systems of equations
which comprise them are far too complicated to be "solved" in any explicit
sense. On the other hand, adequate approximate solutions can frequently be
generated by computer methods. The intelligent and effective design of such
methods depends crucially, however, on a rigorous understanding of why solutions
do exist, in what sense they exist, and in what ways they are sensitive to noise
in the data. The project will therefore seek to provide this rigorous
mathematical framework for these models and to determine possible limits on the
range of their applicability. A second goal of the project will be to attract
and nurture the development of younger mathematicians to this area of research.
Specifically, the PI will continue collaborative research with present and
future graduate students and postdocs, will teach an advanced graduate-level
course on mathematical problems in compressible flow in the second year of the
grant period, and will continue supervising undergraduate research in Indiana
University's REU program approximately every third summer.
