
* 0758378
* RUI: Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems & Applications: An Operator Theoretic Approach
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,06/12/2008
* Lawrence Fialkow,NY,SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 175,000.00

Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems and Applications: An Operator Theoretic
Approach This research concerns an operator-theoretic approach to multivariable
truncated moment problems. For a finite real multi-sequence, we seek concrete
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a positive Borel
representing measure in Euclidean space, a measure such that the power moments
of the measure coincide with the corresponding elements of the multi-sequence.
We associate to the multi-sequence a corresponding moment matrix. It is known
that a representing measure exists if and only if the moment matrix admits an
extension to a larger, positive semi-definite moment matrix, which in turn
admits a flat, i.e., rank-preserving, extension to a still larger moment matrix.
This research concerns the existence and minimal size of such moment matrix
extensions. Column dependence relations in the moment matrix determine an
algebraic variety which contains the support of any representing measure, and
this research concerns a description of the algebraic varieties for which it is
possible to establish the desired flat moment matrix extensions. More generally,
this research concerns representing measure whose support is contained in a
prescribed semi-algebraic closed set. In this case, we require flat extensions
(as above) for which the localizing matrices corresponding to the semi-algebraic
set are also positive semi-definite. This part of the research is concerned with
semi-algebraic (or algebraic) sets for which positive polynomials admit degree-
bounded weighted sum-of-squares representations; applications directly concern
finite convergence in Lasserre's polynomial optimization theory. Another aspect
of this research concerns algorithms for explicitly computing finitely atomic
representing measures; applications of this part of the research lead to the
construction of minimal or near-minimal multivariable cubature rules in
Numerical Analysis. The aim of this research is to develop new existence and
uniqueness criteria for finitely atomic representing measures in multivariable
truncated moment problems. Truncated moment problems play an essential role in
aspects of such fields as Operator Theory (subnormality of weighted shifts),
Interpolation Theory (classical Nevanlinna-Pick theory), Numerical Analysis
(multivariable cubature rules), Control Theory (signal processing), Optimization
Theory (polynomial optimization over a region), and Real Algebraic Geometry
(representations of positive polynomials as weighted sums-of-squares). The
principal focus of this research is an approach to multidimensional truncated
moment problems based on an extension theory for the moment matrix associated to
the moment data. When this matrix admits an infinite, positive, finite rank
moment matrix extension, this approach yields an explicit formula for a finitely
atomic representing measure supported on the joint spectrum of a normal tuple of
operators corresponding to the extension. The primary goal of this research is
to determine concrete conditions on the moment data which permit the desired
extension. This research also concerns algorithms for explicitly computing
finitely atomic representing measures corresponding to moment matrix extensions.
Another aspect of this research concerns the interplay between the existence of
representing measures and the existence of sum-of-squares representations for
positive polynomials; this aspect is directly related to Lasserre's algorithm
for polynomial optimization. Another application of this research concerns the
development of new minimal cubature rules on classical domains such as the disk
or triangle. Broader impacts will include undergraduate training and research
projects for science students from underrepresented minorities, and the use of
computing, particularly simulations, as an experimental methodology in
mathematics and computer science courses.
