
* 0758247
* On well-posedness and regularity properties for fluid equations and nonlinear dispersive equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,04/11/2008
* Natasa Pavlovic,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 126,841.00

Pavlovi'c plans to gain better understanding of fluid and nonlinear wave and
dispersive equations via analyzing dispersive equations using harmonic analysis
techniques that turned out to be useful in the context of fluid equations and
vice verse. The first group of proposed problems focuses on the Navier-Stokes
equations that describe fundamental properties of viscous fluids. One approach
in studying existence of solutions to the Navier-Stokes is to obtain solutions
to the corresponding integral equation. Existence of these solutions in 3D has
been proved only locally in time and globally for small initial data. Hence it
is important to understand behavior of these solutions in "critical spaces" that
preserve scaling invariance. With her collaborators the PI will investigate the
behavior of solutions to the Navier-stokes equations in critical spaces.
Questions of interest include stability of self-similar solutions in critical
spaces (which is motivated by the analogy with solitons in the context of
dispersive equations) and a long standing open problem related to well-posedness
of the Navier-Stokes equations in the largest critical space. The second group
of proposed problems concentrates on nonlinear dispersive equations. Many of the
important structural properties (e.g. conserved or monotone quantities) of the
nonlinear Schrodinger equations (NLS) are at low regularities, and to exploit
these features one needs to establish existence theory at low regularities.
Pavlovi'c proposes to continue her work on establishing global well-posedness
for certain class of NLS equations corresponding to low regularity data. The PI
will employ and further investigate tools that were useful in recent advances in
the field, such as interaction Morawetz estimates. The third group of problems
is related to super-critical nonlinear wave and NLS equations. Here super-
critical refers to equations with conserved quantities at lower regularities
than the scaling invariant norm (the 3D Navier-Stokes is an example). Motivated
by her earlier work with Katz on partial regularity of the Navier-Stokes
equations, Pavlovi'c proposes to use microlocalization techniques in order to
obtain a partial regularity result for super-critical NLS and wave equations.
Suggested problems involve important mathematical questions such as existence
and regularity of solutions to nonlinear PDEs that describe motion of fluid or
various wave phenomena. For instance, the theory of the Navier-Stokes equations
in three dimensions is far from being complete. The outstanding open problems,
whose better understanding would have impact in the fields from oceanography to
cosmology, are global existence, uniqueness and regularity of smooth solutions
to the Navier-Stokes in 3D. On the other hand, the NLS and their combinations
with the Kortewegde- Vries and wave equations have been proposed as models for
many basic wave phenomena. Such a physical relevance of the equations motivates
mathematical explorations. The proposed activity seeks to find an
interdisciplinary approach to questions arising from fluid and dispersive PDEs.
In particular, the PI plans to analyze dispersive equations using sophisticated
techniques of harmonic analysis that turned out to be useful in the context of
fluid equations and vice verse.
