
* 0758226
* Martingales and Painleve Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2008,11/10/2009
* Aimo Hinkkanen,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 177,666.00

The motivating idea of this project is that functions have a hitherto unknown
probabilistic structure: associated with certain combinations of first-order
partial derivatives of functions, there are two fields of rotations, and two
martingales that are martingale transforms of each other, starting from
constants of equal modulus, and ending at what one obtains after rotating these
combinations of the derivatives. Finding such rotation fields would, in
combination with techniques developed by Burkholder for martingale transforms,
enable one to obtain the conjectured values for the sharp norms of certain
singular integral operators that occupy a central place in complex and harmonic
analysis: the Beurling-Ahlfors transformation in the plane and its
generalizations in space. The principal investigator will work on extending to
the general case his previous results showing that in certain cases such
rotations and martingales exist. The principal investigator will also study the
order of growth of the solutions to the second and fourth Painleve equations.
The six Painleve differential equations are prototypes of second-order
differential equations that do not have removable singularities. They have
recently had an increasing impact in pure and applied mathematics and in science
and engineering.

Work performed under this proposal should lead to the development of new
structures tying together analysis, probability theory, and physics: the
principal investigator has found that, in three dimensions, the martingale
conjecture has an interesting physical interpretation as a relation between
static electric and magnetic fields. It will also lead to a greater
understanding of and concrete results for the important Painleve class of
nonlinear differential equations, which is being used in numerous applications
in other areas of mathematics as well as in physics and engineering. Painleve
equations are considered to be related to the concept of integrability for
nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations. Other applications in
pure mathematics include the study of Bonnet surfaces and random matrices. In
interdisciplinary mathematics and other sciences, the numerous applications of
the Painleve equations and transcendents include the following areas: the Ising
model in physics; correlation functions in an antiferromagnet model; quantum
field theory and topological field theory; general relativity and cosmology;
supersymmetry gauge theories in physics; resonant oscillations in shallow water;
Hele-Shaw problems in viscous fluids; plasma physics; superconductivity;
nonlinear optics and fiber optics; polymers, polyelectrolytes, and colloids.
