
* 0800416
* Extremal Problems in Quasiconformal Geometry and Nonlinear PDEs, an Invitation to n- Harmonic Hyperelasticity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,04/02/2012
* Tadeusz Iwaniec,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 499,339.00

In this project the principal investigator initiates a study of extremal
problems for mappings of finite (usually unbounded) distortion, hoping to
provide background for further developments in geometric function theory and
nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations. The plan of attack relies on
geometric and physical intuition, drawn especially from the theory of nonlinear
elasticity and materials science. This represents a trend that in recent years
has become more pronounced, and it has led to increasing efforts by pure and
applied mathematicians to combine such ideas and results. The project centers on
the remarkable relationship (first envisioned by the principal investigator and
Jani Onninen) between mappings of finite distortion and hyperelasticity. Both
theories are governed by variational principles and problems of compelling
common mathematical interest. The new fronts that have been created in geometric
function theory include polyconvex integrals of the distortion function and the
associated total n-harmonic energy. Of special interest are mappings of smallest
mean distortion, whose existence, regularity, and global invertibility are
related to deep unsolved mathematical questions. For instance, the present
proposal takes on difficult questions concerning deformations of spherical rings
in Euclidean n-space, and a much studied conjecture of Nitsche (1962). This is a
tentative first step toward an n-dimensional theory of moduli, a subject that
hopefully will develop into a very coherent analogue of Teichmuller theory in
higher dimensions. The project features new concepts (such as free Lagrangians)
and challenging questions galore, some already prepared for answers, others of a
more speculative, long-term character.

With its elaborate design, this project will encourage the dissemination of
modern geometric function theory, a classical field that has undergone a
tremendous transformation in recent years, to a wider audience and will enhance
the understanding of the subject's pervasive presence in applications. The
project reflects continued efforts by the principal investigator to provide an
active and welcoming research environment for graduate students and young
scholars through effective training, the creation of educational materials, and
the fostering of scientific partnerships both within the U.S. and overseas. This
endeavor has hitherto been particularly effective for groups historically
underrepresented in mathematics, especially women. The proposed problems will
find considerable interest among geometric analysts, especially researchers in
such physically relevant fields as partial differential equations, the calculus
of variations, and nonlinear elasticity theory.
