
* 0800908
* Problems in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,03/02/2010
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 386,146.00

Broadly speaking, the project addresses open problems in regularity theory of
elliptic and parabolic nonlinear systems of partial differential equations, as
well as several problems from the theory of incompressible Euler equations. Most
of the elliptic and parabolic problems are formulated in the context of the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, but various model equations will also be
studied and the insight obtained from the model equations is expected to be
important. The main emphasis is on developing methods and techniques for
problems that are out of the reach of perturbation theory. For certain classes
of equations (such as, for example, the Navier-Stokes equation) such problems
are of considerable theoretical and practical importance.

Partial differential equations represent a basic tools for modeling many natural
and technological phenomena. For instance, the equations describing fluid flow
(on which an important part of this project will concentrate) are used in
weather prediction, climate research, and various technological applications,
such as the design of optimal aerodynamical shapes. The equations of fluid
dynamics are notoriously difficult to solve, even with the help of the largest
computers. Some of these difficulties are intrinsic, but some are due to the
fact that our mathematical understanding of the equations themselves is
incomplete. Advances in theoretical understanding of partial differential
equations can lead to substantial improvement in practical methods for solving
them. In the final analysis, the main task of the theoretical investigation is
to find some simple and natural parameters that control the behavior of the
solutions. Once a good set of such parameters is known, it becomes much easier
to design practical methods for calculating the solutions. Reason: armed with
such parameters a researcher knows what is important and what is not when one
tracks a solution. The researcher can then focus computational power on the
aspects that really matter. The proposed research can have a significant impact
in this direction.
