
* 0800570
* Several Questions in Noncommutative Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,05/15/2008
* Yi-Jun Yao,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2008
* USD 85,053.00

Abstract Yao

The investigator proposes to study several different topics in noncommutative
geometry (NCG). The first topic concerns one class of deformations of algebras
arising from the theory of modular forms. These deformations have been related
to the Hopf algebras which appear naturally as local symmetry for noncommutative
spaces, such as those of leaves of a foliation. The PI plans to use methods and
techniques of harmonic analysis (on the group of affine transformations of a
real line) to search for a corresponding deformation theory in the framework of
C* algebras, which can be considered as the set of continuous functions over
noncommutative spaces. Other topics in this project concern cyclic cohomology, a
noncommutative analogue of the classical De Rham cohomology, which encodes some
topological properties of the algebras in question. The PI intends to apply some
ideas of complex geometry to study some noncommutative manifolds. The PI plans
also to investigate the cyclic cohomology of Hölder functions on the circle and
other manifolds, and find applications on problems in harmonic analysis.

Noncommutative geometry is a domain which is originated in the study of operator
algebras(which, historically, has its origin in the mathematical foundation of
quantum mechanics). Since late 70?s, this area interacts to a great extent with
differential geometry, group theory, topology, etc.; and later with number
theory or quantum field theory. By addressing both internal questions of this
domain and its interactions with other research areas, one could expect further
applications in physics once the primary goals of the project achieved.
