
* 0800906
* On Relativistic and Non-Relativistic Fermi Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2008,10/05/2010
* Christian Hainzl,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 116,084.00

In recent years, in condensed matter physics, significant attention has been
devoted to the study of ultra-cold atomic gases. In some remarkable experiments,
the experimentalists have learned to tune the inter-atomic interaction from very
weak to very strong, observing thereby different phases of the gas. Within our
first project we intend to study the weak-coupling regime, which is usually
called the BCS (Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer)-regime. Mathematically, this regime
can be quite accurately described by the famous BCS gap-equation. This equation
describes the wavefunction of, so called, Cooper pairs. It is highly non-linear,
nonetheless, in a recent work we were able to link the BCS gap-equation to the
spectral analysis of a linear, pseudo-differential, operator. This allowed a
precise characterization of the class of potentials giving rise to
superfluidity. In further projects we plan to study the energy gap, continuity
properties of the momentum distribution, and higher order calculations of the
critical temperature, as well as systems with where the two spin states are
unequally populated, all questions that are particularly important for
applications, such as the classification of different types of superfluids.

Our second project concerns the study of relativistic particles, described by
Dirac's operator. In recent works with Lewin, Solovej and Sere we established a
framework within mean-field approximation which allows us to obtain ground
states via a minimization principle, which is a major departure from prior
results. Although originally developed in the context of QED these methods can
be applied to quite arbitrary infinite quantum systems. All our previous results
hold in the case of zero temperature. In near future we plan to extend our
results to arbitrary positive temperature. The second part of our project on
Dirac particles is associated with gravitational forces. First, we consider
classical Newtonian forces and study a time-evolution which is supposed to
describe the dynamical collapse of white dwarfs. Second, we plan a more
innovative approach, incorporating general relativity.

Broader Impact: The goal is to develop new mathematical tools for superfluid
systems and Dirac systems. Such methods lead to different points of views and
increase the understanding of the underlying physical systems. For example, in
the long run, such methods could help to understand the mechanism of high T_c-
superconductors. These have all kind of applications such as ultrafast
computers, magnetic levitation, loss-less powergrid, etc. The work will include
multiple collaborative efforts and contribute to the training of PhD students.
