
* 0801261
* Local and global dynamics for nonlinear dispersive equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,05/02/2012
* Daniel Tataru,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 832,934.00

The proposed work is devoted to a broad range of problems within the field of
nonlinear dispersive equations. The primary goal is to achieve a good
understanding of the interplay between linear dispersive dynamics and nonlinear
effects. On the linear side, the project will study the global-in-time
dispersive properties for wave and Schroedinger equations evolving on curved
backgrounds. This is also in part directed toward the conjectured stability of
the Schwarzchild and Kerr black hole solutions of the Einstein equations in
general relativity. On the nonlinear side, a key topic to be explored is that of
multiscale analysis. This corresponds to nonlinear dispersive equations that
evolve in regimes where linear and nonlinear effects are strongly interlaced.
Thus while one might see coherent linear dynamics on a very short, possibly
frequency dependent time scale, these are lost at larger times. The challenge is
then to uncover larger patterns that remain coherent on longer and longer time
scales.

Broadly speaking, dispersive equations are equations whose solutions can be
thought of as superpositions of waves travelling in different directions.
Nonlinear effects allow these waves to interact, which may lead to modified
propagation patterns (creating new waves) or possibly to the phenomenon
described by mathematicians as "blow-up." Many of the equations considered in
this project have their origins in physical theories such as general relativity,
many-body quantum field theory, surface wave propagation, and plasma physics.
For this reason, it is hoped that the results of the research may shed some
light on the corresponding physical phenomena. The project involves graduate
students and postdocs, as well as several domestic and international
collaborators.
