
* 0801168
* Multivariable Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2008,08/17/2011
* Raul Curto,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 152,604.00

Abstract Curto

The research deals with multivariable operator theory, focusing attention on
three areas: (i) algebraic conditions for existence, uniqueness, and
localization of the support of representing measures for truncated moment
problems (TMP); (ii) multivariable techniques in the detection of subnormality,
esp. for Toeplitz operators on the unit circle, including an approach to the
Lifting Problem for Commuting Subnormals (LPCS); and (iii) operator theory over
Reinhardt domains, with special attention given to the spectral and structural
properties of multivariable weighted shifts. Concerning the first area, we plan
to extend recent work on flat extensions of positive moment matrices (joint with
L. Fialkow and H.M. Möller), which has led to a general framework for the study
of TMP. We plan to apply these methods beyond the extremal case, to obtain
algebraic and geometric invariants for solubility, to further develop an
appropriate analogue of the Riesz-Haviland Theorem, and to investigate the
duality between TMP and degree-bounded representations of polynomials
nonnegative on a prescribed semialgebraic set. The second area deals with a
multivariable approach to LPCS and with subnormality for Toeplitz operators.
Building on work of C. Cowen for the case of hyponormal Toeplitz operators, our
approach is to first characterize 2-hyponormality, then k-hyponormality, and
eventually subnormality. We would also like to develop further the ideas in
recent joint work with J. Yoon and S.H. Lee to search for necessary and
sufficient conditions for two commuting subnormal operators to admit a joint
normal extension, including some useful connections with Agler's abstract model
theory. The third area deals with structural and spectral properties of
multiplication operators on functional Hilbert spaces over Reinhardt domains. We
plan to extend the study of the spectral picture of subnormal multivariable
weighted shifts to hyponormal ones, exploiting recent results (joint with J.
Yoon) which highlight some of the pathology that arises when a Berger measure is
absent, and using the groupoid techniques introduced in joint work with P.
Muhly.

Hilbert space operators are infinite generalizations of matrices. The infinite
generalization of a vector is frequently a function and for this reason Hilbert
space operators are frequently modeled as the operator of multiplication on a
space of functions. Part of this project involves finding such models for
operators or tuples of operators. Once such models are obtained many basic
questions about the structure of these operators become more natural. A separate
part of the research deals with inverse problems, esp. moment problems, which
are related to power moments of mass distributions, and arise naturally in
statistics, spectral analysis, geophysics, image recognition, and economics. Our
research is aimed at resolving some outstanding problems in multivariable
operator theory, while creating recruitment and retention opportunities for
women and minorities to pursue careers in mathematics, by engaging their
participation in projects related to the interaction of mathematics with other
sciences. The results on truncated moment problems have been used by S.
McCullough to obtain a structure theorem in Fejér-Riesz factorization theory; by
J. Lasserre in the study of semi-algebraic subset of the plane; and by J.
Lasserre and M. Laurent to convert polynomial optimization into an instance of
semidefinite programming. We anticipate that such connections with areas outside
of operator theory will continue to arise. Several open problems in this
proposal are written to generate research projects accessible to undergraduate
and graduate students, especially those related to cubatures, low-degree moment
problems, their connections with algebraic geometry, and multivariable weighted
shifts.
