
* 0803120
* Non-linear equations and Schroedinger operators
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,08/13/2012
* Dirk Hundertmark,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 189,994.00

This project targets basic questions in mathematical physics and the theory of
partial differential equations. It involves a rigorous study of properties of
solutions of certain nonlinear differential equations (e.g., the decay
properties of dispersion managed solitons, spectral properties of matrix
Schrödinger operators, and properties of Coulomb matter under extreme densities)
that correspond to significant physical phenomena. The methods used and
developed in this research are a combination of analytic techniques from
differential equations, analysis, harmonic analysis, the calculus of variations,
functional analysis, and spectral theory.

The major part of this research project is interdisciplinary. It bridges pure
mathematics and applied sciences such as engineering and physics. For example,
dispersion management solitons are by now widely used in high-speed internet
cables. Despite this commercial success only very little is known rigorously
about the decay of these solitons. Engineers care about the decay, because it
effectively determines the bandwidth (hence the speed) of optical fiber
communication devices. The research will lead to a better rigorous understanding
of these solitons. Not only will the new mathematical methods developed in the
project feed back into the analytic toolbox available for mathematicians, but it
will also put the often ad-hoc formal calculations of engineers on a firm basis.
This could lead to deepened insights into the mathematical foundations of
dispersive equations, in the process providing engineers with both new tools for
exploring the nature of these systems and increased potential for improving
existing fiber optics systems. The project will extend and strengthen existing
collaborations with researchers in the USA, Europe, and Korea. Part of the grant
will be used for supporting and training a graduate student.
