
* 0805582
* Critical points of variational integrals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2007,12/23/2011
* Xiaodong Yan,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 11/30/2012
* USD 96,261.00

Critical Points of Variational Integrals

Abstract of Proposed Research Xiaodong Yan

This project is to study the regularity of critical points of multiple integrals
in the calculus of variations; especially some of the integrands that arise from
nonlinear elasticity. Also some questions that generalize well-known results in
classical analysis. One project is to investigate conditions on the integrands
that guarantee certain partial regularity of critical points. In particular the
regularity of certain systems that are models in nonlinear elasticity will be
studied. This will include both compressible and incompressible materials.
Another project is to study the regularity and qualitative properties of the
solutions of certain systems of nonlinear integral equations. These systems are
closely related to the systems that arise in the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev
inequality.

The questions to be studied in this project are important technical results in
analysis and the calculus of variations. Any results would be of considerable
interest as there has been much research on these, and related, subjects during
the last twenty years. The problems in nonlinear elasticity may lead to insights
into the behavior of exotic materials while the other problems may be of
importance for some questions in geometry.




