
* 0851061
* Alan T. Waterman Award
* DMS,WATERMAN AWARD, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2008,06/10/2010
* Terence Tao,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 500,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) is proud to announce that 32-year-old
Terence Tao, a professor of mathematics at the University of California at Los
Angeles, will receive its 2008 Alan T. Waterman Award. Called a "supreme
problem-solver," and named one of "the Brilliant 10" scientists by Popular
Science (October 2006), Tao's extraordinary work, much of which has been funded
by NSF through the years, has had a tremendous impact across several
mathematical areas. He will receive the award at a black tie dinner program at
the U.S. Department of State on May 6. The annual Waterman award recognizes an
outstanding young researcher in any field of science or engineering supported by
NSF. Candidates may not be more than 35 years old, or seven years beyond
receiving a doctorate, and must stand out for their individual achievements. In
addition to a medal, the awardee receives a grant of $500,000 over a 3-year
period for scientific research or advanced study in their field. Terence Tao was
born in Adelaide, Australia, in 1975. His genius at mathematics began early in
life. He started to learn calculus when he was 7 years old, at which age he
began high school; by the age of 9 he was already very good at university-level
calculus. By the age of 11, he was thriving in international mathematics
competitions. Tao was 20 when he earned his doctorate from Princeton University,
and he joined UCLA's faculty that year. UCLA promoted him to full professor at
age 24. Tao now holds UCLA's James and Carol Collins Chair in the College of
Letters and Science. He is also a fellow of the Royal Society and the Australian
Academy of Sciences (corresponding member). Nicknamed "the Mozart of Math,"
Tao's areas of research include partial differential equations (PDE),
combinatorics, number theory and harmonic analysis. Harmonic analysis is an
advanced form of calculus that uses equations from physics. Some of this work
involves, in a colleague's words, "geometrical constructions that almost no one
understands." Tao also works in a related field, nonlinear partial differential
equations, and in the entirely distinct fields of algebraic geometry, number
theory and combinatorics, which involves counting. In addition to the
prestigious Waterman award, Tao has received a number of other awards, including
the Salem Prize in 2000; the Bochner Prize in 2002; the Fields Medal, often
touted as the "Nobel Prize for Mathematics" and SASTRA Ramanujan Prize in 2006;
and the MacArthur Fellowship and Ostrowski Prize in 2007. Through the years,
Tao's research has often been funded by other NSF grants. His current research
is funded by NSF Award #0649473, "Global Behaviour of Critical Nonlinear PDE."
