
* 0855597
* Complex Analysis, Potential Theory and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2009,05/17/2009
* Dmitry Khavinson,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 122,344.00

The intellectual thrust of the projectfocuses on problems related to a recent
solution by methods of complex analysis of a problem in astrophysics concerning
the maximal number of images one may observe when a light from a distant object
is deflected by n co-planar masses before reaching the observer. The PI and G.
Neumann proved a conjecture by the astrophysicist S. Rhie that this number
depends linearly, rather than quadratically; on n. (This result reduces
substantially the number of relevant calculations for large n.) The PI, jointly
with his student E. Lundberg, is planning to extend these ideas to a more
realistic situation when the lensing effect is produced by an elliptical galaxy
with an isothermal mass distribution of gas. Another main theme of this project
develops further recent results of the PI obtained jointly with Bell, Ebenfelt
and Shapiro, and, more recently, by the PI's student Lundberg, dealing with
algebraic properties of solutions of the boundary value problems in potential
theory. One of the main novel tools being developed in the project is the
extension to the complex space of a notion of a "lightning bolt" pioneered by
Arnold and Kolmogorov in the 1950s in their solution of the 13th Hilbert problem
on superpositions of functions. Complex lightning bolts turn out to be precisely
the obstacles preventing global analytic continuation of harmonic functions in
two-dimensional complex space. The project also addresses several other
fundamental long standing questions in complex analysis and potential theory. A
large part of the project has a strong interdisciplinary flavor. This research
continues a deeper study of some problems in astrophysics, more precisely, in
gravitational lensing. In particular, the project deals with the problems that
have arisen from the PI?s recent work with the astrophysicists Fassnacht and
Keeton. The PI is continuing popularization of some aspects of his research and
is planning several articles directed at a wide audience. The PI has given in
the past and will continue to give popular lectures for undergraduates based on
the research topics of the project. The PI is working with a local high school
student (M. Rabinovich), who was recently selected as a 2009 Intel Talent Search
Competition finalist. The PI will be continuing his efforts in dissemination of
his research and, at the same time, continuing to supervise Ph D students. The
PI now has two students: one advanced and one in his second year. A beginning
female graduate student has recently expressed interest in working with the PI
on some of the topics in the project. The PI continues his fruitful
collaborations on some parts of the project with researchers from
underrepresented groups. The PI is also actively involved at various levels in
organizing multiple events (conferences, workshops, etc.), on the research
topics discussed in the proposal and in bringing together mathematicians and
physicists in order to uphold the strong momentum of collaboration on several
problems in this project.
