
* 0856485
* Infinite dimensional analysis, viscosity solutions and applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2009,08/04/2009
* Andrzej Swiech,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 193,261.00

The research of the project is focused on fully nonlinear first- and second-
order partial differential equations (PDE) in infinite dimensional spaces and
applications thereof. Primary examples of such PDE are equations of Hamilton-
Jacobi-Bellman-type (HJB) that are associated with optimal control of
deterministic and stochastic PDE. The theory of PDE in infinite dimensional
spaces has been studied from the point of view of mild, regular, weak, and
viscosity solutions and has established itself over the last two decades as one
of the modern tools of infinite dimensional analysis. In particular, in addition
to optimal control of PDE, the theory of viscosity solutions of such equations
has found applications in areas such as the study of large deviations of
infinite dimensional diffusions, the theory of bond markets and other aspects of
mathematical finance, and stochastic invariance. In this project the principal
investigator focuses on two emerging areas of infinite dimensional PDE that are
wide open. The first is integro-PDE in Hilbert spaces. The goal is to develop a
viscosity solution theory for fully nonlinear first- and second-order integro-
PDE in Hilbert spaces and study its various applications. The interest in such
equations comes primarily from their association with infinite dimensional jump-
diffusion processes, in particular with stochastic PDE driven by Levy processes.
Regarding applications, the theory will be used to develop a PDE approach to
large deviations for solutions of stochastic PDE with small Levy noise intensity
and to study infinite dimensional Black-Scholes and Black-Scholes-Barenblatt
integro-PDE coming from the theory of bond markets driven by impulsive noise. A
second area of emphasis is PDE in the space of probability measures, which
finally seems open for development owing to recent advances in the theory of
mass transport and abstract gradient and Hamiltonian flows. This new area is
extremely interesting and important, and the project will concentrate on its
applications to large deviations and statistical mechanics. Other problems
contained in the project include the use of HJB equations to obtain necessary
and sufficient conditions for optimality for optimal control of PDE and
investigations into maximum principles.

The project contains a pioneering program of research that is aimed at the
development of new tools in partial differential equations and infinite
dimensional analysis. The proposed research spans areas as diverse as nonlinear
partial differential equations, functional analysis, probability, stochastic
processes, stochastic partial differential equations, mathematical finance,
optimal control, game theory, statistical mechanics, mass transport, and
calculus of variations. In particular, it will provide analytical techniques for
the study of infinite dimensional jump diffusion processes that are used in
stochastic modeling of various phenomena in which random and violent events can
occur. Beyond mathematics, the project should have impact and stimulate research
in fields such as engineering, physics, finance, and economics. The broader
impacts of the project will also include attracting and training graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars.
