
* 0856687
* Geometry of Measures
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2009,02/19/2013
* Tatiana Toro,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 607,660.00

Abstract Toro

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The theme of this proposal is the strong relationship that exists between the
questions of how the geometry of a domain can be recovered from the regularity
of its harmonic measure, and free boundary regularity problems. Remarkably the
analogies become more apparent when examined under a Geometric Measure Theory
(GMT) magnifying glass. The core of this proposal addresses three questions. The
first one aims to understand domains in higher dimensional Euclidean spaces in
terms of their harmonic measure as it has been done in 2 dimensions with great
success. The underlying thesis is that in higher dimensions GMT plays the role
that complex analysis does in 2 dimensions. The second question is that of the
existence and regularity of minimizers for variational problems stated in terms
of H\"older continuous metrics rather than smooth metrics. This problem includes
the understanding of the structure of the corresponding free boundary. A by-
product of this, is a question concerning the regularity of quasi-minimizers of
the functional studied by Alt and Caffarelli. The third question goes back to a
long term interest of the PI concerning the existence of good parameterization
for subsets of Euclidean space. A remarkable feature is that this last project,
which is purely in geometry, was motivated by an attempt to answer a question in
potential theory. The cross-pollenization between harmonic analysis and GMT has
been clearly beneficial to both areas.



The theory of calculus of variations has been the main theoretical tool used in
the study of variational problems often concerning energy minimization. Energy
minimization methods are used to understand the equilibrium configuration of
molecules. The basic idea is that a stable state of a molecular system should
correspond to a local minimum of their potential energy. The proposed research
provides new outlets for GMT, a field of Mathematics that has contributed
greatly to the development of the calculus of variations and geometric analysis.
The transformative aspect of this grant is the invigoration of this fundamental
area of Mathematics. In the last few years, the number of students going into
GMT in the US, has greatly diminished while it has increased in Europe. An
important feature of the proposed work is that, while some results have already
been obtained, there is great potential for expansion. In particular, we expect
the active participation of graduate students and junior mathematicians. The
field, which has been one of the pillars upon of which some areas of geometric
analysis have been built, offers the theoretical framework to study a wide array
of variational problems coming from different venues of science.
