
* 0900885
* Singularities and Complexity in CR Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2009,07/02/2009
* Jiri Lebl,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 99,898.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The PI proposes to study the theory of singularities and complexity in CR
geometry. In particular the PI proposes to study the connections between his
previous work on Levi-flat hypersurfaces, properties of nowhere minimal
submanifolds of complex euclidean space, and the complexity of proper maps
between balls in different dimensions. The common link can be described as
studying the set where two squared norms of holomorphic maps are equal, and
relating the CR geometric information of the solution set of this equation to
the complexity of the maps. The PI proposes to prove that the singular set of a
Levi-flat hypervariety is Levi-flat, to classify algebraic Levi-flat
hypervarieties in complex projective space, to study the regularity of Levi-flat
hypersurfaces with boundary, to extend the work on complexity of proper maps
between balls, and finally, to further develop computational methods to help in
gaining insight into the combinatorial aspects of the proper maps of balls and
related problems.

Study of several complex variables, of which CR geometry is part, is central to
the understanding of modern mathematics, physics and other applied sciences. For
example, to understand behavior of differential equations, one must understand
the geometry of the space where the equation lives. The theory of singularities
and complexity in CR geometry is not well understood currently, and there is
great interest in the CR geometry community in building proper foundations in
this area. Furthermore, there is fertile ground to build connections with other
areas of mathematics. The study of proper maps of balls has already yielded
unexpected connections with number theory, combinatorics, linear algebra, and
has computational aspects that may perhaps yield advances in symbolic and
numerical computation. Many of the methods applied in this research are easily
accessible to beginning graduate and even advanced undergraduate students. The
project will therefore not only advance the understanding of this new area in
complex analysis, but may serve to involve young researchers.
