
* 0900947
* Global properties and large-time behavior of solutions nonlinear parabolic equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Peter Polacik,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 195,000.00

A part of the project is devoted to the study of various classes of parabolic
partial differential equations with symmetries. The basic question to be
addressed is how positive solutions reflect the symmetry of the equation. For
elliptic equations, there are classical theorems on symmetry of positive
solutions and some motivations for symmetry problems in parabolic equations stem
from these theorems (when viewing solutions of an elliptic equation as steady
states of the corresponding parabolic equation). Other very interesting and
challenging symmetry problems are specific to parabolic equations. Such are, for
example, problems concerning the asymptotic symmetry of positive solutions as
time approaches infinity. The principal investigator will continue his research
in this area with the goal of obtaining a better understanding of the manner in
which positive solutions approach the space of symmetric functions. Results in
this vein would be instrumental in using the asymptotic symmetry of solutions to
study their temporal behavior. The principal investigator will also continue his
research concerning parabolic Liouville theorems. Such theorems state that
certain very specific parabolic equations do not have nontrivial solutions in a
class of admissible functions. Liouville theorems, when available, are very
powerful tools for the qualitative analysis of parabolic equations. In
combination with scaling arguments, they can be used, among other things, for
the derivation of a priori estimates and for establishing blow-up and decay
rates of solutions. The goal of this project is to prove new Liouville theorems
and pursue further applications of Liouville theorems in various classes of
nonlinear parabolic problems. Liouville theorems, as well as results on symmetry
of solutions, will play important roles in another part of the project, which
concerns threshold solutions. Such solutions appear as separatrices between
solutions exhibiting two different kinds of behavior, such as the decay to zero
and blow up in finite time, or decay to zero and locally uniform convergence to
a positive steady state. Solutions of this type are studied, for example, in
connection with quenching and propagation phenomena in models from combustion
theory and population genetics. Up to now, existing theorems mostly treated one-
dimensional equations or problems with a variational structure, thus excluding
important equations that involve advection terms or explicit time dependence.
The project will focus on these nonvariational problems.

In less technical terms, the project can be characterized as qualitative or
geometric analysis of solutions of a certain type of nonlinear evolution
equations. Such equations are widely used in models in applied sciences, in
particular, chemical engineering, combustion theory, and ecology. Understanding
qualitative properties of solutions is important for the internal development of
the mathematical theory of partial differential equations as well as for
improvement of their modeling relevance. The present project addresses questions
that concern geometric properties of solutions (such as their symmetries when
viewed as functions of spatial variables), as well as their behavior with
respect to time (periodicity properties, stabilization to equilibria, blow up in
finite time). Development of new mathematical techniques for addressing such
questions is an integral part of the project.
