
* 0900946
* Fourier Analysis: Space, Frequency, and Direction
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2009,05/17/2011
* Loukas Grafakos,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 197,894.00

Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier can rightly claim the title of forefather of
frequency decompositions. Having postulated in 1807 the theory that essentially
arbitrary functions can be expressed as sums of basic sinusoidal waves of
various frequencies, Fourier resisted fervent theoretical objections to paint a
landscape full of applications to concrete problems. Since then, the development
of analysis has furnished new perspectives that have resulted in extraordinary
accomplishments in several fields of mathematics and the sciences. Recent
techniques include sensitive decompositions localized in both space and phase,
which take into consideration directional aspects of the problems. Such
decompositions have led to solutions of long-standing conjectures such as the
almost everywhere convergence of Fourier series, and the boundedness of the
bilinear Hilbert transform. The principal investigator proposes to embark on an
extensive study of problems in Fourier Analysis and applications that have a
common feature: they require a delicate balance between space, frequency, and
direction. The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the historical value
of the problems studied, many of which have naturally arisen over time and have
a reputation for their difficulty. This proposal consists of three parts:
positive theory, quest for counterexamples, and concrete applications. Proposed
work on the positive theory includes extension of the range of boundedness of
the bilinear Hilbert transform and other rough singular integrals and a study of
m-linear orthogonality and Littlewood-Paley theory. Geometric aspects of
frequency decompositions play a crucial role in this study. Counterexamples are
sought for the bilinear disc multiplier in the nonlocal square-integrable case
and the Carleson-Hunt operator on certain spaces of functions. Concrete
applications focus on directional sensitivity in computerized tomography.

Fourier Analysis provides decompositions of functions in parts that have common
spatial, frequency, and directional characteristics. Just as symphonic music can
be analyzed as a finite union of simple notes, certain complicated operations
can be represented by their actions on a spectrum of frequencies. Irregularities
of signals and images are better located once they are decomposed into small
pieces that can be studied individually. The alteration of frequency via
multiplication by a typically nonsmooth function, such as intermittent
television transmission, calls for a systematic study of preservation of
information contained in a signal. Preservation of integrability under frequency
alterations serves as a good model to study preservation of information and is
the main focus of the theoretical part of this proposal. The broader impact of
this proposal is exactly this point, i.e. to provide a solid theoretical
foundation or groundwork for modeling protection against the loss of information
contained in a signal or image. Applied problems addressed in this project focus
on improved results in computerized tomography based on frequency decompositions
sensitive to direction. Such applications may lead to sharper computerized
tomography images for moving subjects during standard MRI tests.
