
* 0900934
* Pluripotential Theory and Applications to Geometry, Number Theory, and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2009,05/14/2009
* Dan Coman,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 158,058.00

Abstract for Proposal DMS-0900934, PI: Dan Coman

This project addresses problems from pluripotential theory, some of which have
important applications to transcendental number theory, complex geometry, and
algebraic geometry. A unifying theme is that at its core lie plurisubharmonic
functions and positive closed currents, either as main objects of investigation
or as main tools to be employed. One direction of research deals with problems
in pluripotential theory on compact complex manifolds, where there are new
interesting phenomena, different from the local setting. The main goals are the
study of the complex Monge-Ampere operator and of the corresponding Green
functions. Another direction is concerned with problems from pluripotential
theory in the complex Euclidean space. The questions to be considered involve
geometric properties of positive closed currents and their approximation by
analytic varieties, the study of pluricomplex Green functions and their
connection to problems in algebraic geometry. A third direction of research is
to analyze the behavior of polynomials along transcendental analytic varieties
and to study the algebraic independence of entire functions. It is expected this
will continue to have applications to transcendental number theory. The project
also contains problems from complex dynamics, concerning polynomial
automorphisms of complex Euclidean spaces, where pluripotential theory provides
important tools.



Complex analysis and potential theory are central areas of Mathematics. Over the
years, they have provided methods and powerful tools that helped solve many
important problems from other fields of pure and applied Mathematics, as well as
from Physics, Biology, etc. Thanks to the powerful methods of complex analysis,
it has been often the case that progress is made in the study of concrete
problems by formulating them first in the context of complex numbers. This
project deals with the developing and further applications of new techniques
from complex analysis and potential theory to problems in several important
areas of modern Mathematics, such as number theory, complex and algebraic
geometry, dynamical systems, as well as possible applications to Mathematical
Physics. The problems to be studied belong to the main stream of current
research in several complex variables. Making progress on these problems will
contribute to the advancement of knowledge and understanding in the field. The
proposed research will impact human resources development through summer funding
of two graduate students. They will work for their dissertation under the
investigator?s supervision on topics related to this project. In this way the
project integrates research and education.
