
* 0901644
* Hessian and Special Lagrangian Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2009,06/05/2009
* Micah Warren,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 145,698.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The project will investigate interactions between
differential geometry and nonlinear partial differential equations. In
particular, it will explore (A) regularity for certain classes of nonlinear
Hessian equations and (B) geometry of special Lagrangian submanifolds of
Euclidean space, Calabi-Yau manifolds, and certain pseudo-Riemannian manifolds.
A recent counterexample shows that regularity for the special Lagrangian
equation does not hold in lower phases. Work of the principal investigator with
Yuan Yu then completes the picture in three dimensions, but there is still a gap
in what is known for dimensions larger than three. The PI and his collaborators
are also looking for regularity of other related symmetric Hessian equations.
Recent and ongoing developments in the theory of optimal transportation
demonstrate that regularity of the optimal transportation map is related to the
geometry of certain maximal calibrated submanifolds of a pseudo-Riemannian
space. The project's goal is to apply the machinery of calibrated manifolds to
obtain novel results in optimal transport, in the process developing a nice
geometric picture.

String theory is an exciting developing branch of physics, which many hope will
lead to an understanding of the fundamental interactions of the universe. In the
late 1990s, leading mathematical physicists asserted that, in order to obtain a
better understanding of string theory, one should first try to understand
objects called "special Lagrangian submanifolds." These objects are minimal
surfaces that have special properties and are governed by a nonlinear equation.
This project attempts to answer questions such as when these surfaces are
smooth, when they are flat, and when they are discontinuous. The answers to such
questions will have an impact on the study of the underlying physics. The
optimal transport problem asks the question of how to transport materials most
cost effectively between two locations. The answers are directly applicable in
many areas of science, including economics, medical imaging, fluid mechanics,
and meteorology. Perhaps the biggest question asks the following: When is the
optimal transportation continuous? Recently, the principal investigator has
found a connection between the problem of finding the optimal transportation map
and the problem of describing a certain type of special Lagrangian minimal
surface. The smoothness of minimal surfaces has been intensely studied by
mathematicians for decades. This project now seeks to apply some of the ideas
from geometry to the theory of optimal transport.
