
* 0901632
* Collaborative Research: Variational Problems and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2009,04/05/2011
* Eric Carlen,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 320,459.00

The proposal aims to explore the interplay of dynamics and variational
inequalities. Variational inequalities provide an effective means to derive
properties of solutions of evolution equations and likewise, evolution equations
can be used to derive variational inequalities. Exploiting this interplay has
been very fruitful in the past, and the investigators plan to approach various
problems using this perspective. One is to find correction terms of various
examples of the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev inequality by exploiting a surprising
connection to the porous medium equation and to the Gagliardo-Nirenberg
inequality. In particular, a correction term for the logarithmic Hardy-
Littlewood-Sobolev inequality will lead to an improved understanding of the
solutions of the Keller-Segel model describing the chemotaxis of certain
bacteria. A similar philosophy applies as well to certain problems in kinetic
theory, with the plan to derive quantitative estimates on speed of approach to
equilibrium for some inhomogeneous master equations of Kac type. These
investigations tie in with analogous questions in quantum mechanics. Here the
PI's plan to prove hypercontractivity estimates for Lindblad operators that
describe dissipative quantum mechanical systems, with the aim to obtain
quantitative estimates on the speed of approach to equilibrium as well. Another
circle of problems is proving Lifshitz tails in the random displacement model.
The aim there is to understand the conductivity properties of materials.

Many phenomena in science and technology can be modeled by evolution equations.
An interesting example, treated in this proposal, is the Keller Segal model,
that models the aggregation, or the absence thereof, in the motion of bacteria.
Understanding the behavior of solutions of these equations is both biologically
and mathematically interesting. Likewise, it is widely observed thatn systems of
many interacting particles, either classical or quantum mechanical, evolve
toward an equilibrium, and they do this at a certain speed, often largely
independent of the number of particles. Understanding this, and determining this
speed is one of the objects of this research. Another question of great interest
is what distinguishes a conductor from an insulator. There are simple models in
quantum mechanics that are supposed to exhibit these kind of behavior. While it
is impossible to understand these phenomena by exact computations, using
mathematical techniques notably from analysis, the PI's aim to understand these
processes better. Conversely, applied problems, e.g., the porous medium
equations that describes the seepage of water in dams, can be used to find
interesting mathematical facts, which in turn lead to improved understanding of
other problems. It is this interplay of pure and applied mathematics that is the
focus of the PI's research and it has been an excellent way to educate graduate
students as well as undergraduates, and to draw them into mathematical research.
