
* 0901463
* Topics in gas dynamics and fluid flow
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2009,07/19/2009
* Robert Strain,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 147,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research focuses on the mathematical analysis of the evolutionary solutions
to the equations from gas dynamics and fluid flow. In gas dynamics the goal is
to gain a deeper understanding of relativistic kinetic equations coupled with
their internally generated fully Lorentz invariant forces. Attention will be
focused on questions of existence, uniqueness, regularity and decay properties
of strong solutions to these equations. The second program of research studies
incompressible fluid dynamics in both the axisymmetric and three dimensional
cases. The goal of this research is to obtain lower bounds on putative blow-up
rates and to determine their stability under perturbations. This project can be
considered relevant for physical phenomena such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and
whirlpools that are fairly close to axisymmetric. This proposal aims to moreover
establish connections between these subject areas, and further explore other
broad questions closely related to both projects.

The proposed research contains an interdisciplinary approach to questions
arising in non-linear partial differential equations in areas ranging from
incompressible fluid flow to gas dynamics. The physical phenomena that these
equations model are encountered all across the natural world. Methods the
investigator plans to use involve energy based techniques which have proven to
be flexible and robust for studying regularity of a variety of nonlinear partial
differential equations. The PI's research vision includes developing new tools
to study fundamental analytical problems about these basic models; these tools
are expected to be generalizable to a wide array of important problems in
applied non-linear PDE. The PI plans to disseminate knowledge obtained through
the proposed activity among both pure and applied mathematicians. The PI will
continue to explore, develop and implement diverse methods to integrate
mathematical research at levels ranging from undergraduate projects to the
vanguard of current research.
