
* 0901092
* From bispectrality to integrable systems, orthogonal polynomials, heat equations and W-algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2009,07/23/2009
* Plamen Iliev,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2012
* USD 140,875.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The bispectral problem appeared first in the pioneering work of Duistermaat and
Grunbaum. It asks to classify spectral problems possessing a hidden symmetry
between the space and the spectral variables. The goals of this proposal is to
establish and explore new connections between integrable systems, orthogonal
polynomials, heat equations and Lie algebras, closely related with each other
and mysteriously linked to the bispectral property. The first part of the
proposal aims at the construction and the classification of multivariable
classical orthogonal polynomials; their duality properties (between the
continuous and the discrete variables) and relations to integrable systems and
algebraic geometry. Another part of the proposal explores the connection between
rank one bispectral operators and dynamical systems of particles on the line
(such as Calogero-Moser and Ruijsenaars-Schneider). The bispectral property in
this case leads to the construction of new interesting W-algebras and their
representations. The PI has also proposed a new approach to study heat equations
based on soliton equations (such as KdV and Toda lattice) and Sato?s
Grassmannian, and to use this approach to characterize the bispectral operators
by a finiteness property of the heat kernel.

The classical (one dimensional) orthogonal polynomials have played a crucial
role in mathematics and physics in the last centuries. The construction and the
classification of such polynomials in more than one variable is an old and
important problem and its solution will have numerous applications in both pure
and applied mathematics. The connection with algebraic geometry and integrable
systems serves as a useful bridge which translates powerful techniques, explains
the bispectrality from duality and leads to various extensions. Heat equations,
arising in many physical applications, can be studied in a uniform way, by
connecting them to soliton equations. The characterization of bispectrality in
terms of representation theory of Lie algebras brings the purely algebraic side
of the proposal. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will establish new
links between the different branches of mathematics and physics and will
stimulate communications and collaborations between specialists in the various
areas involved. Research projects are also designated for students, whose
involvement in the project will advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching and training.
