
* 0901250
* Mathematical Problems in General Relativity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2009,04/25/2014
* Sergiu Klainerman,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 540,229.00

General Relativity has very important long term goals among which the weak and
strong cosmic censorship, final state and stability of Kerr conjectures are the
most outstanding. To complete such goals one needs to solve many fundamental
difficulties among which the PI proposes to concentrate on the problems of
uniqueness and stability of the Kerr family as well as the bounded curvature
conjecture. The PI intends to continue his work with A. Ionescu, and more
recently S. Alexakis, to remove the restrictive real analyticity assumptions of
the well known results of S. Hawking and Carter-Robinson. The PI also plans to
continue to work with I. Rodnianski and J. Szeftel and settle the important
bounded curvature conjecture. Together with I. Rodnianski they plan to adapt the
recent work of Christodoulou, based on what he calls the short pulse method,
with which he was able to derive the first result on the formation of trapped
surfaces for solutions of the Einstein vacuum equations. The PI and his
collaborator believe that the new method can be signifficantly improved and
applied to various situations.

If successful the proposal will give a better understanding of some of the main
theoretical open problems of General Relativity. The long term hope is that some
of the insight gained in the process will influence related areas such
Theoretical Physics and Numerical Relativity. Of paramount interest to the
gravitational wave experiments is to de- sign numerical algorithms which can
simulate, realistically, black hole interactions. The PI also hopes that the
interplay between geometric and an- alytic methods, which are being developed,
will influence other areas of nonlinear PDE, Differential Geometry and Analysis.
The PI plans to attract and train a larger number of PhD students and postdocs,
than he has done so far, in General Relativity. The PI believes that the subject
is going now through an exciting period when important problems are solved and
many new avenues of research are being open.
