
* 0901122
* Dynamics on Surfaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2009,02/22/2012
* John Franks,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 419,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This is a project to investigate aspects of low-dimensional dynamical systems.
The proposed research addresses the connection between algebraic properties of a
group that acts on a surface in an area-preserving way and the possible
topological nature of the dynamics of the action. One theme is to try to find
global fixed points for a smooth group action and use the induced representation
of the group into the automorphisms of the tangent space at the fixed point to
conclude information about the action. Anticipated results from this project
will advance our knowledge of dynamical systems and will explore new
relationships between dynamics and algebra.

This proposal concerns transformations of surfaces as they evolve in time. The
study of such transformations, especially area-preserving ones, has a long
history going back to work of Henri Poincare and G. D. Birkhoff, work that was
motivated by problems in celestial mechanics. For such a system a "state" is a
point on a surface and the objective is to understand how the collection of all
states evolves in time. Time can be considered as either continuous (represented
by a real number) or discrete (represented by an integer). The present project
deals with the discrete case and generalizes it to consider evolutions where the
analogue of time is represented, for example, by a matrix rather than an
integer. This is part of a long-term program to understand the relationship
between the algebraic nature of dynamical systems and the geometric or
topological behavior they exhibit. There are numerous applications of results in
this area to broader fields of science, especially to classical mechanics,
celestial mechanics, and more modern chaos theory.
