
* 0901514
* Mathematical Aspects of Aperiodic Solids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2009,06/27/2011
* Jean Bellissard,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 238,305.00

This proposal concerns the development of a mathematical tool liable to describe
the structure and the transport properties of solids that are not periodic. It
will consider the following aspects: (i) In such solids there is a new mode of
atomic diffusion called phason transport that is dominant at low temperature.
Using a new recent diffusive random process, the PI expect to give a precise
description of such transport. (ii) To extend this mathematical description to
solids more complex, namely those which are neither random nor rigid, and for
which the number of local patches of a given size can be infinite. An example of
such solids could be amorphous silicon. (iii) To describe electronic transport
at very low temperature, such as the so-called Mott's variable range hopping
transport, which is responsible, in particular, for the unusual accuracy of the
measurement of the resistance standard in the Quantum Hall Effect.

This proposal is the continuation of a 30 years program intending to develop the
mathematical tools allowing the study of such solids. Because of the lack of
translation symmetry, the usual tools of calculation in Solid State Physics
cannot be used anymore and require the development of more sophisticated
methods. Examples of solids covered by this study are semi-conductors at very
low temperatures, or quasi-crystalline. The PI has used successfully Non-
commutative Geometry, a theory developed by the Field Medalist Alain Connes, in
several aspects of this program since 1980. At the interface between Mathematics
and Physics, this program requires the use of a broad list of mathematical tools
including Number Theory, Algebraic Topology, Analysis, Probability Theory, and
should be applicable to a broad list of materials that cannot be studied by
usual theoretical methods.
