
* 0901340
* Non-linear partial differential equations, free boundary problems and fractional operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2009,09/13/2009
* Antoine Mellet,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,000.00

This project deals with several aspects of the mathematical analysis of
nonlinear partial differential equations. A large part of the endeavor is
devoted to the study of elliptic and parabolic free boundary problems. The
principal investigator is interested in the existence and regularity theory for
such problems, and special attention will be paid to investigating the
asymptotic behavior of the solutions (such as the long-time behavior and
homogenization limits). Another direction of research concerns nonlocal elliptic
and parabolic equations, mainly equations involving fractional Laplace
operators. In particular, the project will investigate the effects of the
nonlocality of these differential operators on well-known phenomena such as
front propagation and homogenization. Finally, part of this project is devoted
to certain nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations of third and fourth order.
The analysis of such equations is still poorly understood, mainly because of the
lack of a maximum principle and other basic properties that their second-order
counterparts possess. Developing existence and uniqueness theories for such
equations will be one of the main challenges of the project.

Nonlinear partial differential equations have applications in physics, biology,
economics, engineering, and other areas of science. Free boundary problems, for
instance, typically arise in the modeling of physical phenomena that involve
interfaces (between two materials) that are changing with time (a good example
is the study of the melting of a block of ice). Some free boundary problems
discussed in this proposal turn up in the modeling of gas combustion and in the
study of fluid flow. A better understanding of the effects of small
inhomogeneities in the properties of the medium (for instance, impurities in the
ice) is the goal of the "homogenization theory" mentioned earlier. Ultimately,
this theory will allow the development of more accurate models to describe a
great variety of phenomena. Nonlocal diffusion equations are another type of
equation that are commonly used to model a broad range of phenomenon. The
principal investigator proposes a new approach to deriving these equations using
so-called microscopic (kinetic) models, for which the parameters can be easily
related to simple physical quantities. This will lead to better accuracy in the
models used by physical scientists. Finally, applications of higher order
elliptic and parabolic equations are also numerous. The equations discussed in
this proposal have some applications to the modeling of hydraulic fractures
(which are used, for example, to propagate rock fractures in oil and gas
reservoirs so as to enhance oil recovery) and to the study of biological
membranes.
