
* 0901995
* Issues in Nonlinear Elliptic Equations and Free Boundary Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2008,10/14/2008
* Luis Silvestre,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 45,199.00

Issues in Nonlinear elliptic Equations and Free Boundary Problems

Abstract of Proposed Research Luis Silvestre

This project concerns the analysis of nonlinear problems in elliptic partial
differential equations, integro-differential equations and some related free
boundary problems. We will focus on the obstacle problem for the fractional
Laplacian, the thin obstacle problem, nonlinear integro-differential operators,
and optimal design of composites. The obstacle problem for the fractional
Laplacian is closely linked to lower dimensional obstacle problems, as the PI
has recently shown in collaborative work. Thus these two problems will be
investigated together. The PI also intends to generalize the concepts of
viscosity solutions, well-posedness, and regularity results from the theory of
fully nonlinear elliptic equations to nonlinear integro-differential equations.
The PI intends to apply ideas from free boundary problems to some questions
about composite design in materials science. The microstructures that maximize a
certain effective quantity, or a combination of such, may sometimes be found by
solving a free boundary problem. Analysis of this problem will provide a better
understanding of these optimal structures.

The free boundary problems studied in this project arise in elasticity,
financial mathematics, and composite material design. The obstacle problem is
originally a model for the shape of an elastic membrane resting on a solid body.
The same equation is used in financial mathematics for pricing American options.
When stock prices have large jumps they may be modeled using discontinuous
processes; this results in an obstacle problem for an integro-differential
operator. The research proposed here studies the qualitative properties of the
solutions of this problem as well as general nonlinear problems arising from
stochastic games driven by random processes with jumps. Related ideas are also
applied to the design of composite materials. Suitable free boundary problems
enable the analysis of the microscopic structures that are optimal for certain
purposes, such as to maximize the sum of the thermal and electric conductivity
in a material.


