
* 0901570
* Rings of Algebraic Differential Operators in Mathematical Physics and Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2009,05/26/2011
* Yuri Berest,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 287,377.00

Berest

The proposed research lies at the intersection of several areas of mathematics
and mathematical physics, including geometric analysis, representation theory,
noncommutative algebra and algebraic geometry. It is motivated by old (yet
unsolved) problems in the theory of partial differential equations. One such
problem (known as the problem of lacunas) deals with propagation of waves
without diffusion, another with heat kernels on Riemannian manifolds with finite
asymptotics. Despite being analytic by their nature, these problems exhibit a
remarkable feature: they have algebraic solutions. The earlier work of the PI
and his collaborators links these classical problems of analysis to various
questions of algebraic geometry and noncommutative algebra, concerning rings of
differential operators on algebraic varieties and their specific representations
(projective D-modules). One of the primary goals of this proposal is to
systematically study the properties of such modules, their endomorphism rings
and moduli spaces. The results obtained so far (mostly in the case of curves)
reveal many interesting connections with noncommutative geometry, representation
theory, combinatorics and integrable systems. Another goal of the proposal is
thus to investigate some of these connections. In a different direction, the PI
intends to develop a new method for computing asymptotics of heat kernels based
on ideas of homotopical algebra.

The mathematical problems addressed in this project arise from the practical
question: what happens when a short signal (light or sound, say) is omitted from
a point A, travels through a medium and arrives at point B? There are many
possibilities: there could be focusing, diffraction, persistence of faint
echoes, or still a short `clean-cut' signal at B. This last possibility is of
particular interest, but it may occur only under very special conditions. To
describe these conditions in precise mathematical terms is one of the goals of
the proposal. The results sought in this direction are fundamental for our
understanding of wave phenomena and may have applications in related physical
sciences, including the theory of electromagnetic and acoustic waves, space
communication technologies, magneto-hydrodynamics, crystal optics, etc. As a
broader impact, the PI expects that the interdisciplinary nature of this work
will stimulate communication and collaboration between experts in the various
areas involved.
