
* 0901239
* Geometric Methods in Representation Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2009,09/20/2009
* Shrawan Kumar,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Kumar



The PI (Shrawan Kumar) intends to continue work in the general area of `Lie
Theory and Geometry.' He proposes to work on four projects. The first project
aims at settling the following problem on complete intersections raised by
Kollar and Peskine in 1988. Let C(t) be a family of complex smooth curves in the
three dimensional projective space such that the general member is a complete
intersection. Then, is the special member also a complete intersection? The PI
has converted this problem into a problem of the nonexistence of equivariant
morphisms from the three dimensional affine space minus the origin to the
instanton moduli space of SU(2) connections on a rank two bundle over the four
dimensional Euclidean space modulo the based gauge equivalence. This moduli
space has been extensively studied and the PI expects to use these results to
solve the above problem. Let G be a semisimple algebraic group over the complex
numbers and let s be a diagram automorphism of G with fixed subgroup L. The
second project aims at determining the eigencone of L as well as the tensor
product decomposition for the representations of L in terms of that of G. The PI
and Belkale have formulated some precise conjectures to determine this. Once
solved, it would give an optimal solution of the saturation problem for non-
simplylaced groups provided the saturation holds for simplylaced groups. The
third project (jointly with Arzu Boysal) aims at determining the fusion algebra
explicitly. Let g be a simple Lie algebra. Fix a positive integer k (called the
level). Let R(g) be the representation ring of g. The fusion ring R(g;k) (at
level k) is a quotient ring of R(g) under a ring homomorphism f. Gepner
determined its kernel for the special linear Lie algebra and it was subsequently
determined by Bourdeau-Mlawer-Riggs-Schnitzer and Bouwknegt-Ridout for the
symplectic Lie algebras. The PI and Boysal have come up with explicit
conjectural description of the kernel of f for other classical groups as well as
for the exceptional Lie algebra of type G(2). The PI proposes to prove this
conjectural description and also find an analogous description of the kernel of
f for all other exceptional groups. The fourth project aims at writing a book on
``Verlinde formula, its complete proof and consequences." E. Verlinde gave a
conjectural formula in 1988 for the dimension of the space of conformal blocks.
This space appears as a basic object in Rational Conformal Field Theory. In the
special case of the Wess-Zumino-Witten model, the space of conformal blocks
admits an interpretation as the space of generalized theta functions arising in
the theory of moduli of vector bundles on projective curves. This interpretation
opened a completely new horizon for the study of the moduli of vector bundles
(more generally, principal G-bundles) on projective curves. These developments
leading to the proof of the Verlinde formula as well as various applications are
scattered through the literature and there is no single source containing these.
The proposed book would fill this void in the literature.

The proposed projects underline the theme of unity in mathematics as they are
expected to derive ideas from several areas of mathematics including Topology,
Combinatorics, Algebraic Geometry, Representation Theory and Mathematical
Physics. These projects suggested by the PI represent some of the very difficult
and important problems of current interest which, if solved, should also help
clarify the results in the existing known cases. In addition, it is expected
that the solutions will spawn a lot of activity in the area. The PI has
considerable expertise in the techniques he is proposing to use. The PI's
proposed book on ``Verlinde formula, its complete proof and consequences" would
be the very first book on the subject. It is expected that it will serve as a
basic source for graduate students and professional mathematicians alike thus
substantially promoting teaching and learning. The two books written earlier by
the PI (one coauthored with M. Brion) have become standard texts on the subject.
The PI has successfully supervised six PhD students.
