
* 0905907
* Geometric and dynamical problems on surfaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2009,05/17/2011
* Howard Masur,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 189,979.00

The principal investigator will work on problems in the geometry, topology, and
dynamics of surfaces. The objective of the first part of the proposal is to
increase our understanding of the mapping class group, its action on the
Teichmuller space of a surface and the boundary at infinity of Teichmuller
space. Among the specific problems is one that attempts to show that from the
point of view of counting orbits points for the action of the mapping class
group on Teichmuller space, a random mappping class group element is pseudo-
Anosov. Another problem is to study the distribution of orbits of the mapping
class group on Thurston's space of measured foliations. The objective of the
second part of the proposal is to study the dynamics of flows on translation
surfaces. The principal investigator is interested specifically in the
phenomenon of minimal but not uniquely ergodic directions for the linear flow on
the translation surface.

The principal investigator works in several diverse areas of theoretical
mathematics. These fields are topology, geometry, and dynamical systems. They
come together in the broad area of studying properties of surfaces. This is a
subject of mathematics that goes back hundreds of years, and yet remains a
vibrant area of modern research. The work of the principal investigator involves
expanding our knowledge of these areas and also involves the training of
graduate students to become research mathematicians.
