
* 0906233
* Minimal surfaces and geometric flows
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2009,07/08/2011
* William Minicozzi,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 384,460.00

The PI proposes, jointly with Toby Colding, to continue our investigations on
minimal surfaces and related areas of geometric analysis, including geometric
evolution equations such as the mean curvature (MCF) and Ricci flow. Our
lamination theorem and one-sided curvature estimate played a key role in a
number of results on minimal surfaces including the Meeks-Rosenberg proof of
uniqueness of the helicoid, our proof of the Calabi-Yau Conjectures, and the
Meeks-Perez-Ros proof of the uniqueness of the Riemann examples. Minimal
surfaces with uniform curvature (or area) bounds have been well understood and
the regularity theory is complete, yet essentially nothing was known without
such bounds. The study is divided into three cases depending on the topology of
the surface. Our understanding is relatively complete in the first case when the
surface is a disk. The main problems are to get a finer understanding of
compactness in the higher genus cases, to understand singularities of potential
limit laminations (especially generic properties), and to understand moduli
spaces like the space of genus one helicoids of M. Weber, D. Hoffman and M. Wolf
(cf. with Hoffman and B. White). The second broad area of the proposal centers
on the study of singularities in MCF, including estimates for the size of the
singular sets, a compactness theorem for the possible types of singularities,
and a classification of generic singularities of the flow.



Minimal surfaces are surfaces that locally minimize their surface area and,
thus, model soap films where surface tension is in perfect equilibrium and the
film does not change other time. They have been studied at least since
Lagrange's 1762 memoir, but recent years have seen breakthroughs on many long--
standing problems in the theory of minimal surfaces, with important
contributions from many mathematicians. There is a time-varying analog of this
where a surface (which is not in equilibrium) evolves to minimize its surface
area as quickly as possible; this is called mean curvature flow or MCF.
Mathematically, this leads to a nonlinear partial differential equation which is
formally similar to the equation that governs the flow of heat in physics.
Clearly, minimal surfaces remain static under the MCF. MCF and other geometric
flows were developed for their intrinsic beauty as well as their potential
applications to other &#64257;elds to model, for instance, option pricing,
motion of grains in annealing metals, and crystal growth. While key foundational
results have been obtained, several of the most basic questions remain
unanswered.






