
* 0969254
* Random matrix models and their applications to statistical mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2010,06/18/2012
* Pavel Bleher,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 165,000.00

This research project is directed on basic problems of the theory of random
matrix models and their applications to statistical mechanics. The project
concerns with different conjectures of universality of the scaling limits of
eigenvalue correlation functions and with exactly solvable models of statistical
physics. This includes: (a) the development of the Riemann-Hilbert (RH) approach
to random matrix models with external source; (b) the semiclassical asymptotics
and the RH approach to multi-matrix models; (c) the exact solution of the six-
vertex model with domain wall boundary; (d) the study of the phase separation in
the six-vertex model, and others.

The project has an interdisciplinary character and it lies on the frontier
between physics and mathematics. The problems of scaling and universality are
central in many areas of modern science: theory of critical phenomena and phase
transitions, statistical physics and quantum field theory, theory of quantum
chaos, nonlinear dynamics, etc. This project is directed on the development of
powerful mathematical methods to the problems of scaling and universality in the
theory of random matrices and their applications to statistical physics. It
involves methods of different areas of mathematics: analysis, theory of
integrable systems, probability theory, semiclassical asymptotics, complex
analysis, etc. The research project under consideration has direct applications
to various physical problems: combinatorial asymptotics related to quantum
gravity, exactly solvable models of statistical physics, spin systems on random
surfaces, theory of critical phenomena and phase transitions, quantum chaos.
Possible further applications include the theory of knots and links and related
problems in molecular biology, growth models, statistical data analysis, and
others.
