
* 1001676
* Long Time Behaviour for Dispersive PDEs with Large Initial Data
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2010,06/13/2012
* Ioan Bejenaru,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 11/30/2012
* USD 144,000.00

This project focuses mainly on analyzing the long-time behavior of certain
dispersive partial differential equations. All the equations considered in the
project have a physical origins: the Schrodinger maps equation is known as the
Heisenberg model in ferro-magnetism, the spin-models have a similar origin,
while the Zakharov system comes from plasma physics. From a mathematical point
of view, most of the problems the principal investigator intends to address lie
at the cutting-edge of research in partial differential equations. The dynamics
of various equations with large data is a very important problem in the field.
Some major breakthroughs have been achieved during the past few years, and the
analysis involved is highly nontrivial. Understating the impact of the geometry
of the target manifold on the evolution of the equation (in the case of
Schrodinger maps and spin-models) is of great interest. Research into systems
that lack scaling (like the Zakharov system) is extremely challenging,
especially in the absence of usable conservation laws. While, strictly speaking,
the problems to be explored in this project belong to the field of partial
differential equations, the research requires the use of fine tools from other
areas of mathematics, notably harmonic analysis and Riemannian geometry.

One of the main reasons that mathematics is useful to the broad scientific
community, and in turn to society as a whole, is that it provides one of the
most rigorous frameworks for constructing theories that explain the world around
us and predict future events. The field of partial differential equations is, to
a great extent, the study of models arising from physics. Everyone is aware of
the existence of light, heat, fluid flow, magnetism, etc. These are all natural
phenomena that, once they are well understood, can lead to major discoveries
whose impact on human lives is tremendous. A scientific approach to the study of
a natural phenomenon follows a standard pattern. One investigates the complexity
of the phenomenon, determines its essential features, and writes down a
differential equation that describes the evolution in time of the object under
study. Next, one studies the long-time behavior of the mathematical model and
describes its evolution in qualitative terms. (In the event that this process
identifies potential singularities, a prime interest of the principal
investigator, then the phenomenon becomes directly relevant to the current
project.) Finally, if the mathematical analysis agrees with the empirical
observation of the phenomenon, then the mathematical model is validated, which
often opens a wide range of possible applications. On the other hand, if
discrepancies arise between the mathematics and the empirical observations, then
one seeks to refine the mathematical model, usually by allowing for greater
complexity. The new model undergoes a similar mathematical analysis and so on,
until a good mathematical model matching the physical reality is found.
