
* 1001560
* Subfactors, bimodules and planar algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2010,03/29/2012
* Dietmar Bisch,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2014
* USD 176,000.00

This project on subfactors and planar algebras aims at developing a wide range
of techniques to better understand the structure of subfactors and discover new
examples. One of the main goals is to understand the technique of composing
subfactors in terms of their associated planar algebras. This will lead to new
methods of constructing subfactors and planar algebras, in particular new
examples with infinite principal graphs which are essential for progress in the
structure theory. Moreover, every such subfactor will provide a potentially very
interesting fusion category of bimodules, which can be computed explicitly. As a
first step, those compositions will be studied that arise as planar subalgebras
of the tensor product of two Temperley-Lieb planar algebras. For more general
compositions, a cohomology theory for subfactors and planar algebras has to be
developed which will replace group cohomology. A very rich theory is likely to
emerge from these investigations. In particular, it is expected that new
classification results for subfactors with Jones index two times the golden
ratio squared will be obtained.

A subfactor can be viewed as a mathematical object which captures quantum
symmetries of a mathematical or quantum physical system. These symmetries play a
key role in understanding the behavior of these complex systems, and the theory
of subfactors provides effective tools to manipulate and study them. This theory
has had many profound and surprising applications to numerous areas of
mathematics and physics, such as conformal field theory, statistical mechanics,
low dimensional topology and combinatorics. Subfactors have contributed in an
important way to the understanding of naturally occurring structures in these a
priori quite distinct areas of mathematics and physics. It is expected that the
project will make important contributions to some of these areas of basic
science. Exciting applications of planar algebras and their associated fusion
categories to solid state physics and to topological quantum computing are
possible. Furthermore, the project will involve graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers and contribute to their training as researchers in
mathematics.
