
* 1001610
* Structure of the space of Anosov systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2010,04/14/2010
* Andrey Gogolev,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 11/30/2011
* USD 99,988.00

The proposed work is concerned with the space of Anosov diffeomorphisms of a
compact manifold. Anosov systems constitute the paradigm of chaotic dynamics and
have been intensively studied since the late sixties. Still, some questions are
wide open, most importantly, the question of classification of Anosov
diffeomorphisms. There are three major directions in the proposed program. 1.
Smooth classification of Anosov systems. This will continue the research program
started in the PI's recent work and aims at gaining fundamental understanding of
the structure of the space of higher dimensional Anosov systems. 2. Study of the
global topology of the space of Anosov diffeomorphisms and the Teichmuller space
of smooth conjugacy classes. 3. Anosov diffeomorphisms on simply connected four
dimensional manifolds. Dimension four is the least dimension where the
classification problem is open. It is expected that simply connected 4-manifolds
do not support Anosov diffeomorphisms.

The project lies in the area of hyperbolic dynamics and aims at a fine
understanding of hyperbolic dynamical systems. A dynamical system is called
hyperbolic if the ambient space exhibits a lot of stretching in one direction
and contraction in another direction. The behavior one observes in hyperbolic
systems is usually referred to as deterministic chaos. One of the first
appearances of such systems was in the work of Cartwright and Littlewood who
studied certain differential equations of second order with periodic forcing.
This work arose from war-related studies involving radio waves. Since then
hyperbolic dynamics has been an important tool in natural sciences. The results
of the proposed research will be disseminated through seminar and conference
talks, online preprint servers as well as journal publications. Also, the PI
plans to deliver expository talks in his area with the purpose of introducing
undergraduate and graduate students to the exciting area of hyperbolic dynamics.
