
* 1001894
* RANDOM MATRICES IN FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2010,08/04/2010
* Todd Kemp,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 123,500.00

The principal research goals of this proposal deal with questions in infinite-
dimensional analysis: functional analysis on spaces that are fundamentally
infinite-dimensional, such as the space of random variables associated to a
Brownian motion or an infinite-dimensional group of orthogonal transformations.
Herein, these questions are viewed through the lens of random matrix theory, a
relatively new field at the confluence of probability theory, complex analysis,
and combinatorics. Random matrix theory provides powerful new tools in the arena
of functional analysis. Moreover, as connections have grown, interplay between
the two fields has allowed functional analysis to feedback and give insights
into structures associated to random matrices. The proposed research includes
three projects, investigating the interconnected themes of Segal-Bargmann
analysis, stochastic analysis, and random subspaces of a Hilbert space. Also
proposed is a project in random matrix theory, concerning random eigenvectors.
In the former three cases, tools from random matrix theory have, in the view of
the principal investigator, great potential to give fruitful insights into
problems both old and new. For the latter project, the flow of information moves
in the opposite direction: the complex analytic techniques from free probability
theory in operator algebras are used to give quantitative information about the
geometry of the eigenspaces of a pair of random matrices. In all of the proposed
research, there is the potential for interaction between very different fields ?
probability theory, geometric functional analysis, and operator algebras to name
a few. Moreover, the latter project is motivated by, and promises real-world
application to problems in signal processing and other parts of electrical
engineering.

Arrays of numbers (also known as matrices) are a common efficient way to record
data, in all branches of science. Finding meaning in those arrays is an
enterprise that runs from the mundane to the highly sophisticated. A relevant
example is common in signal processing, where a time-varying signal is digitized
to produce a rectangular array of amplitudes. Filtering noise out (or decoding
signals) means finding ways to recognize ordered versus random patterns within
the matrix. Using ingredients developed in physics starting in the 1950s,
statistics in the 1980s, and more recently complex and functional analysis in
the last two decades, there is now a rich, robust collection of tools for such
signal-to-random-noise separation. This proposal includes several projects
motivated by those tools and their foundations within functional analysis. The
principal investigator is an expert in a number of fields related to random
matrix theory, and expects fruitful results to follow from exploring old and new
connections between pure mathematics and applied science. In at least one
proposed project, there is significant promise of actual practical applications
to signal processing problems (for large arrays of antennas). This proposal
involves research problems at varying levels of sophistication, and so
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral and faculty
researchers may participate.
