
* 1001886
* Riemann-Hilbert Problems, Integrable Systems and Random Matrix Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2010,05/17/2012
* Percy Deift,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 169,000.00

The PI plans to work on a variety of problems from mathematics, applied
mathematics and physics. All the problems under consideration are asymptotic in
nature in the sense that the problems depend on a large parameter, such as time
or space, or a small parameter, such as perturbation strength. The main issue is
to determine the behavior of the systems when the parameter(s) go to infinity,
or to zero, respectively. It turns out that the problems under consideration
have a Riemann-Hilbert representation which provides a non-commutative analog,
for these problems, of the integral representations of the classical special
functions, such as the Bessel functions or the Airy function, etc. And just as
the classical special functions can be analyzed asymptotically by the steepest-
descent/stationary phase method, so too the Riemann-Hilbert problems can be
analyzed by the non-linear steepest-descent method introduced by the PI and
X.Zhou in 1993. Amongst the problems to be considered by the PI and his
collaborators are: spiral asymptotics for the modes of lasers with rectangular
plane-parallel reflecting surfaces, as the Fresnel number goes to infinity;
asymptotics for the Emptiness Formation Probability of the XY spin-1/2 chain, as
the anisotropy and field strength vary; perturbation theory of infinite
dimensional integrable systems such as the perturbed Nonlinear Schroedinger
Equation, in the focusing case when solitons are present. In addition the PI
will consider problems in random matrix theory and in the asymptotics of
Toeplitz and Hankel determinants.

It is a remarkable, and unanticipated, fact that a great variety of problems in
mathematics, applied mathematics and physics can be rephrased as Riemann-Hilbert
problems. This makes it possible to analyze their behavior with the same
efficiency and accuracy as the classical problems, such as electricity and
magnetism, of the 19th century. In particular, various random matrix ensembles
can be analyzed by Riemann-Hilbert methods. Random matrices in themselves
provide models for an extraordinary range of problems, from the scattering of
neutrons off heavy nuclei, to the zeros of the Riemann-zeta function on the
critical line. In transportation theory, for example, the PI and his
collaborators recently showed how the bus system in Cuernevaca, Mexico, could be
described by random matrix theory: this bus system has special features and is
used in many parts of Latin America. The list of problems that can be modeled by
random matrix theory includes combinatorics, multivariate statistics, condition
numbers in numerical analysis, tiling problems, interacting particle systems ,
quantum transport problems and wireless communication, amongst many others. The
PI and his collaborators are also involved in writing various texts on Riemann-
Hilbert methods and also on random matrix theory that should be accessible to
researchers across the scientific spectrum.
