
* 1001322
* Mappings of real submanifolds in complex space, CR geometry, and analytic PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,06/16/2015
* Peter Ebenfelt,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 191,913.00

The goal of this project is to study geometric and analytic aspects of generic
real submanifolds in complex manifolds (or, more generally, of manifolds with a
CR-structure). Particular attention will be paid to the structure of mappings
between such manifolds. Examples of generic manifolds include (smooth)
boundaries of open subsets of complex Euclidian space. Important information
about proper mappings between open sets can be gleaned from their restrictions
to the boundary. Basic questions that will be investigated include the
existence, uniqueness, and regularity of CR-mappings between given CR-manifolds,
as well as geometric questions that arise in connection with this study. The
objective is to gain a deeper understanding of mappings in CR-geometry, and
their role in complex analysis and PDE. One part of the project will focus on
these problems in the context of nontrivial CR-mappings of a Levi-nondegenerate
hypersurface into another of higher dimension. The principal investigator
expects that this research will lead to a better grasp of how the local CR-
geometry of such hypersurfaces (which, in principle, is completely encoded in
the Chern-Moser CR-curvature tensor) affects geometric properties of CR-mappings
(e.g., various notions of nondegeneracy and rigidity). The principal
investigator will also study geometric and analytic properties of CR-mappings
between more general CR-manifolds. A particular analytic property of interest is
that of finite jet determination. The equidimensional case is by now fairly well
understood. The principal investigator intends to study the situation where the
target manifold has a higher dimension than that of the source. This situation
appears to be drastically different from the equidimensional one. The principal
investigator anticipates that this study will involve the development of
substantially new methods, which in turn will enhance our understanding of
mappings into higher dimensional spaces.

The study of real submanifolds in complex manifolds is central to complex
analysis and to other areas of mathematics and physics. In this research, tools
from a wide range of areas such as real and complex analysis, partial
differential equations, and algebraic geometry are used and further developed.
The principal investigator is hopeful that the investigations carried out in
this project will enhance our understanding of the geometry of real submanifolds
and partial differential equations in complex space, which will benefit research
in adjacent areas of mathematics as well as in areas of theoretical physics. He
expects the project to provide interesting research topics for graduate
students. The seminar activity that results from the project should prove
stimulating for both students and other researchers.
