
* 1001839
* The 2010 Barrett Lectures: Discrete Differential Geometry and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/15/2010,04/09/2010
* Kenneth Stephenson,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 03/31/2011
* USD 20,125.00

The proposal seeks funds to support a five day conference representing the 2010
Barrett Memorial Lectures. The Lectures, which are well known and highly
regarded, have been organized annually on a variety of topics and with a
distinguished list of speakers and participants. The 2010 Barrett Lectures are
entitled "Discrete Differential Geometry and Applications". This will be a five-
day conference organized by Professor Kenneth Stephenson (Tennessee), and
Professor Alexander Bobenko (Technical University, Berlin). The conference
continues a sequence which started in Germany and has been instrumental in
founding Discrete Differential Geometry) as a coherent topic. Three
distinguished researchers, Rick Kenyon, Igor Pak, and Peter Schroeder, will be
involved in organizing the five days, each devoted to a different aspect of DDG
through hour talks and sessions for shorter talks. One evening there will be a
contributed poster session, and one evening a contributed software demonstration
session.

The conference is intended to introduce Discrete Differential Geometry and its
unique mixture of theory, computation, and application more broadly in the US.
Young researchers and graduate students are particularly important parts of the
audience, and every effort will be made to attract a diverse and
interdisciplinary audience, including women and minorities.
