
* 1001829
* Non-asymptotic problems on random operators in geometric functional analysis and applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2010,05/04/2012
* Roman Vershynin,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 172,999.00

This proposal will advance and apply the techniques of geometric functional
analysis for theoretical and computational problems related to random operators.
The classical random matrix theory traditionally focuses on the asymptotic
regime, when the dimensions of the matrices increase to infinity. However, many
of today's applications operate in the non-asymptotic regime, with fixed but
large dimensions, and they require explicit probability bounds. A systematic
development of the non-asymptotic random matrix theory will be carried out.
Special attention will be paid to advancing the invertibility theory of random
operators. Building on the recent progress on estimating the condition numbers
and the smallest singular values of random matrices with independent entries,
the program will now be expanded to include some more difficult classes or
random operators: random Hermitian matrices, randomly perturbed deterministic
matrices, random submatrices of deterministic matrices, operators that factor
through random matrices, sums of independent random matrices and random matrices
with independent columns. These advances will be based on on parallel
development of probabilistic, analytical and geometric tools, including the
Littlewood-Offord theory of small ball probabilities and its connections with
additive combinatorics.

In high dimensional spaces, random operators/matrices are widely used to model
transformations that are too complicated or too general to be understood
deterministically or explicitely. The more classical applications of this
randomized approach, including those in mathematical physics, operate in the
asymptotic regime. This means that the random operators act on spaces whose
dimension increases indefinitely, and one seeks to capture the limiting picture
as the dimension approaches infinity. In contrast, many of today's applications
operate in the non-asymptotic regime, acting on spaces of large but fixed
dimensions. This happens in particular in functional analysis where random
operators model typical operators; numerical analysis of algorithms where random
matrices model typical inputs; the new area of compressed sensing where random
operators are the best known measurement systems; statistics where random
matrices capture the dependencies among the various parameters of a sample of a
population. This proposal will systematically advance and unite the random
matrix theory in the non-asymptotic regime, with a view toward applications in
the areas mentioned above. The program is based on collaboration with
researchers in geometric functional analysis, statistics, electrical
engineering, and computer science. A graduate student is expected to join the
PI's efforts starting the second year of the program.
