
* 1001405
* Studies in Representation Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,04/13/2012
* Wilfried Schmid,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,012.00

This proposal contains two separate strands, both connected to the
representation theory of reductive Lie groups: the study of irreducible unitary
representations of such groups, and functional equations of L-functions attached
to automorphic representations. In collaboration with Kari Vilonen, Schmid shall
apply M. Saito's theory of mixed Hodge modules to the study of irreducible
unitary representations; the objective is to derive criteria for unitarity.
Schmid will continue his collaboration with Steve Miller. They will prove the
regularity of L-functions, and derive functional equations, from the point of
view of automorphic distributions, in cases that are inaccessible by other
methods. Classical Fourier analysis is an absolutely fundamental tool for the
study of functions of one or several real variables. In the 20th century,
Fourier analysis was extended to abelian groups, compact groups, and finally to
non-compact, non-abelian groups. Irreducible unitary representations constitute
the basic building blocks of Fourier analysis. Although Harish-Chandra
constructed enough irreducible unitary representations carry out Fourier
analysis on reductive Lie groups, all irreducible unitary representations are
necessary for Fourier analysis on quotient spaces of reductive Lie groups. Many
partial results exist, but they do not fit into a coherent, general picture.
Schmid and Vilonen recently formulated a far-reaching conjecture on the
unitarity problem. Their aim is to verify the conjecture and to explore its
various implications. Riemann's zeta function encodes deep properties of prime
numbers, and Dirichlet L-functions do the same for primes in abelian extensions
of the rational numbers. These functions are regular, except for certain well
understood poles, have Euler products, and satisfy functional equations.
Conjecturally Langlands L-functions play an analogous role for general number
fields. They are defined in terms of Euler products, but their analytic
properties are not obvious from the de¯nition. Functional equations and
regularity have been established in important special cases. Miller and Schmid
expect their method to apply in several new cases, and also to simplify some
existing arguments significantly.

Irreducible unitary representations of reductive groups play an important role
in the Langlands program and other areas of number theory. The mathematical
physics literature abounds with examples of irreducible unitary representation
having various special properties. A more systematic approach to the
classification of unitary representations would help to unify this aspect of
mathematical physics. Vogan and his collaborators are working on a computer
algorithm which would determine whether any specified representation is
unitarizable. For some groups, for example E8, such an algorithm will severely
strain existing computing facilities. The conjecture of Schmid and Vilonen has a
direct bearing on this massive computational problem, by allowing to cut down
signi¯cantly on the number of cases that need to be checked. L-functions occupy
a central place in algebraic and analytic number theory, and are now of interest
also to cryptographers. This makes significant new results about L-functions
useful to a large group of mathematicians, well beyond the community of experts
on L-functions.
