
* 1001674
* Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2010,06/04/2012
* Jalal Shatah,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2014
* USD 321,950.00

This project is concerned with the study of the evolution of free boundaries and
interfaces in fluid flows and the impact of resonances on their evolution. The
principal investigator will collaborate with P. Germain and N. Masmoudi to
develop the space-time resonances method. This method consists of isolating
frequencies that are resonant in time and located in the same region in space.
In order to determine such frequencies, a detailed analysis of the wave packets
and their interaction will be carried out. This will include a study of
multilinear operators a la Coifman-Meyer, as well as operators with flag
singularities. The project also incorporates the study of singular limits of
modulated waves into the research. We anticipate that the limiting behavior will
be determined by space-time resonant waves. All of this research will require a
close integration of the geometric energy method (that was developed by the
principal investigator jointly with C. Zeng) with the space-time resonance
method described above.

Many physical phenomena, such as surface ocean waves and their interaction with
wind, and engineering problems, such as laser cooling to produce Bose-Einstein
condensates, can be explained or solved by evoking the phenomena of resonances.
Together with dispersion, resonances form the backbone of the analytical tools
that have been developed to study the stability of nonlinear waves. The
development of the space-time resonance method is a cornerstone of such an
endeavor. It will bring together different areas of mathematics and applied
mathematics (harmonic analysis, partial differential equations, dynamical
systems, fluid dynamics, vortex dynamics), where new tools will be developed. It
also brings existing methods to a new setting that extends their applicability
far beyond what was previously possible. This project will also include the
training graduate students. This training will be unique, since working on any
of the projects will require considerable knowledge in different areas of
mathematics and physics.
