
* 1001317
* Monotonicity formulas, nonlinear PDE's and sub-Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2010,03/26/2013
* Nicola Garofalo,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 01/31/2013
* USD 176,825.00

This proposal is concerned with a number of questions at the interface of
nonlinear partial differential equations and geometry, with particular emphasis
on sub-Riemannian manifolds. The unifying theme is the systematic search of some
basic monotonicity properties of the solutions of the problem at hand. Such
properties play a special role in analysis and geometry and often lead to a
remarkable insight in the nature of the relevant equations. One of the main
directions in this proposal is a new notion of curvature in sub-Riemannian
geometry. It represents a generalization of the Ricci curvature tensor from
Riemannian geometry. Combining new Bochner identities with the monotonicity of
some entropy-like functionals, for manifolds for which such generalized Ricci
tensor is nonnegative one is led to a priori gradient bounds of Li-Yau type,
Harnack inequalities, Gaussian upper bounds, isoperimetric inequalities, and a
sub-Riemannian Bonnet-Myers compactness theorem in the strictly positive case.
In another direction the proposal aims at furthering the present knowledge of
minimal surfaces in sub-Riemannian geometry with particular emphasis on the sub-
Riemannian Bernstein problem. The PI and his co-authors have recently solved
this problem in the first (three-dimensional) Heisenberg group. The proposed
research revolves around the analysis of the higher dimensional problem as well
as the study of new monotonicity properties of the relevant area functionals. In
yet another direction the proposal is concerned with the study of some new
monotonicity properties of solutions of variational inequalities of elliptic and
parabolic type with an obstacle confined to lie in alower dimensional manifold.
Such monotonicity formulas are then applied to the study of the regularity of
the relevant free boundary problems.

This proposal can be placed at the confluence of two major areas of research in
mathematics known as partial differential equations and Riemannian geometry.
Partial differential equations are relations between an unknown function and a
certain number of its derivatives. They govern the observable phenomena of the
physical world. Riemannian geometry provides with a framework which is necessary
to understand what happens when we are confronted with phenomena which fall
outside the classical mechanics of Newton and Galilei. For instance, in
Einstein?s theory of relativity the description of the curved space-time
requires the use of Riemannian manifolds, with their intrinsic geometry. The
past decade has witnessed an explosion of interest in a far reaching
generalization of Riemannian geometry, as well as in the relevant partial
differential equations which are needed to describe the new phenomena which
arise in this area. Since this proposal is at the forefront of some of these
developments it has the potential to impact those areas of mathematics and of
the applied sciences (robotics, mechanical engineering, neuroscience) which are
at the origin of these advances. In view of the extensive involvement and
training of doctoral students and post-doctoral advisee, and the systematic
dissemination of the relevant research through seminars, lectures, conferences,
publications and websites, this proposal presents a strong component of human
resources development.
