
* 1001286
* Rigidity Results in von Neumann Algebras and Orbit Equivalence
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2010,07/06/2010
* Ionut Chifan,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 10/31/2012
* USD 104,977.00

The proposed project will expand PI?s prior research in the fields of von
Neumann algebras and orbit equivalence ergodic theory. PI will exploit new ideas
and techniques to obtain additional rigidity results for von Neumann algebras
arising from group actions on probability spaces. The PI is seeking general
methods that produce new examples of W*E superrigid actions, a problem of
central interest in the theory as it unifies extreme forms of rigidity from both
orbit equivalence and von Neumann algebras. In addition, the PI will continue
his prior investigation of structural properties of certain von Neumann
algebras, such as obtaining additional Bass-Serre rigidity type results for
amalgamated free products.

Over the last decade, Popa?s deformation/rigidity theory led to the solutions of
many long-standing problems in von Neumann algebras, orbit equivalence and
descriptive set theory. It also triggered new exciting parallel development,
such as Peterson?s derivation theory for von Neumann algebras, a technique
designed to bring more insight to the field from cohomological aspects of groups
representation theory. Moreover, it generated a new array of open problems
concerning the classification of von Neumann algebras and the study of
equivalence relations, some of which are the object of the current proposal. The
PI anticipates additional connections with infinite group representation theory
and geometric group theory. Finally, he will seek to attract new young
researchers in the field and to exploit connections with other areas of
mathematics by co-organizing conferences and informal seminars in von Neumann
algebras.
