
* 1001844
* Selected topics in perturbation theory, Schur multipliers, and Hankel and Toeplitz Operators in Noncommutative Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2010,04/13/2012
* Vladimir Peller,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 155,999.00

The project is concentrated on problems of perturbation theory and the theory of
Schur multipliers as well as approximation and factorization and approximation
problems for matrix-valued functions. The principal investigator has achieved
recently important progress in perturbation theory. In his joint work with A.B.
Aleksandrov it has been shown that a Hölder function on the real line of order
less than 1 must also be operator Hölder of the same order. The principal
investigator is going to develop this theory. In particular, he is going to work
on similar problems in the case of perturbations by unbounded operators, on
perturbations of dissipative operators. He is also going to attack the problem
of estimating functions of perturbed normal operators. Such problems of
perturbation theory are closely related to problems arising in studying Schur
multipliers. In particular, the principal investigator is going to work on the
famous problem to determine whether a Schur multiplier of a Schatten ? von
Neumann class must be completely bounded. The principal investigator is going to
use Hankel and Toeplitz operators with matrix-valued symbols to work on various
problems in noncommutative analysis. In particular, he is going to work on
problems of analytic and meromorphic approximation of matrix-valued functions.
In his recent results with F. Nazarov and L. Baratchart a new phenomenon has
been found that has resulted in discovering the class of respectable matrix
functions and the class of weird matrix functions. He is going to develop this
approach and extend the results to the case of meromorphic approximation.

The research in perturbation theory will have an impact on several areas of
mathematics and applications such as mathematical physics, quantum mechanics,
and physics. In particular, the results will be applied in studying random
Schrödinger operators and nonlinear equations of mathematical physics. The
factorization and approximation problems in noncommutative analysis are very
important in applications in control theory and systems theory. In particular,
such problems are extremely important in designing feedback controllers and
modeling linear systems with state spaces whose dimension is controlled by given
restrains. It is especially important in applications to consider problems that
involve matrix-valued functions, because this corresponds to the case of
multiple input ? multiple output linear systems.
