
* 1001884
* Perturbations of smooth group actions and cohomology
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2010,07/10/2010
* Danijela Damjanovic,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 132,961.00

The central objective of this project is to obtain a better understanding of the
local structure of smooth group actions. Lack of dynamical diversity (local
rigidity) among small perturbations of a group action is a rare phenomenon and
is typically connected to other rigidity phenomena that have been discovered in
the past two decades. It happens that some form of infinitesimal (or
cohomological) rigidity may lead to local rigidity. In the realm of classical
dynamical systems this was proved for Diophantine circle rotations in the 1960s
and led to the KAM Theorem. This project is concerned with a general approach to
describe local structure based on the cohomological data, even in the absence of
cohomological rigidity. The project includes applications to several situations
of interest where cohomology is not trivial but is well understood, and to
situations where cohomology is simple but there is not enough analytical
precision in its description.

Understanding small perturbations of dynamical systems has always been one of
the imperatives of science, given the fact that complete prediction of system
behavior over time can typically be carried out only for mathematically simple
systems. The solar system is one example of a natural system that is a small
perturbation of a simple system. In this case, a celebrated mathematical theorem
(the KAM Theorem, from which the current project draws its inspiration) sheds
light on the stability of the system. Group actions, the focal subject of this
project, can be viewed as dynamical systems with "multidimensional time," and
many systems in biology (neural networks), computer science (multidimensional
data storage media), and physics (quasi-crystals) can be modeled more
efficiently by mathematical systems that allow for multidimensional time than by
classical systems in which time is one-dimensional. This brings about the need
to understand small perturbations of such systems. On the other hand, rigidity
of local structure is often just one manifestation of a system that is rigid in
the large. Others, including rigidity of so-called invariant measures for
certain systems with multidimensional time, are closely connected to important
problems in number theory.
