
* 1001850
* Well-posedness of moving interface problems in perfect fluids
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,06/05/2012
* Steve Shkoller,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 274,999.00

The Euler equations are recognized as a suitable model for multiphase fluid
flows with moving boundaries and interfaces at large Reynolds number, and they
serve as the basic mathematical model even when other physical phenomena are
coupled to the fluid motion. Despite more than two centuries of mathematical
analysis of these complicated nonlinear equations, the existence theory for
these systems of hyperbolic moving free-boundary PDE, which model ideal
compressible and incompressible fluid flow, remains a significant challenge.
This includes a single mass of fluid, gas, or liquid, moving inside of a vacuum
that creates degeneracy in the flow, as well as multiphase immiscible fluids
separated by surfaces of discontinuity, across which velocity components
experience jumps. Recently, the Principal Investigator of this project has been
developing a novel set of analytical tools designed to establish existence
theories and well-posedness theorems for multidimensional moving free-boundary
hyperbolic problems, wherein the geometry of the free-surface interacts with the
motion of the fluid at leading order. These analytical tools apply to the
3-dimensional incompressible and compressible free-surface Euler equations with
or without surface tension on the boundary, and coupled fluid-structure
interaction problems. The fundamental ideas rely on new anisotropic smoothing
operators that permit approximations of the Euler equations that retain the
geometric structures of transport and boundary regularity, and for which
existence of smooth solutions is provable, and a new class of degenerate
parabolic approximations to characteristic and degenerate hyperbolic systems of
conservation laws. The proposal addresses the well-posedness of the motion of a
multidimensional compressible gas in the so-called physical vacuum singularity,
modeled by the free-boundary compressible Euler equations with sound speed
vanishing at the boundary at the rate of the square-root of the distance to
vacuum; well-posedness of supersonic 2-D vortex sheets and surfaces of
discontinuity; and well-posedness for the motion of a relativistic fluid in
vacuum, modeled by the Euler-Einstein equations.

Multiphase fluid flows with moving interfaces, modeled by the Euler equations,
play a central role in a multitude of physical and engineering applications,
ranging from the creation of hurricanes due to wind blowing on top of the ocean
surface to the atomization of liquid fuel jets in combustion chambers to the
motion of astrophysical bodies such as gaseous stars. The analytical
understanding gained in this work may have important ramifications in the
understanding of basic physical phenomena, which has hitherto been poorly
understood. In addition to basic wave motion and mixing that occurs in the
motion of interfaces between water and air, other conventional examples include
the interface between air and helium under shock wave interaction, the so-called
Richtmyer-Meshkov instabilities between two gases, the behavior of a gas bubble
in a liquid in a shock wave, and liquid fuels that are usually burned by first
atomizing a fuel jet to increase the surface area and hence the evaporation
rate. We can also add the prediction of spray behavior, for which the initial
atomization is both the most critical and the least understood aspect of the
spray. Understanding the short-time nonlinear balance that occurs in the
Rayleigh-Taylor instability should be quite important for the understanding of
jets, which become unstable when capillary effects are large due to waves longer
than the diameter, thus breaking up into a stream of relatively large drops.
