
* 1001488
* Problems in Function Theory and Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2010,05/14/2012
* Richard Rochberg,MO,Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 182,355.00

The applicant proposes to work on two sets of problems. The first is a
continuation of the applicant's collaboration with Arcozzi (Bologna), Sawyer
(Hamilton), and Wick (Atlanta). This group is working on specific problems in
the operator theoretic function theory of spaces of holomorphic functions which
are subspaces of potential spaces. The classical Dirichlet space is a
fundamental example; the Drury-Arveson-Hardy space is perhaps the most important
example. The questions are similar to the questions classically considered for
subspaces of Lebesgue spaces; questions about interpolation, zero sets,
multiplier algebras, coronas, etc. However the techniques required are quite
different, involving capacity theory and involving use of discrete models for
both the space of holomorphic functions and the containing potential space. The
work on a second set of problems is work in collaboration with Xiang Tang (St.
Louis) trying to understand the various roles of the Rankin-Cohen brackets. The
brackets are constant coefficient bidifferential operators whose coefficients
are combinatorial numbers. These operators arise naturally in a wide range of
settings. Some of the structural reasons for their ubiquity are now understood,
but the occurrence of the brackets in certain contexts of particular interest to
the applicant is poorly understood. A goal of the proposed research is to
improve that situation.

In the 1970s and 1980s there were profound mathematical advances at the
interface of commutative harmonic analysis and function theory. The research was
driven by a desire to see how several very productive, but seemingly very
different, viewpoints could be used together to get a deeper understanding of
transformation rules for waveforms. The successful unification of the viewpoints
allowed resolution of long standing mathematical questions. The improved insight
also led to fundamental innovations in data analysis and signal processing;
using wavelets for image compression was an early success and by now the
descendents of these ideas are a standard part of the toolkit of many computer
scientist and electrical engineers. The theoretical tools and insights developed
during that time also brought the questions in this proposal within reach. The
specific questions being considered are of direct mathematical interest. The
analytical tools being developed to work on the questions will, again, broaden
and deepen the understanding of how waveforms can be analyzed and manipulated.
The questions about the Rankin-Cohen brackets are of a different sort. When very
complicated and very elegant expressions arise in several seemingly unrelated
contexts there is, for many mathematicians, a compelling aesthetic imperative to
find the underlying reason. There is a great tradition of working on such
questions and although the answers are often mundane, sometimes they are quite
profound.
