
* 1001283
* Semilinear and nonlinear pdes motivated by complex variables and CR manifolds and the Bochner extension phenomenon
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,04/22/2010
* Shiferaw Berhanu,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 134,705.00

This project involves the study of semilinear partial differential equations in
the plane and systems of linear and nonlinear partial differential equations in
higher dimensions. The semilinear equations are motivated by Vekua-type
equations for the Cauchy-Riemann operator while the systems of equations are
generalizations of the tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations on embedded CR
submanifolds. The problems to be investigated include the analyticity of
solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations and the properties of the
solutions of Vequa-type equations when the Cauchy-Riemann operator is replaced
by more general complex vector fields. The tools that may be used for the
semilinear equations come from the solvability theory for complex vector fields
in various function spaces and the theory of ordinary differential equations
with periodic coefficients. For the nonlinear equations, the tools will include
those developed in the theory of holomorphic extendability of CR functions
including the FBI transform, analytic discs, and the Baouendi-Treves
approximation theorem for vector fields with rough coefficients.

The research in this project is expected to have applications to partial
differential equations and geometry. The semilinear equations arise from a
geometrical problem that concerns the existence of nontrivial infinitesimal
bendings for a given surface. This problem has physical applications to the
elasticity of thin shells. The nonlinear equations arise in numerous geometrical
and physical applications including in the modeling of atmospheric phenomena,
and in the study of limit shapes of surfaces that minimize surface tension. The
research activity on this project will be a source of meaningful problems for
graduate students and recent Ph.D's.
