
* 1001193
* Methods of operator K-theory in geometry, topology, analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,04/30/2012
* Gennadi Kasparov,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 206,876.00

This research is a continuation of the previous project titled ``Operator
K-theory methods in geometry, topology, harmonic analysis''. The main objectives
of the present project are applications of operator K-theory to a number of well
known problems in geometry, topology, representation theory and index theory of
elliptic operators. These problems are the Baum-Connes conjecture in K-theory of
group C*-algebras, the positive Ricci curvature conjecture in relation to the
Dirac operator on a loop space and the problem of constructing a useful index
theory of elliptic operators on infinite-dimensional manifolds. The Baum-Connes
conjecture part of the project consists of two different problems: the Baum-
Connes conjecture for discrete groups which act properly and affine-
isometrically on Lp spaces and the Baum-Connes conjecture for discrete
arithmetic groups. Concerning index theory on infinite-dimensional manifolds,
some non-rigorous rudiments of it already exist in theoretical physics, but
providing a solid basis for this theory will be another problem of the present
project. The positive Ricci curvature conjecture is a well-known topological
conjecture on the vanishing of the so called Witten genus. The main approach to
it is by the use of index theory on infinite-dimensional manifolds.

The development of quantum mechanics in the 20th century has led to the
creation of the theory of operators in Hilbert space and later to the creation
of the theory of C*-algebras. The theory of C*-algebras is closely related with
the contemporary field theory in physics, as well as with geometry, topology,
group representation theory. Operator K-theory came to the C*-algebra theory
from topology and grew out into a highly powerful tool. Nowadays, operator
K-theory is part of the non-commutative geometry which is a synthesis of
analysis and geometry with wide applications in many areas of mathematics and
theoretical physics. The emphasis of the present project is on the applications
of operator K-theory to several well known problems in topology, geometry, and
infinite-dimensional analysis. For instance, constructing index theory in
infinite dimensions, which is part of our project, will provide the basis for
numerous applications in mathematics and theoretical physics. Operator K-theory
methods will be the main tool for this research.
