
* 1001629
* Nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations with nonlocal effects
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, COFFES
* 07/01/2010,05/12/2010
* Luis Silvestre,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 164,000.00

This project concerns the analysis of elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations. The focus is on the regularity of solutions of equations
whose diffusion is nonlocal, such as equations involving the fractional
Laplacian. These equations arise, in particular, from models involving
discontinuous stochastic processes. One important problem is to understand the
equations arising from stochastic control problems and stochastic games
involving discontinuous Levy processes. These equations are the fractional-order
version of fully nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations. The analysis of the
regularity of integro-differential equations is not only interesting because it
extends the theory of regularity of second-order partial differential equations,
but also because it gives us a extra insight into what causes the regularization
in elliptic and parabolic problems. Another mathematically interesting feature
is that, since fractional diffusion has scaling properties different from those
for second-order diffusion, the interplay between the first-order terms of the
equation and the diffusion can become nontrivial at small scales. The principal
investigator will study equations with advection and fractional diffusion, with
an emphasis on the critical and supercritical regimes. Examples of this type of
equations are the critical and supercritical quasi-geostrophic equation and the
Burgers equation with fractional diffusion.

The nonlocal equations presented in this project arise from models in
engineering, finance and physics that involve long-range interactions. The most
common situation in which this happens occurs in models involving discontinuous
stochastic processes. For example, the price of a stock can suddenly jump from a
value to a very different one. It has been suggested that it may be better to
model stock prices with so-called discontinuous Levy processes than with
diffusions. In that case, the equation involved in computing the value of an
American option would be an obstacle problem for an integro-differential
equation. Other nonlinear integro-differential equations arise from stochastic
games, or from the physical phenomena known as anomalous diffusion. Nonlocal
equations are also obtained from deterministic models. For example if one
assumes that temperature is diffused quickly through the atmosphere, then this
phenomenon creates a nonlocal diffusion effect on the surface of the earth.
