
* 1004908
* Rigidity of Abelian Actions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/20/2009,11/05/2009
* Danijela Damjanovic,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2011
* USD 72,558.00

The proposed research is in the area of smooth dynamics and ergodic theory. The
main focus of the proposed research is the study of dynamical systems with
multidimensional time. Intensive research during the past two decades proved
that wide variety of such systems which display certain degree of chaotic
behavior, are remarkably rigid. These results induced fast progress towards some
long standing conjectures in number theory and quantum mechanics. Rigidity of
such systems stands in sharp contrast with flexibility of chaotic systems with
one-dimensional time. There are two main themes within the proposed research.
The first is to explore further stability and rigidity of algebraic
multidimensional-time systems with less chaotic behavior: existence and local
rigidity (i.e. differentiable stability) of partially hyperbolic abelian actions
on nilmanifolds, and local rigidity of parabolic abelian actions on certain
classes of locally symmetric spaces. In this direction the proposed research
involves the KAM theory approach and thus requires a detailed study of the
corresponding infinitesimal problem: the description of the first cohomology
over these actions. The second theme is to explore the existence and stability
properties of non-algebraic systems which are strongly partially hyperbolic.
Such systems have specific structure of invariant foliations which on one hand
imposes restrictions for the manifold of the action, and on the other hand it
tends to be robust under small perturbations thus leading to certain degree of
stability for the action. The research in this direction leads towards global
classification of strongly partially hyperbolic multidimensional-time systems.

Dynamical systems and chaos are the areas of mathematics which have flourished
during past years while maintaining a strong connection with their roots which
lie in the study of various phenomena in domains like cell biology, nano
technology, meteorology and engineering. The studies of evolution of nature
systems in time represent one of the core scientific interests today. The
problem of stability of systems is one of the main issues which arises in the
study of nature systems as mathematical models are merely approximations of the
natural phenomena. In celestial mechanics, stability of the solar system is one
important topic, and the KAM theory turned out to be a powerful tool towards
better understanding of the system's long term behavior. Systems with multi-
dimensional time appear in quantum mechanics, where rigidity of such systems is
present in the form of uniform distribution of quantum states.
Multidimensional-(lattice) time systems also appear in the mathematical
formalism for quasicrystals, whose physical properties and generation have been
intensively studied. In hardware architecture one of the recently explored
venues is extending the classical methodology to multidimensional time
(multidimensional scheduling). The principal investigator will continue to
encourage undergraduate students, female in particular, to take active part in
the research process and will make an effort to expose them to various aspects
and applications of this research. These activities will benefit from the grant.
