
* 1006309
* Analysis of conformal and quasiconformal maps
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2010,06/11/2010
* Christopher Bishop,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2014
* USD 200,441.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1006309 Principal Investigator: Christopher Bishop

The principal investigator will study the geometric properties of conformal and
quasiconformal maps, with an emphasis on the connections with other areas such
as numerical analysis, computational geometry, complex dynamics and geometric
measure theory. He will continue his work on fast conformal mapping algorithms,
including the class of Schwarz-Christoffel iterations. These include Davis'
method and the CRDT algorithm of Driscoll and Vavasis as special cases, and
other methods involving the medial axis and quasiconformal mappings. One of the
basic themes is to start with certain quasiconformal maps that approximate the
desired conformal map, but are easier to compute and have better properties.
These maps have natural connections to several well known problems such as
Brennan's conjecture, and the PI will investigate these connections. The PI will
also continue his work on various related problems involving optimal meshing
algorithms, diffusion limited aggregation, the geometry of Brownian motion, the
quasiconformal Jacobian problem and conformal welding.

A fundamental problem of mathematics and engineering is to quickly and
accurately solve various differential equations related to fluid flow, heat
conduction and wave propagation on complex regions. For 2-dimensional surfaces,
a standard method is to use a conformal mapping (i.e., angle preserving on small
scales) to replace the region with a simpler one, such as a disk or rectangle.
This approach has been studied for over 150 years, but not until the 1980's did
computers made conformal mapping practical for highly complex regions. The PI
will investigate how to improve existing methods and develop new ones that are
faster and more reliable. He will also investigate the theoretical behavior of
conformal maps on extremely complex domains such as fractals and the connections
between conformal maps and probability theory. The PI has already applied the
insights gained from these problems to meshing. This is the process of dividing
a complex region into simple pieces such as triangles. Meshing is a basic part
of most numerical methods and the usefulness of a mesh in applications depends
on the number of pieces (fewer is better) and their shapes (better to avoid
small and large angles). It is difficult to construct a mesh which is good in
both respects, but PI has used non-Euclidean geometry to construct 2-dimensional
quadrilateral meshes with optimal size and shapes for simple polygons and is
working to extend this to more general domains. Greater generality is needed in
various problems involving crack formation, interfaces between materials and
computer learning. Efficient meshing also has numerous applications in high-
performance computing such as modeling surfaces for engineering and computer
graphics. This award is jointly funded by the programs in Analysis and Geometric
Analysis.
