
* 1006294
* Problems in Complex Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2010,06/17/2015
* John Fornaess,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 344,133.00

The principal investigator plans to work on various problems in complex
analysis. The long term goal is to understand the Cauchy-Riemann equation and
related topics. Problems either are directly concerned with proving estimates,
improving understanding of key concepts basic for these equations or applying
estimates. (i) We will work jointly with Gautam Bharali and Berit Stensønes on
finite type pseudoconvex domains. Our objectives for the next three years is to
improve our understanding of the boundary geometry. This is a necessary
prerequisite to develop results on the Cauchy-Riemann equations. Bharali,
Stensones and the PI have recently made progress by developing a better
understanding of complex curves tangent to high order. (ii) We will work jointly
with T. Dinh, F. Rong, Nessim Sibony and Erlend F. Wold on laminations by
Riemann surfaces in complex projective space. Our objective for the next three
years is to improve our understanding of laminations in higher dimension. The
authors have recently found some examples of Riemann surface laminations.(iii)
The study of foliations by Riemann surfaces leads to basic questions about
currents. In two dimensions, positive closed currents can be approximated by
currents of integration of Riemann surfaces. In higher dimension, it would be
useful to have a similar geometric interpretation of currents. We propose to
work on this topic with Coman. The first case is that of currents in three
dimensions. (iv) The PI also proposes joint collaborations with Lina Lee and
Yuan Zhang. We are working on various problems involving invariant metrics and
infinite type pseudoconvex domains. (v) The PI also plans to continue the
project with Loredana Lanzani on a complex div-curl theorem and with Klas
Diederich on Holder estimates for the Cauchy Riemann equation of D'Angelo
domains and other questions.

We plan to work with mathematicians at different stages of their carreers. Some
senior mathematicians are Diederich, Løw, Sibony and Stensønes. We believe that
together the four of us have a good overview of the fields of several complex
variables and complex dynamics. This benefits our joint projects but also our
work with younger mathematicians. We plan to work with four midcareer
mathematicians, Bharali, Coman, Dinh and Lanzani and also with 4 postdocs, Lee,
Rong, Zhang and Wold. Also we work with graduate students, Crystal Zeager and
Taeyong Ahn. Of these, 5 are females.
