
* 1027628
* Systems of nonlinear elliptic equations and free boundary problems on manifolds
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2009,03/10/2010
* Lei Zhang,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 74,082.00

This project pursues research in three major directions. The first set of
problems is about free boundary problems (FBP) on Riemannian manifolds. One
major task is to prove regularity results for the free boundary or the solution
of the FBP. For this purpose it is important to establish some monotonicity
formulas to describe the asymptotic behavior of the solutions near the free
boundary. For FBP in Euclidean spaces Alt-Caffarelli-Friedman and Caffarelli-
Jerison-Kenig have established some celebrated monotonicity formulas, which play
a central role in the regularity theory. As their first goal, the principal
investigator and E. Teixeira seek to establish the analogues of these formulas
for the Laplace-Beltrami operator on Riemannian manifolds. The second set of
problems is related to finding a metric on four-manifolds with constant
Q-curvature. This geometric problem can be translated to an existence problem
for a certain fourth-order partial differential equation. The principal
investigator and M. Ould Ahemedou seek to solve this existence problem
completely by using arguments of Lin-Wei, Weinstein-Zhang, Bahri-Coron, and
others to handle various major difficulties presented by this equation. The
third set of problems concerns the blow-up solutions for certain systems of two-
dimensional elliptic equations, namely, the Liouville and Toda systems. In
comparison with scalar Liouville-type equations, the blow-up phenomenon for
these systems is very poorly understood. The principal investigator and C.S. Lin
seek to develop the necessary tools for obtaining a thorough understanding of
blow-up for these two systems.

In the first set of problems, the so-called monotonicity formulas should provide
a major new tool for the study of regularity theory for free boundary problems
defined on Riemannian manifolds, the more general and meaningful context for
such problems from the viewpoint of applications. Moreover, these new formulas
will provide motivation for people to extend to the Riemannian setting many
other important results that are known currently only in the realm of Euclidean
spaces. The second set of problems reviews strong interplay between analysis and
geometry. On one hand, these problems exhibit some major analytical
difficulties, the overcoming of which will require new ideas and methods. On the
other hand, the deep and rich geometric meaning of these problems is a great
source of inspiration for people to try to understand and surmount such
analytical difficulties. Thus, solving the second set of problems will not only
provide new tools for investigating other partial differential equations with
similar complications, but also lead to a better understanding of many related
open problems in geometry. The problems in part three are rooted in various
fields of physics, chemistry, and ecology, as some important models in these
fields are described by the Liouville- and Toda-like systems. Solving the
challenging mathematical questions related to these systems will likely impact
the aforementioned fields and expose the deep connections between them.
