
* 1065946
* Finite Factors, Operators, and Free Probability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2011,04/08/2013
* Hari Bercovici,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 270,800.00

This project focuses on several aspects of operator theory and function theory
that arise in the study of free random variables and related areas. The tools
involved are partly intrinsic to these areas, but also involve input from other
areas, such as combinatorics and algebraic geometry. One important theme is the
use of the combinatorial Littlewood-Richardson rule in the study of eigenvalue
problems for compact operators on a Hilbert space or for self-adjoint elements
in a finite von Neumann algebra. This rule (and its continuous extensions) also
plays a role in a different direction concerning the classification of invariant
subspaces of certain operators. A second major theme is the study of weak and
strong limit laws in free probability, as well as regularity questions for free
convolutions. There are many problems here where methods of classical function
theory yield interesting, and sometimes unexpected results. Other problems of
operator theory to be considered treat the spectral Nevanlinna-Pick problem and
its analogues, hyperinvariant subspaces, and p-entropies. Of these questions,
the Nevanlinna-Pick problem is inspired by control theory questions and may have
practical applications, while p-entropies have applications in theoretical
computer science.

The aim of this project is to solve several problems in functional analysis by
highlighting their connections to areas of mathematics that do not seem, at
first glance, to be related. An example is the use of methods of algebraic
geometry in the solution of analysis problems. Some of the areas of study in
this project have potential applications in engineering, especially in control
theory (specifically, the control of large structures), and earlier results of
the principal investigator have actually been incorporated into engineering
projects. Besides their purely scientific merit, the activities supported by
this grant are expected to have an impact through the training of doctoral and
postdoctoral students and the creation of new course materials that will
incorporate some of the research findings from the project. The principal
investigator has trained a number of Ph.D. students, of whom three are women and
one is Hispanic. The work of these students has had a significant impact on the
fields that they entered (operator theory, free probability, control theory, and
partial differential equations). The principal investigator has also mentored
several postdoctoral associates who went on to successful careers. Finally, the
principal investigator has directed two undergraduates in the Indiana University
REU program. As indicated, mentoring activities at the undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral levels will play an integral role in this project.
