
* 1066978
* Multivariable complex dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/15/2011,06/17/2013
* Jeffrey Diller,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 185,179.00

This proposal concerns problems in the intersection between several complex
variables, complex algebraic geometry and dynamical systems. The problems stem
from a very general program for constructing and analyzing measures of maximal
entropy for rational self-maps of projective space. The work will begin with and
be guided by the particular case of rational maps preserving a meromorphic two
form. Specific issues to be investigated include `algebraic stability' for
degree growth of maps, laminarity of invariant currents in codimension greater
than one, and how to intersect dynamically natural closed currents to produce
invariant measures.

A dynamical system, at its most general, is any 'thing'-e.g. the weather, a
bacteria colony, an economy, or a solar system-that evolves in time according to
definite mathematical rules. Given the present state of the system, one often
wants to know something about its future state. Will the earth warm
significantly in the next century? Will the solar system fly apart? What are the
long term financial effects of a given tax cut or government intervention? In a
broad mathematical sense, all of these questions reduce to understanding whether
some aspect of a dynamical system is 'stable' or 'unstable'. That is, does it
vary slowly and predictably as the system evolves, and or is it prone to change
rapidly and chaotically with a small variation in the system. The research
proposed here aims at better understanding mathematics of dynamical systems, and
in particular at determining and describing those parts of a system which are
most unstable. Funding for this proposal will also support the two PhD students
the PI is currently advising. It's broader impact will be felt through the PI's
involvement with a Notre Dame summer program for high school math teachers and
with the Riverbend Math Center, which is a local independent non-profit
organization dedicated to promoting math education at all levels.
