
* 1068735
* Translation Flows on Flat Surfaces and the Teichmueller Geodesic Flow
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2011,04/26/2011
* Alexander Bufetov,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Piore Gilman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 0.00

The research is a study of dynamical properties of translation flows on flat
surfaces, with a special emphasis on connections with probability theory. In
previously funded work, the proposer has obtained new limit theorems for
translation flows. These results give a completely new type of limit theorems in
ergodic theory and open a wide array of questions. The proposer will continue
his study of limit distributions for translation flows. An important particular
case is that of flows along stable foliations of pseudo-Anosov diffeomorphisms.A
specific tool essential for this study is the symbolic coding, developed and
studied by the proposer, of translation flows as suspension flows over Vershik
automorphisms, a construction developing earlier work of S.Ito. Strongly
chaotic, hyperbolic behavior of the Teichmueller flow controls the mildly
chaotic, parabolic behavior of translation flows.In the second, more geometric,
part of the project, the proposer will continue his investigation of the chaotic
properties of the Teichmueller geodesic flow.

We see chaotic behavior in the evolution of stock prices, weather patterns,
turbulent fluids and traffic jams. How to control chaotic behavior? A key role
in our modern perception of chaos is played by the ergodic theory of dynamical
systems. The proposed research studies the slow chaos for flows on surfaces, a
central class of examples in geometry and physics. The project also has an
important pedagogical component. Through lectures by visiting scholars, working
seminars and reading projects related to the proposal, the proposer will
continue involving Rice undergraduate and graduate students in Mathematical
research.
