
* 1068105
* Loewner Evolutions and Random Maps
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2011,05/02/2013
* Steffen Rohde,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 345,005.00

Rohde will continue his investigations of conformal mappings generated by the
Loewner differential equation, and will investigate the conformal geometry of
random surfaces, particularly random planar maps such as the Benjamini-Schramm
Uniformly Infinite Planar Triangulation. One aspect of Rohde's research is to
understand similarities and differences between the deterministic and the
stochastic Loewner equation, such as trace properties and their dependence on
the regularity of the driving term. The Loewner equation is closely related to
the "Zipper-algorithm" of Kuhnau and Marshall, and to conformal welding. Another
aspect of Rohde's research is to prove convergence of this welding algorithm,
and to study generalized weldings corresponding to non-simple curves. Rohde's
research also explores the analytic foundations of the emerging theory of random
maps and random Riemann surfaces, such as the type problem.

What is the shape of a large molecule such as DNA? How does water percolate
through soil? What are the patterns of spin-alignments in ferro-magnets? These
problems are too complex to allow for a precise and simple mathematical answer.
Even much simpler mathematical models, proposed by chemists and physicists, were
out of reach of mathematicians for decades. This changed in 1999 with the
invention of the Schramm-Loewner Evolution SLE, the Loewner equation driven by
one-dimensional Brownian motion. The last decade has witnessed tremendous
progress on old mathematical problems and even provided physicists with new and
unexpected insights, as well as furthering interactions between probabilists,
mathematical physicists, and complex analysts. Rohde's research aims at
foundational questions of this emerging theory. Specifically, he is working on
path properties of solutions of the Loewner equation in both the deterministic
and probabilistic setting, and he is working towards an understanding of the
large-scale behavior of random sphere-triangulations.
