
* 1069015
* Fourier Analysis and Multilinear Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2011,06/03/2013
* Rodolfo Torres,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 229,999.00

The study of multilinear operators has developed largely by the interest in very
concrete and naturally appearing examples whose understanding has produced
powerful time-frequency tools. The investigator will capitalize on the recent
successes and progresses achieved and confront problems that are needed to
complete the development of the subject. At the same time novel problems and
innovative approaches to study them will be introduced and explored. Singular
integrals have played a crucial role in questions related to elliptic
regularity, generalized Cauchy-Riemann equations, Sobolev embeddings,
Littlewood-Paley theory, and other problems in partial differential equations
and the study of function spaces. Multilinear singular integrals represent a
next step in the proven successful enterprise of computing operations on
functions via their spectral resolution and the understanding of them through
the revealing lenses of the Fourier transform. Among the speci&#64257;c goals of
the proposal are the study of bilinear or multilinear operators with minimal
regularity assumptions; the development of more precise extrapolation and
weighted estimates techniques; and the analysis of bilinear multipliers with
singularities in the frequency domain not well-understood yet, but which are of
critical importance for further progress in the field. Recent work on
multilinear operators has already found both foreseen as well as unexpected
applications outside harmonic analysis. Some of the questions to be investigated
in this proposal can have potential impact in other mathematical disciplines, in
particular in partial differential equations. Fourier analysis methods provide
ways to analyze information by decomposing it into simple building blocks or
wavelike components. Particular operations are easy to perform in these
components by exploiting the fact that waves which oscillate at different
frequencies do not interact much with each other. This is a basic idea in the
analysis of signals and their transformations, and progress in the development
of new Fourier analysis techniques often translates into schemes and algorithms
for compression of information, pattern recognition, and other application of
image processing in science and engineering. The investigator will continue to
interact with graduate students and colleagues in the early stages of their
careers. His research will be integrated with his teaching, training, and
mentoring activities, which include the direction of PhD students working under
his supervision. He will also continue to conduct research opportunities for
undergraduates and participate as faculty mentor in existing programs to
increase student diversity at his institution. The research in this proposal
will be disseminated both through professional conferences in the discipline as
well as expository lectures to broader audiences, which are intended to increase
the awareness about mathematics and science in the general public.
