
* 1100657
* Geometric, convexity and regularity properties of certain classes of convex bodies
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2011,04/01/2011
* Maria Alfonseca,ND,North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 62,445.00

This project focuses on the application of Analysis techniques, in particular
the Fourier transform, to the study of the geometric and convexity properties of
certain classes of convex bodies: Zonoids and intersection bodies. These bodies
have appeared independently in several areas of Mathematics, from Geometry to
Functional Analysis. In the last two decades, the introduction of Fourier
analytic techniques has yielded important results about these two classes of
bodies, and has been used to unify the study of some of their properties.
However, many open questions still remain. The proposed research is directed in
three main directions: (a) a better understanding of the relation between
zonoids and intersection bodies, such as conditions that ensure that an
intersection body is the dual of a zonoid, or the study of the asymptotic
behavior of zonoids whose polars are zonoids; (b) the study of the convexity
properties and fixed points of the intersection body operator; (c)
reconstruction of non-symmetric bodies from lower dimensional information, such
as the area or the perimeter of their parallel sections.

Convex bodies appear as objects of study in many areas of Mathematics, and have
applications in Physics, Medicine, and Computer Science. For example, the
problem of reconstructing a three dimensional body from one and two dimensional
information is the basis of medical techniques such as X-rays and CT-scans, and
it is also used in the study of the structure and physical properties of
crystals. Convexity holds central importance in optimization and linear
programming problems. This project works towards the advancement of the
mathematical understanding convex bodies and the relation between their analytic
and geometric properties. The proposed educational program, which includes
graduate classes and seminars, undergraduate projects at North Dakota State
University, and visitor exchanges with other Universities, will help prepare
mathematicians to work in these areas. Further outreach activities, such as
Sonia Kovalevsky Day for high school girls and the NDSU Math Club, will engage
underrepresented students in the study of Mathematics.
