
* 1101428
* Aspects of regularity theory for PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2011,04/18/2013
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 411,997.00

The project addresses several open problems in the theory of partial
differential equations. The problems arise primarily in the context of equations
used in fluid mechanics (the Navier-Stokes equations and Euler's equations) or
in the calculus of variations (regularity of minimizers of multi-dimensional
variational integrals for vector-valued functions). For the Navier-Stokes
equations the study will include the following areas of emphasis: (1) long-
distance behavior of steady-state solutions; (2) regularity for special classes
of solutions, such as the axi-symmetric solutions; and (3) regularity of related
linear equations with low-regularity coefficients. In the case of Euler's
equations, the project will focus on the following topics: (1) existence of
periodic and quasi-periodic solutions; (2) the structure of the set of the
steady-states of the two-dimensional equations; and (3) the relevance of various
steady-states of the two-dimensional equations for two-dimensional statistical
theories. The problems in the calculus of variations concern the stability of
singularities. Unlike in the scalar case, the minimizers of regular variational
functionals for vector-valued functions can have singularities. How stable are
these singularities? This question will be addressed. The topic also has
connections to nonlinear elasticity.

Theoretical research in partial differential equations ultimately has a very
practical goal, which is the understanding and prediction of behavior of
solutions of the equations. For example, fluid flows are usually described by
the Navier-Stokes equations. Do the solutions of these equations correctly
describe what we see "in practice," and can we use the equations to make precise
predictions about the flows? From what we know about these equations, the
answers seem to be yes, but the mathematics of the equations is still not very
well understood. Indeed, we do not yet have satisfactory mathematical
explanations for the behavior of solutions that can be observed either in
experiments or in computer simulations. The information we need to obtain from
the computations can usually be formulated in simple and concrete terms. For
instance, at what speed will an aircraft stall? The question is simple, whereas
the behavior of the solutions underlying this question is complicated. Can we
somehow manage the complexity by finding the most important mathematical
parameters of the flow that are still "controlable"? When we study regularity of
solutions, the situation is quite similar: there seems to be a very large
spectrum of behaviors that solutions can exhibit. Can we obtain some control of
the solutions by focusing on relatively few "right" parameters? What are the
right parameters? This research project focuses on questions of this nature. If
we can identify some good quantities that govern the behavior of the solutions
and that we are able to control, then it becomes much easier to calculate the
solutions themselves, since the theoretical information tells us where to focus
our computational resources.
