
* 1101315
* Statistical properties of dynamical systems: large deviations, extremes, return time statistics and dynamical Borel-Cantelli lemmas.
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2011,06/10/2013
* Matthew Nicol,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 154,000.00

This project seeks to improve our understanding of certain key statistics of
non-uniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems: return time statistics, extreme
value statistics, dynamical Borel-Cantelli lemmas and large deviations. While
there has been progress in describing these statistical properties for uniformly
hyperbolic systems, uniform hyperbolicity seldom holds for physical systems and
models based on non-uniform hyperbolicity are more realistic. Return time
statistics quantify probabilities of a physical system transforming into or
returning to a state in a certain period of time. Extreme value statistics give
limit laws for successive maxima of a time series of observations on a system.
Borel-Cantelli lemmas are a fundamental tool in establishing the almost-sure
behavior of stochastic processes. The aim is to extend our understanding of
these statistical properties to non-uniformly hyperbolic systems including those
with polynomial correlation decay rate. A further goal is to obtain large
deviation estimates for functions on dynamical systems with discontinuities (or
singularities) or which give rise to multiplicative cocycles, such as matrix
valued functions.

Some physical systems are so complex that, although they may be modeled by
mathematical equations, they are best described from the viewpoint of
statistics. For example, knowing the probabilities of a hurricane located
offshore affecting certain towns on the coast is useful information and more
certain information usually cannot be given. However, it is a major problem that
the classical statistical assumption of complete randomness (independence of
successive observations) is seldom satisfied for realistic models of physical
systems since successive observations are highly correlated. Extreme value
theory estimates the likelihood of observing an event of a certain magnitude,
while large deviations estimates the probability of an outlier or rare event.
This project aims to improve predictions of complex physical systems by
providing an understanding of extreme value theory, large deviations and other
statistics for a wide class of physically realistic mathematical models. The PI
will also continue to work towards improving science education at all levels and
by informing the public through outreach activities.
