
* 1101305
* Operator Algebras and Topological Invariants
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2011,04/16/2013
* Marius Dadarlat,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2015
* USD 319,569.00

This project is guided by the premise that the ideas and the methods of
algebraic topology, understood in a broad sense, will continue to play a key
role in the study of operator algebras. The underlying theme of the research is
to devise new techniques and tools in the deformation theory of operator
algebras. The idea of deformations of algebras is intimately related to
K-theory, as is revealed by the development of E-theory. In particular one can
read the K-homology of a locally compact connected space X from matricial
deformations of the algebra of continuous functions on X. In what may be
regarded as a counterpart of this property in condensed-matter physics, Kitaev
has proposed very recently a classification of topological insulators that is
based on real K-homology and that relies ultimately on a classification up to
approximate unitary equivalence of matricial deformations of spaces. A first
objective of the project is to study invariants of C*-algebras that integrate
the primitive spectrum along with homological invariants. This is naturally tied
to the idea of deformation and the theory of continuous fields and will involve
the study of KK-theory and E-theory parametrized by spaces that are not
necessarily Hausdorff. A second objective is to investigate the existence of
deformations of group C*-algebras into matrix algebras with the property that
they detect the K-theory of the group C*-algebras. In addition, the principal
investigator aims to provide formulas for computing invariants associated with
these deformations. A third objective is to study invariants of simple
C*-algebras that capture properties not detected by K-theory or tracial states.
In particular, the project will investigate rigidity properties of simple
C*-algebras.

The physics of elementary particles has led to new mathematical theories in
which numerical functions are replaced with infinite arrays of numbers or
matrices. Matrices can be multiplied, but unlike numerical multiplication, the
order of the factors is essential, so that A times B is not always equal to B
times A. This property of matrix multiplication, called noncommutativity, is
crucial for the interpretation of very complex phenomena in quantum mechanics
that might initially appear completely counter-intuitive (e.g., Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle). The passage from numbers to matrices often involves a
process of deformation in which spatial structures are discretized in such a way
that the possible twists of surfaces (or even more complicated objects) are
captured in the form of numerical invariants. This project is concerned with the
theory of such deformations and connects classical geometry with noncommutative
geometry, a theory that proposes a reconstruction of the general concept of
space that is better aligned with the principles of quantum physics than is
traditional geometry. Moreover, the deformation theory that the principal
investigator will study provides mathematical tools relevant to physical
phenomena that are observed in certain special materials. These materials behave
as insulators in their interiors, while permitting the movement of charges on
their surfaces, due to exotic metallic states localized there. Such remarkable
new materials, known as "topological insulators," have already had a
considerable impact on condensed matter physics and are expected to find
technological applications in magneto-electronics, an emerging field in which
spin currents are used instead of charge currents, and in quantum computing.
