
* 1101260
* Free boundary and evolution problems arising in gas dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2011,07/15/2011
* Mikhail Feldman,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,914.00

The project consists of two main topics: (1) a study of free boundary problems
for elliptic and degenerate elliptic nonlinear equations and systems that arise
in the models of compressible fluid dynamics and (2) a study of the system of
semigeostrophic equations, which provides a model of large-scale
atmosphere/ocean flows, using methods of Monge-Kantorovich mass transport and
transport equations with nonsmooth vector fields. The first part of the project
focuses on the shock reflection problem, one of the most fundamental
multidimensional shock wave problems. The objective is to study existence,
uniqueness, and geometric properties of solutions to the self-similar potential
flow equation and the full compressible Euler system, which together model
regular shock reflection. The self-similar potential flow equation is a
nonlinear second-order equation of mixed elliptic-hyperbolic type for the
velocity potential. The regular shock reflection problem can be formulated as a
free boundary problem for the elliptic phase of the solution. In recent work,
G.-Q. Chen and the principal investigator have established the global existence
of a regular shock reflection solution for the potential flow in the case where
the wedge angle is larger than the sonic angle. The goal of the present project
is to extend these results in several directions, including proving existence of
subsonic regular reflection (thus completing the proof of the von Neumann
detachment conjecture in the framework of potential flow) and including the case
of the compressible Euler system. In recent years, progress has been made in the
study of the semigeostrophic system with constant Coriolis parameter in flat
geometry. The second component of this project will include the investigation of
a more physically relevant case of the system, one with variable Coriolis
parameter on a manifold, and also a study of solutions that correspond to
singular measures in the "dual" variables.

Free boundary problems arise in many models in physics, fluid dynamics,
engineering, and economics. In physical systems, "free boundaries" are regions
of rapid variation of conditions between two very different states, such as
shock wave in gas dynamics. Mathematically this rapid transition is simplified
as occurring infinitely fast along a surface of discontinuity in the partial
differential equation governing the physics. Location of this surface is not
known at the outset, thus one must solve both for physical states and their
boundaries. Significant progress has been achieved during the last several
decades in the study of free boundary problems. However, in the case of
nonlinear partial differential equations and especially for equations that have
very different properties in the regions separated by the free boundary, many
questions remain. The principal investigator plans to apply the techniques of
free boundary problems to study some fundamental multidimensional shock waves in
gas dynamics, specifically shock reflection patterns. This involves free
boundary problems for nonlinear equations and systems of complex structure, for
which new methods will be needed. Understanding properties of free boundaries,
such as their regularity, stability and geometry, allows better analysis and
numerical methods in models and applications. Another focus of the project is
the semigeostrophic system, which models large-scale atmospheric/oceanic flows
and is used in meteorology, in particular in models of front formation in the
atmosphere. Methods include study of related Monge-Kantorovich-type problems.
The Monge-Kantorovich mass transport theory has recently been applied
successfully in several areas (e.g., kinetic theory, fluid flow, elastic
crystals, granular materials, urban planning, microeconomic decision problems).
Broader impact resulting from the project will be achieved since the project
addresses the problems important in engineering and meteorology. Also, graduate
students will be involved in the work on the project.
