
* 1101403
* Perturbations of Operator Algebras and Related Topics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2011,05/13/2013
* Roger Smith,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 198,000.00

This project has two main areas of focus. The first of these concerns the
perturbation theory of operator algebras with particular reference to the
longstanding Kadison-Kastler problem, which asks whether operator algebras that
are close in a suitable metric must be isomorphic (or even unitarily
equivalent). This is part of a more general and very difficult problem: when two
algebras are the same (isomorphic), how can we recognize that this is so? The
difficulty arises because the same algebra can have many different, seemingly
unrelated, representations. In recent joint work with coauthors, the principal
investigator has made considerable progress on the Kadison-Kastler problem, and
he plans to continue this work in several directions: an isomorphism result for
close crossed product algebras, the K-theory of close algebras, the shared
properties of close algebras, and the question of whether close containments
lead to embeddings. Recent progress has come for algebras that have the
similarity property, and this has a reformulation in cohomological terms. Thus
the second main area of focus will be the Kadison-Ringrose problem, which asks
whether certain cohomology groups (which act as obstructions to desirable
properties) must vanish. This will involve the theory of completely bounded
linear and multilinear maps and also connects to the bounded projection
property.

The modern study of operator algebras has evolved from two main sources.
Matrices, which are generalizations of numbers, were introduced to solve
equations and now find applications from computer graphics to search engines for
the internet. In formulating quantum mechanics mathematically, von Neumann found
that he needed infinite-dimensional versions of matrices called linear
operators, which were best studied in operator algebras. Moreover, the time-
evolution of quantum mechanical systems came to be expressed in terms of the
crossed product by groups of automorphisms. The emerging theory of quantum
computation is substantially based on the theory of completely bounded and
completely positive maps at the matrix level, and these topics underlie much of
the work that will be undertaken. Thus, the results obtained in these areas are
likely to impact some of these more concrete areas, since the finite factors are
those operator algebras that most closely model matrix algebras. An important
aspect of the principal investigator's work has been the training of
postdoctoral researchers and doctoral students. Most of the young people who
have been mentored by the principal investigator are now in faculty positions
where they are training the next generation of scientists and engineers. A
scientifically and mathematically trained workforce is essential for the
technological future of the country, so the principal investigator will continue
to give a central role to the mentoring of young mathematicians.
