
* 1101360
* The Structure of Simple Amenable C*-Algebras and their Homomorphisms.
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2011,05/08/2013
* Huaxin Lin,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 138,580.00

In this project the principal investigator will study the structure of unital,
simple, amenable C*-algebras and homomorphisms from one such C*-algebra to
another. From a theorem of Gelfand we know that a unital commutative C*-algebra
is isomorphic to the algebra of continuous functions on some compact Hausdorrf
space. The structure of a commutative C*-algebra is thus completely determined
by the underlying space, or the topological structure of the space. A
homomorphism from one commutative C*-algebra to another is induced and
determined by a continuous map from one underlying space to another. Thus, in
the noncommutative setting, this project comes down to a study of noncommutative
topology. The central goals of the project are (1) to use K-theory-related data
to classify separable, simple, amenable C*-algebras, (2) to determine
approximate unitary equivalence classes of homomorphisms, and (3) to find
applications to the study of noncommutative topology and topological dynamical
systems.

The simplest C*-algebra is the system of all complex numbers. The next most
simple C*-algebras are systems of matrices of complex numbers. In general,
C*-algebras are systems of operators (which can be thought of as generalizations
of matrices). For example, differentiation and integration are operators on
certain function spaces. Operators can also be used, for example, as models for
observables for the microscopic physical world. A system of operators has the
structure of addition and multiplication, just like the system of numbers.
Unlike the system of numbers, where two times three is the same as three times
two, in a general C*-algebra the product A times B may not be the same as B
times A. This noncommutativity reflects the reality of quantum physics and
corresponds to the famous Heisenberg uncertainty principle. C*-algebras arise in
many diverse areas of science and engineering, of which quantum mechanics is
just one important example. For purposes of application, as well as for
theoretical reasons, it is important to understand the structure of C*-algebras,
or the structure of systems of operators formed from different applications. The
aim of this project is to find the simplest essential data that determine both
the structure of a C*-algebra and the relations that exist between C*-algebras
so that applications become possible. To be useful, the data should be easy to
obtain and relatively easy to compute. Furthermore, if two C*-algebras give rise
to the same set of data, then the algebras should be identical for purposes of
all applications. The prinicipal investigator has to search these data and
invent tools to provide a proof that such data can indeed be used to determine
completely the structure of the corresponding C*-algebras. The expected
immediate applications will be to the study of dynamical systems. However, a
long-term impact should be felt in many other areas of mathematics (e.g., linear
algebra, operator theory, group representations, noncommutative topology,
noncommutative geometry). In the last few years, some related research involved
the training of several Ph.D. students. This project will also include both
graduate student training and the mentoring of postdoctoral researchers.
