
* 1147523
* RTG: Analysis and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2012,06/14/2016
* Alexander Kiselev,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,796,615.00

The University of Wisconsin Research and Training Groups (RTG) project in
Analysis and Applications consists of a variety of initiatives with the aim of
increasing the number of US citizens and permanent residents who study
mathematics and then pursue teaching and research careers in mathematics. The
project will significantly increase both the intensity and range of activities
at UW Madison, and create a culture of broad education and intensive well-
rounded training, for trainees at the postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
level. The research scope of the proposal is both broad and coherent, interwoven
by common themes and ideas. The harmonic analysis research topics include
classical questions on Fourier multipliers, restriction of Fourier transforms
and the interplay of sub-Riemannian geometry and analysis. In mathematical fluid
dynamics, the research will focus on regularity and blow up problems for active
scalars, on investigating realistic models of atmospheric dynamics building upon
the classical Boussinesq system, and on mixing problems that lie on the
interface of partial differential equations, dynamical systems and probability.
In mathematical biology, we will work on reaction networks that model a broad
range of processes in biochemistry, systems biology and ecology, and on
applications of chemotaxis to enhancement of biological reactions.

The research of this project will be focused on analysis and applications. The
applied problems will come from a variety of areas and sciences. There will be
applications that involve models used in atmospheric science for weather and
climate studies. There will be problems on efficiency of mixing in fluids, of
interest in applications ranging from internal combustion modeling to food
processing. Finally, there will be problems on reaction networks of interest in
biochemistry, and problems on sensing of chemicals by living organisms of
interest in ecology and oceanography. The project is designed to give young
participants experience and depth necessary to adapt to a variety of career
paths and to pursue the most promising directions available. It offers a wide
range of teaching and research activities, including summer training programs
for incoming graduate students, annual research seminars for graduate students
and postdocs, annual research experience programs for undergraduates, research
workshops and outreach opportunities. The research experience programs for
undergraduates seek to early acquaint students with the excitement of
mathematics research and provide leadership training opportunities for graduate
students and postdocs. Those activities will have a large innovative teaching
component during the academic year, and will be followed by intensive research
programs in the summer. The graduate research seminars will cover a diverse
range of active topics, exposing researchers and students to a mix of advanced
analysis techniques along with concrete applied problems where these techniques
can be used. The research workshops will serve to broaden the perspective of the
trainees and suggest new directions of research. Outreach activities sponsored
by the project will include regular mathematics seminars for high-school
students, with the participation of RTG trainees. The activities supported by
the RTG grant will significantly strengthen the UW mathematics department's
research and training programs which contribute to the effort of creating a
mathematically skilled workforce. This contribution represents the national and
statewide effect of this project.
