
* 1158859
* Variational and Topological Methods: Theory, Applications, Numerical Simulations, and Open Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/15/2012,03/01/2012
* John Neuberger,AZ,Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Calini
* 02/28/2013
* USD 33,847.00

The PI and the organizers are holding the "Variational and Topological Methods:
Theory, Applications, Numerical Simulations, and Open Problems" conference
during June 6-9, 2012, at Northern Arizona University (NAU) in Flagstaff, AZ.
This conference covers topics in variational and topological methods for
nonlinear elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations (PDE), with two
special emphasis sessions, in singular problems and in numerical simulations for
nuclear physics. The scope of the conference will be fairly wide, to include
theory, applications, and scientific computations, with emphasis on the two
special session areas. The principal speakers, Monica Clapp (Instituto de
Matemáticas, UNAM, Mexico), Pavel Drábek (Univerzita v Plzni, Czech Republic),
Jacques Giacomoni (Université de Pau, France), Jean-Michel Rakotoson (Université
de Poitiers, France) and Peter Takáè (Universität Rostock, Germany) have all
committed to giving a series of keynote lectures. This format was beneficial to
researchers at all levels attending the previous two conferences organized with
the support of NSF in 2002 and 2007 in NAU. The conference website is
http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jmn3/var12/var12.html. This award provides partial
support to eligible participants, with priority given to underrepresented
mathematicians, especially women, graduate students, postdocs, and junior
faculty. One of the goals of the conference organizers is to encourage young
researchers by providing them an opportunity to listen to and interact with
experts. It is a theme that there will be time in the schedule to allow this
discussion, to include open problems for potential new research areas of
mathematics that feature a blend of the analysis, scientific application, and
numerical solution of the key relevant equations of our subject.
