
* 1160817
* Global dynamics for nonlinear dispersive equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,07/11/2014
* Wilhelm Schlag,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 333,000.00

This project will investigate the long-term behavior of solutions to dispersive
Hamiltonian partial differential equations, such as the semilinear wave, Klein-
Gordon, and nonlinear Schroedinger equations. These equations can be either
defocusing or focusing, which distinguishes whether the nonlinearity is
attractive or repulsive. In the latter case, one typically encounters various
regimes depending on the power of the nonlinearity, which allows for rich
dynamics ranging from long-term existence and dispersion, to finite-time blowup.
Recently, in joint work with Kenji Nakanishi from Kyoto University, Japan, the
principal investigator has given a complete characterization of all possible
dynamics at energies close to the ground state energy for a large class of these
focusing dispersive wave equations. This classification is achieved by a
combination of dynamical systems methods (hyperbolic dynamics, invariant
manifolds), with partial differential equations arguments such as concentration
compactness and the Kenig-Merle theory. Several important open problems remain,
among which is to obtain this type of classification for the energy critical
nonlinear wave equation. This is particularly relevant in view of the related
but complementary research by Duyckaerts-Kenig-Merle on focusing equations. A
long-term goal is to establish the soliton-resolution conjecture. This
conjecture can be viewed as the nonlinear analogue of the celebrated asymptotic
completeness property of the linear Schroedinger evolution.

Nonlinear wave equations play a central role in science. Maxwell's equations of
electrodynamics are of this type, and they are arguably the most influential
partial differential equations of modern science -- the existence of radio
waves, and general electromagnetic radiation such as light and X-rays was
predicted in the 1870s by Maxwell based on these equations alone and confirmed
by experiment later that century. Needless to say, it is unthinkable to remove
radio transmission, X-rays, lasers, microwaves, and many other electromagnetic
radiation fields from our daily lives. In addition, Maxwell's wave equations
have had theoretical impact far beyond anything of which nineteenth-century
physicists and mathematicians could have conceived. Indeed, they make the
constancy of the speed of light most natural, and the symmetries of Maxwell's
system lead directly to Einstein's theory of special relativity. Unifying the
latter with gravity then led to the general theory of relativity. In addition,
quantum theory has provided many more examples of wave equations, in many cases
nonlinear ones. For example, special solutions that go by the name of
"dispersion managed solitons," and that solve a certain class of nonlinear
Schroedinger equations arising in nonlinear optics, are indispensable today for
the transmission of the world's internet traffic through carefully designed
glass fiber cables. The introduction of these special cables, which consist of
alternating stretches of different materials, drastically reduced transmission
errors and cost, and allowed for a huge increase in the data volume being
transmitted. This project focuses on the further development and study of
nonlinear wave equations of the type that arise in many areas of physics and
engineering. Time and time again, mathematicians have laid the foundations
through pure research without which the engineering applications that profoundly
affect our daily lives could not have been accomplished.
