
* 1160962
* Spectral Properties of Aperiodic Solids
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2012,06/16/2014
* Jean Bellissard,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,001.00

This proposal deals with developing mathematical tools that can be used to model
the transport of energy through a solid. Such modeling activities are of great
importance, e.g. one wishes to model the transport of electric current through
various materials on the surface of a computer chip. The problem is highly
dependent on the structure of the solid: for material that "has a pattern" a
very successful theory- Bloch theory- has been developed that serves as a very
good physical and mathematical model. The goal of this research is to develop an
analog to Bloch theory for those solids that are without any repeating pattern.
Besides its own intrinsic scientific interest, such a theory could have
technological implications in electronics, instrumentation, and the like.

During the 20th century, a lot of information about the electronic behavior of
periodic crystals has been obtained through the so-called "Bloch Theory". It has
led to a substantial understanding of properties of metals, insulators, and
semiconductors as long as they are periodic crystals and the electron
interactions can be neglected. In particular, numerical methods are routinely
used to compute the band spectrum of such materials. Bloch Theory is more
efficiently justified through the "Wannier transform". In particular, it allowed
to a theoretical description of impurities in semiconductors, leading to
substantial progress in their practical use. Nothing like the Bloch theory
exists for aperiodic materials, namely for most of materials available in
material science. Physicists have relied upon tricks, approximations, effective
models and numerical methods. This led sometimes to seminal results like the
theory of Anderson localization, Renormalization Group Analysis and spectacular
effects like the Quantum Hall effect that led to a change in the definition of
the resistance standard. The discovery of quasicrystals in the mid eighties
changed the trend dramatically: the lack of Bloch theory made it an outstanding
challenge to predict the electronic properties of such materials. Various
approximation schemes have been used, but the accuracy of the results is
questionable and the heaviness of the software makes it essentially impossible
to go beyond two dimensions. There is an urgent need of a robust mathematical
theory to overcome these difficulties. The present project is one step towards
such a goal. Using the full strength of progress made during the last thirty
years, partly by the PI, the present proposal proposes a construction of the
Wannier transform for aperiodic solids having "finite local complexity". The
construction relies heavily upon the developments made in the eighties by the
PI, using the tools of Noncommutative Geometry. It also uses the developments
made in the nineties by a small community of younger mathematicians, including
the PI, to describe precisely tilings with finite local complexity. This
proposal intends to go beyond the Wannier transform to give a tool to predict
the nature of the electronic spectrum, hopefully leading to numerical codes that
will enable to compute the properties of specific materials.
