
* 1160939
* Variational Methods and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2012,06/27/2014
* Andrzej Swiech,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 213,000.00

This project focuses on problems in the calculus of variations and partial
differential equations. A theory, now called direct methods of the calculus of
variations, was developed by Charles Morrey in the middle of the last century
wherein he introduced various fundamental concepts of convexity. This theory has
wide application to many fields, including John Ball's groundbreaking work in
elasticity theory. Recently, John Ball published a list of outstanding problems
in the calculus of variations whose solutions will not only advance that field
but will also have major impacts in elasticity theory. In recent work, the
principal investigator has started to develop tools to handle specific concrete
problems from that list. This will, he hopes, lead to general theories. The
project will extend this study to include important classes of variational
problems that have defied existing theory, such as the stored energy functional
of Ogden material, which appears in elasticity. Another class of problems to be
studied arises in mass transportation theory. It was first formulated by Monge
in 1771 as a simple geometry problem and later extended by Kantorovich to more
general cost functions. It consists in finding the optimal (minimal work) method
for transporting a pile of earth at one location to an excavation site at
another location. These classical results have been extended to more general
cost functions by the principal investigator, his students, postdocs,
collaborators and many others, with special attention to the Wasserstein (or
Kantorovich) metric. Building on these results, the project will investigate so-
called axi-symmetric flows, which preliminary computations indicate are
Hamiltonian systems on the Wasserstein space. The principal investigator has
established a link between the study of these flows and a poorly understood
(challenging) class of parameter-dependent Monge-Ampere equations. He will study
the existence of paths satisfying a certain basic stability criterion and
connecting two prescribed symplectic forms. These problems, interesting in their
own right, include searching for geodesics in the set of symplectic forms.

Tproject will have a number of important scientific and educational components.
First, the theoretical advances will directly aid other scientific research
areas, including meteorology, elasticity theory, and other applied sciences,
that use variational methods in their algorithms. Second, the principal
investigator will continue to disseminate the research by giving courses and
lectures in international conferences, workshops, and seminars. Finally, in
addition to continuing to mentor undergraduates and Ph.D. students at his home
institution, he will extend his active support of underrepresented groups in
mathematics, in part by mentoring students and faculty at Spelman College, a
local HBCU. Current projects involve Spelman's Professor Yewande Olubummo, who
together with the principal investigator plans to develop tools for use in the
study of shape recognition.
