
* 1161498
* Hessian equations with geometric applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2012,03/26/2012
* Micah Warren,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2014
* USD 160,000.00

This project continues the principal investigator's study of interactions
between differential geometry and nonlinear partial differential equations. In
particular, it will investigate regularity for certain classes of Hessian
equations, including fourth-order elliptic equations, and also volume-minimizing
Lagrangian submanifolds of Euclidean space, Calabi-Yau manifolds, and certain
pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. Many questions on second-order special Lagrangian
equations, including existence and regularity, have witnessed great progress
over the last five years. In this project, the principal investigator intends to
study the fourth-order generalization of this equation, which may be even more
relevant to physics. Nonlinear fourth-order partial differential equations
represent a young and exciting field, and any progress may be adaptable to other
equations and even other physical sciences. Recent and ongoing developments in
the theory of optimal transportation show that the structure of the optimal
transportation map is related to the geometry of certain maximal calibrated
submanifolds of a pseudo-Riemannian space. A goal of the project is to apply the
machinery of calibrated manifolds (such as special Lagrangian) to obtain novel
results in optimal transport, thereby developing a nice geometric picture.

This project involves research into two exciting areas of mathematics, which
appear to be linked together under the surface. The optimal transport problem
asks the question of how to transport materials most cost efficiently between
two locations. The answers are directly applicable in many areas of science,
including economics, medical imaging, fluid mechanics, and meteorology.
Development of a strong mathematical theory that emphasizes the crucial elements
allows those in industry to implement solutions based on the theory. For
example, someone working in logistics may want to know the cheapest way to ship
certain goods. Solving the problem by brute force may not be computationally
possible, but if a good mathematical theory is available, the solution can be
computed efficiently. Another proposed use of optimal transportation is to
create software that assists surgeons in real time. In order for this to happen,
a solid theory is necessary. String theory is an exciting developing branch of
physics, which many hope will lead to an understanding of the fundamental
interactions of the universe. In the late 1990s, leading mathematical physicists
asserted that in order to get a better understanding of string theory, we should
try to understand objects called Lagrangian submanifolds. These objects are like
minimal surfaces that have special properties and are governed by nonlinear
equations. This project attempts to answer questions such as when these surfaces
are smooth, when they are flat, and when they are discontinuous. The answers to
these questions will impact the study of physics going forward. Recently, the
principal investigator and his collaborators have related the problem of finding
the optimal transportation map to the problem of describing a certain type of
Lagrangian minimal surface. The smoothness of minimal surfaces has been
intensely studied by mathematicians for decades. This project would now like to
apply some of the ideas from geometry to the theory of optimal transport.
