
* 1161580
* New Perspectives in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations Modeling Collective Quantum Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2012,05/05/2014
* Christof Sparber,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 153,000.00

This project is devoted to the analysis of nonlinear partial differential
equations arising in the mathematical description of collective quantum
dynamics, with applications to, e.g., Bose-Einstein condensates. The
mathematical equations under consideration will mostly be dispersive, and hence
conservative, but several non-conservative (or dissipative) extensions will also
be studied. By doing so, connections between equations of nonlinear Schrödinger
type and complex Ginzburg-Landau type models will become apparent. In the
present project the PI will: (1) study the influence of fast rotating
potentials, experimentally used to create quantum vortices, on the possibility
of finite time blow-up, and establish connections to recently found singular
ring type solutions; (2) give a time-dependent description of vortex creation by
means of adiabatic perturbation theory; (3) establish rigorous connections
between nonlinear Schrödinger equations and other dispersive models; (4) explore
the possibility of dispersive blow-up for the considered equations; (5) analyze
the long-time behavior of solutions to Schrödinger type equations with
additional nonlinear damping terms and other dissipative regularizations. The
techniques to be deployed will range from numerical simulations over formal
analytical methods to fully rigorous mathematical investigations based on, e.g.,
virial estimates, multi-scale techniques, Lyapunov-type functionals, and
concentration compactness methods.

This project aims to find a rigorous mathematical description of certain
collective phenomena in many-body quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is one of
the two fundamental building blocks in modern physics and it concerns the study
of mechanical systems whose dimensions are close to, or even smaller than, the
atomic scale. The mathematical formulation pioneered by E. Schrödinger, P.
Dirac, and J. von Neumann is to a large extent based on partial differential
equations for complex-valued wave functions, which describe the state of the
particles in a probabilistic interpretation. It is the solution of these
equations which can be seen as one of the main driving forces in the early
stages of the development of the theory. The present project lies at the
intersection between the mathematical analysis of such equations and their
application in theoretical physics. It will help gain a deeper mathematical
understanding of the qualitative behavior of the different classes of nonlinear
equations involved and their relations with each other. Answers to the questions
raised will have a strong impact as proven statements in a wide range of the
mathematical sciences, and can be seen as complimentary to the vast amount of
non-rigorous results available in the physics literature. Most of the proposed
research will be conducted through national and international collaborations
with colleagues working in mathematical analysis, theoretical physics, and
numerical simulations.
