
* 1161173
* Branching for representations of semisimple Lie groups and automorphic forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2012,05/15/2014
* Birgit Speh,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 183,645.00

This mathematics research project deals with the restriction of infinite
dimensional unitary representations of a semisimple Lie group G to a semisimple
subgroup H and applications to automorphic forms. The project also concerns the
restriction of the underlying Harish Chandra-modules and their globalizations.
The restrictions of unitary representations are not yet well understood and in
particular understanding the restriction of the HarishChandra-modules is still
in its infancy. So examples play a major role. Speh and her collaborators will
also study the restriction of the HarishChandra-modules of the rank one
orthogonal groups and to work out the restriction of complementary series
representations, which are of particular analytic interest. These restriction
problems have applications to automorphic forms and the cohomology of arithmetic
groups, which Speh will also investigate; in particular she is interested in
generalized modular symbols and period integrals defined by symmetric subgroups.

This mathematics research project in the area of group representation theory
deals in a fundamental way with the understanding of the symmetries of a space,
such as the symmetries of an atom or the rotations of a sphere. Symmetries have
important applications to several disciplines such as robotics and civil
engineering. In robotics, the symmetries of the ``configuration space" are
important and are limiting factors in the controllability of the arms of a
robot. The stability of the impressive domes over some large buildings, such as
sport stadiums, is due in part to the domes' symmetries. As part of this
project, Speh will organize an interdisciplinary conference that will bring
together senior and junior researchers from several disciplines.
