
* 1161752
* Problems in Time Frequency Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2012,04/14/2014
* Ciprian Demeter,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 214,483.00

This mathematics research project aims at answering questions in harmonic
analysis that are of great interest in modern analysis. First, Demeter proposes
to investigate the fundamental problem of whether the phase space translates of
various classes of functions are linearly independent. Together with his
collaborators, Demeter has recently introduced two new tool: One is the spectral
theory of random Schroedinger operators, the other one is the theory of
simultaneous Diophantine approximation. It is expected that further analysis
will reveal connections with various other fields of mathematics. Second, the
question of differentiability and boundedness of singular integrals along vector
fields has gained a huge momentum over the last five years. Building on his
recent work, Demeter proposes to use analytic and combinatorial methods to
investigate various Kakeya-like maximal operators, and to obtain optimal bounds
for the Hilbert transform along a given number of directions in the plane.
Demeter will also investigate the bilinear Fourier restrictions to domains with
curvature. Among other things, this involves extending known uniform estimates
for the bilinear Hilbert transform. This research project will employ a wide
variety of tools from diverse areas of mathematics such as harmonic analysis,
combinatorics, number theory, spectral theory and ergodic theory.

The publication of the work that is expected to arise from this mathematics
research project will enhance the mathematical community's understanding of the
important connections among various mathematics research areas, such as harmonic
analysis, number theory and ergodic theory. The resolution of the Heil-
Ramanathan-Topiwala conjecture could have a significant impact on various
sciences, such as signal processing, where Gabor and wavelet analysis play an
important role. This research project includes a human resources component
consisting of training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
