
* 1161607
* Analysis of black hole spacetimes
* DMS,Gravity Theory, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2012,04/08/2015
* Gustav Holzegel,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 161,071.00

The project concerns the study of the local and global behavior of solutions to
the Einstein equations of general relativity, a non-linear system of hyperbolic
partial differential equations at the intersection of analysis, geometry,
theoretical physics, cosmology and astrophysics. An outstanding problem is to
establish the non-linear stability of the Kerr family of black hole solutions,
and it is precisely here where the project intends to make a contribution. The
past ten years have seen tremendous progress in understanding the boundedness
and decay properties of (linear and non-linear) wave equations on black hole
backgrounds, a problem which is generally thought of as a primer to the full
non-linear stability problem, which would take the full tensorial structure and
quasi-linearity of the Einstein equations into account. Previous work of the
principal investigator has generalized some of these techniques available for
the wave equation to the setting of the Bianchi equations establishing in
particular a conditional result on the propagation of regularity and decay in
the setting of metrics converging to Schwarzschild. Future research is directed
towards generalizing the work to the Kerr setting, as well as to isolate and
study an appropriate linear problem for gravitational perturbations in this
context. This work will be carried out in collaboration with M. Dafermos and I.
Rodnianski. A second research direction is to continue the work on stability and
instability of asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes initiated by the
principal investigator and J. Smulevici in 2011. In particular, in collaboration
with J. Luk and J. Smulevici, the principal investigator plans to study the
conjectured non-linear instability of anti-de Sitter space within the model of
the spherically symmetric scalar field.

General relativity is the currently accepted theory of spacetime dynamics. While
the field equations were already written down by Einstein in 1915, the full
mathematical content of the theory is still far from being understood. One of
the most exciting predictions of the theory is the existence of so-called black
hole solutions of the field equations. Some of these can be written down
explicitly and one two-parameter family of solutions (the Kerr family) in
particular is conjectured to play a fundamental role as the final state of any
vacuum gravitational collapse. While there is now sufficient astrophysical
evidence that black holes indeed exist in the observable universe,the simple
mathematical question of stability of these solutions is unknown. The difficulty
of this problem roots in the strong non-linearities in the Einstein equations
and their tensorial structure. In this way studying the Einstein equations in
the context of black hole stability has broader impact for the entire field of
non-linear partial differential equations (a mathematical technique to
understand non-linearities may generalize to other equations) and geometry, as
well as astrophysical observations.
