
* 1201295
* Descriptive set theory and its relations with functional and harmonic analysis
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2012,03/04/2014
* Christian Rosendal,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2016
* USD 317,552.00

The PI intends to conduct research on the structure of Polish groups and
applications of Descriptive Set Theory and Ramsey theory in Functional and
Harmonic Analysis. Recently, a number of techniques originating in abstract
harmonic analysis have been adopted to the setting of non-locally compact Polish
groups, thus providing a rich tool set for furthering the understanding of the
topological groups arising internally in descriptive set theory and the model
theory of countable first-order structures. The PI is engaged is studying
various aspect of these tools, both applying the resulting structure theory of
Polish groups to problems in functional analysis, as witnessed in his recent
collaboration with V. Ferenczi on the existence of optimal norms on Banach
spaces, and calibrating properties of countable first-order structures M with
topological properties of their automorphism group Aut(M). In addition, the PI
is studying the block Ramsey theory originating in the work of W.T. Gowers,
which has led to significant results in the geometric theory of Banach spaces,
in particular, a classification program for separable Banach spaces based on
infinite-dimensional Ramsey theory. As has become clearer recently, the
underlying Ramsey theoretical results are best understood in terms of infinite
games of perfect information with very strong winning strategies and to which
usual determinacy does not immediately apply.

The research described in the proposal is largely inter-disciplinary,
connecting a variety of fields from mathematical logic to functional and
harmonic analysis. The PI aims to further the continuous integration of
descriptive set theory with other branches of mathematics and thus provide new
venues for a field traditionally having benefited enormously from deep work in
purer areas of set theory. In part through the PI's work, eventually, these
results will hopefully trickle down to applications to rather tame problems in
analysis, i.e., not a priori involving set theory or logic.
