
* 1201875
* Geometric Mapping Theory in Sub-Riemannian and Metric Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Jeremy Tyson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 183,001.00

The PI will study mappings in and between sub-Riemannian spaces and more general
metric spaces. A recurring theme is the study of generic dimension distortion
properties of mappings. Several problems are posed concerning precise,
quantitative statements of the frequency with which given Hausdorff dimension
bounds hold relative to a specified parameter space: such frequency is measured
with respect to measures on the parameter space (in many cases, these
parameterizing measures are themselves Hausdorff measures). The preceding themes
will be developed in two contexts: (i) metric space-valued Sobolev mappings, and
(ii) linear and nonlinear projection-type mappings defined on the Heisenberg
group and other Carnot groups. Another theme covered by the proposed research
program concerns new aspects of the analytic theory of quasiconformal and
quasiregular mappings on the Heisenberg group. This includes both novel
constructions of such mappings as well as emerging connections to partial
differential equations and sub-Riemannian exterior differential calculus as
formulated by Rumin. Additional topics included in the proposal include density
of Lipschitz mappings in spaces of Heisenberg group-valued Sobolev mappings, and
Hausdorff measure negligibility of highly characteristic points on submanifolds
in sub-Riemannian Carnot groups.

This research program lies at the intersection of geometry and analysis.
Geometry is the study of the structure of space, both the familiar Euclidean
spaces of classical antiquity as well as more recent, exotic spaces. Analysis is
the study of change and motion: its origins lie in the theory of differential
and integral calculus developed by Newton and Leibniz in the 17th century,
clarified and rigorously formulated by Cauchy, Weierstrass, Riemann and others
in the second half of the 19th century, and finally extended to its modern form
in the 20th century in work of Lebesgue, Hilbert, Hardy and (later) Sobolev. The
two subjects interact extensively: geometric structure both influences and is
influenced by the dynamic, analytic behavior of mappings between spaces. Sobolev
spaces provide a framework for quantifying the analytic properties of `non-
smooth' functions and mappings. They are a foundational tool in modern
approaches to partial differential equations. Understanding analysis on such
spaces is important for several reasons. First, such understanding provides new
perspectives on the classical theory, highlighting relevant and necessary
features of the underlying geometry. At the same time, this abstract approach
has a greater range of applicability. Techniques and results from analysis on
metric spaces have found application in the study of metric graphs and networks,
fractals and other geometric environments such as sub-Riemannian spaces. Sub-
Riemannian geometries arise in `external' applications to mathematical models of
control theory, robotic path planning and neurobiology, as well as `internal'
applications to other branches of pure mathematics such as several complex
variables, symplectic and contact geometry and geometric group theory. One
aspect of the proposed research involving sub-Riemannian mapping theory relates
to mathematical models in impedance tomography and image reconstruction.
