
* 1201357
* RUI: INSTABILITY OF DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2012,12/27/2013
* Marian Gidea,IL,Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 12/31/2015
* USD 137,998.00

Mathematical models that describe the physical reality often exhibit erratic
behavior, and include small noise accounting for external perturbations. A
fundamental problem is to understand the long term behavior of such systems. The
origins of this problem go back to one of the oldest questions in dynamics- "Is
the Solar System stable?"-which remains largely unsolved to this day.
Instability turns out to be a rather typical regime. A conjecture formulated by
V.I. Arnold in 1964 asserts that even simple mechanical systems, modeled as
integrable Hamiltonian systems, start to exhibit chaotic and unstable behaviors
when they become subjected to small, external perturbations. Despite recent
progress in the understanding of this problem, a comprehensive chart of the
routes yielding instability and chaos is far from completion. Most current
approaches apply only to perturbations of special types, and of very small
sizes. This limitation makes it difficult to analyze realistic models. The
objective of this project is to develop new methods to analyze the effects of
realistic perturbations on integrable Hamiltonian systems. The proposed research
considers general types of perturbations, which are not necessarily of an
extremely small size, and aims to formulate rigorous results that can be applied
to concrete models. Particularly, the conditions considered on these systems are
explicit and verifiable, rather than of generic type. The approach intends to
expand and innovate techniques from differential, algebraic, low dimensional,
and symplectic topology. This machinery will be used in tandem with methods
based on normal hyperbolicity, perturbation theory, KAM and Aubry-Mather
theories, pseudo-holomorphic curves, and random dynamics.

A significant strength of the proposed approach is its applicability to
practical situations. This research yields recipes to increase the energy of
physical systems with small forcing, with potential applications to particle
accelerators, plasma confinement devices, chemical reactions, astrodynamics, and
dynamical astronomy. The results from the proposed investigation on instability
in the three-body problem can be applied to design fuel efficient trajectories
for spacecrafts to explore the Solar System, or to change the orbits of
satellites in specific fashions. As an example, one of the methods discussed in
this research has been used to design the trajectory of the current NASA's GRAIL
mission to the Moon, which begun on January 1st, 2012. The study of random
perturbations of deterministic systems proposed in this project plays a key role
in modeling of climate change. In addition, this project will pro-actively
engage students, including members of underrepresented groups, in educational
and research activities, and will contribute to the professional growth of K-12
educators.
