
* 1201474
* Three problems in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,05/24/2016
* Po Lam Yung,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 96,208.00

In this mathematics research project, the focus is on three different problems
in harmonic analysis. The first one is on a divergence-curl type estimate on a
large class of non-abelian homogeneous Lie groups that includes the Heisenberg
group as the simplest, nontrivial model. The second one is about the
construction of a certain class of pseudodifferential operators that are adapted
to two different flags; these operators will then be used to study the solution
operators of certain partial differential equations that arise naturally in the
study of several complex variables. The third problem is about a class of
nonlinear wave equations whose elliptic parts exhibit conformal invariance, and
we bring in elements from conformal geometry in studying these wave equations.
These problems present interesting challenges from the analytical point of view.

Broadly speaking, harmonic analysis studies functions or signals by decomposing
them into different frequencies. Its applications are abundant, ranging from
signal processing and tomography to problems arising from physics such as
relativity and quantum mechanics. Yung and his collaborators will investigate
some deep and fundamental questions in harmonic analysis, along with its
connections to other areas of mathematics such as several complex variables and
conformal geometry. In particular, in one of the proposed projects, a study of
how certain nonlinear waves propagate through space will be carried out. The
research will be in collaboration both with faculties that are experts in the
field, as well as some young researchers who are just starting their research
careers.
