
* 1201426
* Free boundary problems for capillary surfaces and other nonlinear evolution PDE
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2012,05/09/2014
* Antoine Mellet,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 228,000.00

This project includes three directions of research. The first concerns the study
of some partial differential equations that arise in the modeling of the motion
of liquid droplets on a solid support (e.g., a water drop sliding down an
inclined plane). This part of the research focuses on two particular equations:
the thin film equation and the quasi-static approximation. The main feature of
both of these models is the presence of a moving contact line (the boundary of
the contact region between the drop and the solid support) whose motion is not
known a priori. These models are thus examples of "free boundary problems,"
whose mathematical analysis is very challenging. The research focuses on the
questions of existence of solutions, their regularity, and their long-time
behavior (especially their convergence to traveling-wave-type solutions). The
second direction of research concerns certain nonlocal, third-order parabolic
equations that arise, in particular, in the modeling of hydraulic fractures.
These equations are reminiscent of the thin film equation, but involve nonlocal
singular integral operators (such as the half-Laplacian). The project aims at
developing a full existence and regularity theory for such equations. Though
parts of the theory developed over the years for the thin film equation seem to
adapt readily to this equation, there are important differences due to the
nonlocal character of the operator. As a consequence, the existence of solutions
is not presently known in many physically important cases. The last direction of
research concerns the study of anomalous diffusion phenomena. This is part of a
broad program initiated by the principal investigator to study anomalous
diffusion regimes arising as limits of kinetic-type models. He intends to push
this program to study anomalous heat conduction in chains of anharmonic
oscillators. In such chains, heat is transported by vibrations that can be
modeled as a gas of phonons, whose evolution is modeled by the Boltzmann phonon
equation. By studying asymptotic regimes for this equation, the principal
investigator seeks to derive a nonlinear anomalous Fourier law for heat
conduction.

Accurately modeling the motion of liquid droplets is an important problem in
fluid mechanics with many applications in engineering. The physical phenomena
are extremely complex (the motion of the fluid inside the droplet and its
behavior at the edge of the droplet both involve very complicated equations),
and many simplified models have been proposed. This project focuses on the
mathematical analysis of some of those models with the aim of better
understanding their fundamental properties. Ultimately, the goal is to compare
these properties with experiments to validate (or invalidate) the various
models. Another aspect of the project involves equations that arise in the
modeling of hydraulic fracture. (Hydraulic fracturing, or "fracking," consists
in propagating rock fractures by the injection of fluids with very high
pressure. It is involved, for instance, in the extraction of shale gas.) The
project addresses some fundamental questions concerning these equations, such as
the existence and regularity of solutions. This is important, since without a
proper mathematical theory it is very difficult to develop accurate and
trustworthy numerical methods. The project will thus lead to a better
understanding of the properties of these widely used models and provide a
framework for developing accurate computer-based numerical simulations. Finally,
this research program includes the training and mentoring of students. Indeed,
this proposal offers many opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students to work on accessible research projects with physically relevant
applications.
