
* 1201443
* New Challenges in Nonlinear PDEs.
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2012,06/04/2014
* Andrea Nahmod,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This project deals with research at the interface of harmonic analysis,
nonlinear partial differential equations, geometry, and probability. On the one
hand, it is concerned with the study of dispersive nonlinear wave phenomena from
a nondeterministic viewpoint. In the last two decades enormous progress has been
made in settling questions on existence of solutions to dispersive equations,
their long-time behavior, and singularity formation. The thrust of this body of
work has focused primarily on deterministic aspects of wave phenomena, where
sophisticated tools from nonlinear Fourier analysis, geometry, and analytic
number theory have played crucial roles. Yet there remain some fundamental
obstacles. A natural approach to overcome them is to consider evolution
equations from a nondeterministic point of view and to incorporate into the
analysis tools from probability. Some of the issues to be investigated in this
project are the role of randomization in the well-posedness theory, the almost
sure (in the sense of probability) global-in-time existence of solutions, the
existence and dynamical properties of associated Gibbs measures, and the
behavior of statistical ensembles under gauge transformations. On the other
hand, the principal investigator will study the existence and long-time dynamics
of special types of solutions to certain hyperbolic (or nonelliptic) nonlinear
Schrodinger equations and systems. The aim is to develop a rigorous mathematical
analysis of models arising in connection with the theory of vortex filaments,
ferromagnetism, and current work in nonlinear optics (e.g., examining the
evolution of optical pulses in normally dispersive optical media), models that
have attracted the attention of the physics community.

Wave phenomena in physics such as light, sound, and gravity are mathematically
modeled using partial differential equations. Nonlinear wave models arise in
quantum mechanics, ferromagnetism, vibrating systems, semiconductors, and
optical fibers. Dispersive equations model important wave propagation phenomena
in nature. Their solutions are waves that spread out in space as time evolves
while conserving energy or mass. The best known dispersive equations are the
nonlinear Schrodinger equations that govern the motion of quantum particles
(e.g., electrons), the macroscopic dynamics of the Bose-Einstein condensate, and
signals in fiber optics. This project focuses on the rigorous mathematical
analysis of dispersive equations that arise naturally in physics and
engineering. The synergy of Fourier analysis, probability, geometry, and
analytic number theory provides a well-adapted and powerful toolbox to study the
nonlinear effects that allow waves to interact and produce new, modified
propagation patterns. The problems that the principal investigator will study
are of particular interest in the study of long internal gravity waves in deep
stratified fluids, the theory of vortex filaments and aerodynamics, and in
current work on nonlinear fiber optics that is of fundamental importance in
today's telecommunication systems and internet traffic. The ubiquitous role of
mathematics is to lay the foundations through rigorous research for the best
predictions, based on which the technological advances and engineering
applications we enjoy every day, can be efficiently enabled. The training of
students and junior researchers is an integral part of the project.
