
* 1201328
* Topics in Nonlinear Functional Differential Equations and the Computation of Hausdorff Dimension
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2012,06/05/2014
* Roger Nussbaum,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2017
* USD 153,000.00

This project proposes research concerning (a) the computation of the Hausdorff
dimension of the invariant set for conformal, graph-directed iterated function
systems, (b) Floquet multipliers for nonautonomous, linear functional
differential equations and (c) smoothness questions (infinite differentiability
versus real analyticity) for solutions of functional differential equations.
Topic (a) is only loosely connected with topics (b) and (c); but a unifying
theme in the study of all topics has been the use of the theory of positive
operators and of generalizations of the Krein-Rutman theorem. For example, to an
iterated function system as in (a), one associates a family of positive linear
operators parametrized by positive real real numbers; and one proves that each
such positive linear operator has a strictly positive eigenvector with a
corresponding eigenvalue equal to the operator's spectral radius. The desired
Hausdorff dimension is the unique value of the parameter for which the spectral
radius of the operator equals one, and finding the Hausdorff dimension is
facilitated by knowledge about the regularity of the eigenvectors. In studying
topic (c) one finds examples of linear, nonautonomous functional differential
equations which naively appear to be real analytic. Nevertheless, such equations
may have infinitely differentiable periodic solutions which fail to be real
analytic at an uncountable set of points. The theory of positive operators is
helpful in constructing such examples.

Many real-world problems are best modeled by equations which take history into
account, so-called "functional differential equations" (FDE's) or "differential-
delay equations." Thus red blood cell production in the human body at a given
time involves knowledge of red blood cell levels six to ten days before and has
been modeled by FDE's. Modeling the pupil light reflex in the human eye again
involves FDE's. Many other examples can be found, not only in biology and
physiology, but also in population dynamics, mechanical engineering (mechanical
vibrations), nonlinear optics (lasers with opto-electronic feedback), economics
and physics ( the famous and little-understood two body problem of
electrodynamics). It is likely that advances in the theoretical understanding of
FDE's will eventually have real-world applications. The search for such
theoretical advances is a major focus of this proposal.
