
* 1260516
* Discrepancy Theory and Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,09/11/2012
* Dmitriy Bilyk,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 91,559.00

Discrepancy theory studies various forms of the following question: How well can
uniform distribution be approximated by a discrete set? This project is devoted
to exploring fundamental problems and conjectures of discrepancy theory through
the prism of harmonic and functional analysis. The strategic goals of the
project are two-fold: to infuse discrepancy theory with new methods stemming
from analysis, as well as to enrich the field of analysis with new problems and
ideas. The program includes a wide range of problems and topics: understanding
the precise behavior of the irregularity of distributions in various function
spaces, producing new constructions of various low-discrepancy sets,
investigating the correlation between discrepancy estimates and geometry, as
well as numerous connections of the field to other areas of mathematics, such as
probability and approximation theory.

The ideas and questions of discrepancy theory are strongly interlaced with other
areas of mathematics: combinatorics, geometry, number theory, probability,
approximation theory. Moreover, this field is closely connected to computational
mathematics, namely, the methods of numerical integration, and thus, it has
direct applications in science, engineering, finance etc. The scientific output
of this project will expand and deepen the understanding of the underlying
phenomena of discrepancy theory and its relations to other branches of
mathematics, as well as yield important applications to science and technology.
The results will be broadly disseminated through publications in high-level
journals, presentations in conferences, seminars, and colloquia, active
collaborations with researchers around the world, a number of educational and
mentoring activities.
