
* 1262411
* Regularity and stability results in variational problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,06/06/2017
* Alessio Figalli,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 335,164.00

This mathematics research project by Alessio Figalli is focused on several
problems in the calculus of variations and partial differential equations. These
include the optimal transport problem, the issue of stability in functional
inequalities, and the Mumford-Shah functional. The optimal transport problem
consists of finding the least expensive way to transport a distribution of mass
from one place to another. In addition to being a natural problem in the
calculus of variations, it is also related to partial differential equations,
Riemannian geometry, and probability. The issue of stability in functional
inequalities consists of understanding whether a minimizer of some inequality is
stable in some suitable sense. This is an important issue in order to understand
and/or predict the evolution in time of a physical phenomenon. For instance,
quantitative stability results are used to quantify the rate of convergence of a
given physical system to its steady state, and they can also be used to
understand the extent to which the system changes under the influence of
external factors (for instance, external forces). The Mumford-Shah functional is
a classical model in image segmentation which is used to extract from a blurry
image the meaningful discontinuities (which correspond to edges of objects,
shadows, and overlapping objects). The regularity properties of minimizers of
the Mumford-Shah functional are still far from being understood, and
understanding the smoothness of the interfaces and their topological properties
is an important and challenging problem.

All the problems investigated in this mathematics research project by Alessio
Figalli have important applications in other areas of sciences. For instance,
the optimal transport problem is a fundamental problem in economics, with
further applications to meteorology, biology, and population dynamics; the
Mumford-Shah functional, which is studied in this project, has applications to
image processing (it allows to extract good images out of blurry ones). Some of
the problems in this project will be used in the training of undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Several of Figalli's PhD
students and postdoctoral fellows will engage in research in these areas, and
the results obtained will be widely disseminated via the publication of research
papers and lecture notes, as well as through the development of courses and
seminars.
