
* 1265875
* Asymptotic behavior for dispersive and hyperbolic PDEs
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2013,08/01/2013
* Fabio Giuseppe Pusateri,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 109,000.00

Abstract (Pusateri, 1265875)

The PI proposes to investigate the long-time behavior of solutions for some
classes of dispersive and hyperbolic PDEs. The proposed research revolves in
particular around three classes of problems. The first concerns the question of
stability of flat interfaces for the irrotational free boundary Euler equations
describing the motion of water waves. The second pertains to the study of the
asymptotic behavior for nonlinear systems of mixed hyperbolic/dispersive type,
such as the Maxwell-Schroedinger, Klein-Gordon-Zakharov, and Wave-Schroedinger
systems. The third is related to singular limits over long intervals of time for
point wise decaying solutions of some nonlinear hyperbolic PDEs. The PI's
general aim is to prove, under certain conditions, global existence of solutions
evolving from small Cauchy data. Furthermore, he aims to characterize the
behavior of solutions at infinity and, in particular, answer the question of
scattering, determining whether the global solutions constructed behave or not
like linear ones for large times. A central theme of the proposed research will
be the identification of the mechanisms determining at highest order the global
regularity of solutions and the stability of certain equilibria. The PI expects
some of the questions addressed to have highly non-trivial answers regarding the
qualitative behavior of solutions for large times.

The equations under consideration describe a variety of physical phenomena such
as fluid flows, quantum mechanics and plasma turbulence. Their relevance is
widely recognized and supported by numerical and experimental evidence.
Understanding the quantitative and qualitative properties of solutions, and
their behavior over long periods of time, would be of importance for several
research areas in the theoretical and applied sciences. For example, proving
global-in-time stability of water waves models will improve our understanding of
the motion of waves, such as those generated offshore on the surface of the deep
ocean. It would also be relevant to numerical investigations and experiments
aiming to understand how rogue waves are generated from apparently calm waters.
Establishing mathematically rigorous stability results in some specific regimes
would rule out some of their possible causes. Furthermore, proving that certain
specific nonlinear asymptotic behaviors can occur in some of the equations
considered, would reveal deeper connections with other fundamental models such
as the nonlinear Schroedinger equation, which is ubiquitous in many branches of
mathematics, physics, and engineering. The PI believes that solving the proposed
problems would require substantial extensions of the current analytical methods,
which may result in significant technical improvements of interest for the
mathematics community at large. Finally, beyond pursuing his own projects, the
PI will also be actively engaged in the dissemination of his research and will
strongly promote collaborations among different groups within the international
PDE community and researchers in related areas.
