
* 1265549
* Collaborative Research: Universality Phenomena and Some Hard Problems of Non-homogeneous Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Alexander Volberg,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

This collaborative mathematics research project by Fedor Nazarov, Serguei Treil
and Alexander Volberg is in the area of harmonic analysis. Nazarov, Treil and
Volberg will concentrate their efforts on several well-known hard problems in
non-homogeneous harmonic analysis, geometric measure theory, and spectral
theory. The common theme among majority of the problems is the so-called
"universality" phenomenon, i.e. the fact that in many situations the boundedness
of one operator (or a small collection of operators) implies that a much wider
class of operators is bounded as well. Most of the problems lie in the realm of
the non-homogeneous harmonic analysis, where underlying sets and measures are
highly irregular. Singular integral operators with respect to singular measures
and very irregular sets appear naturally in many problems of analysis. One of
the motivations for the one-weight non-homogeneous case was the study of
analytic capacity. The more sophisticated two-weight estimates of singular
operators appear naturally in spectral theory and in the perturbation theory of
self-adjoint operators. These problems are notoriously difficult, but using new
techniques recently developed by Nazarov, Treil and Volberg and other
researchers, they expect to make fundamental progress in the problems.

This collaborative mathematics research project by Nazarov, Treil and Volberg is
focused in the field of harmonic analysis, which is known to have fundamental
applications to other disciplines, most notably to the analysis of large data
sets, to image processing, and to the study of wave propagation. The results and
mathematical tools that will be developed through this project could also have a
bearing on other areas of mathematics, such as mathematical physics, partial
differential equations, probability. The project will provide a good training
ground for graduate students as well as for mathematicians at the beginning of
their careers. Nazarov, Treil and Volberg anticipate an active involvement of
their graduate students and postdocs in the project.
