
* 1265538
* Analysis of extremal black holes
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2013,06/18/2015
* Stefanos Aretakis,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 148,000.00

This project concerns the investigation of two of the most outstanding
conjectures in general relativity, namely the uniqueness and stability of the
Kerr family of black holes, by concentrating on the special class of extremal
black holes. Recent contributions of the PI showed that waves exhibit
instability properties along the event horizon originating from a novel
hierarchy of conservation laws. Moreover, extremal black holes exhibit very
strong trapping which is coupled with the above conservation laws and also the
phenomenon of superradiance (i.e. the extraction of energy from the black hole).
Satisfactory techniques have been developed to overcome the problem of trapping
in the non-extremal case; however, in view of the aforementioned geometric
couplings, these methods break down in the extremal case. The PI expects that
this project will develop the necessary tools and techniques to provide a
rigorous and definitive understanding of evolution equations on such spacetimes.
In particular, the PI intends to continue the rigorous study of linear and
nonlinear waves and investigate the distribution of quasinormal modes on such
backgrounds. The PI will also work on the global existence and breakdown
criteria for quasilinear equations on extremal Kerr hoping to gain insights for
the ultimate goal of this proposal, namely the fully non-linear stability and
instability and uniqueness problem for extremal black holes.



General relativity is the classical theory that describes the evolution of
physical systems under the effect of gravity. One of the most celebrated
predictions of the theory is the existence of so-called black hole regions, i.e.
regions from where light cannot escape to infinity. Not only have these regions
captured the imagination of scientists, but have also found profound
applications to astronomy, physics, and mathematics. A particularly important
class of black holes consists of the so-called extremal black holes, that is
black holes with zero temperature. The latter are central objects of study in
the high-energy physics community. The PI has initiated a rigorous mathematical
study of evolution equations on such spacetimes and interesting and surprising
results have emerged. Specifically, a novel instability has been discovered on
the event horizon of extremal black holes bearing a wide range of potential
applications regarding the mathematics and physics of black holes. Specialists
in high-energy physics and numerical relativity are further researching the
applications of this instability in other contexts. The PI expects that this
project will unravel the complex interaction between the analysis, geometry and
physics of extremal black holes. Moreover, the PI intends to start new
collaborations which will lead to exchange of knowledge and also increase
interactions with members of the physics, numerical relativity and astrophysics
community. The PI plans to teach seminars at various places aiming at
introducing students and researchers to the very rich mathematical structure of
general relativity.
