
* 1265548
* Topics in Degenerate and Singular Parabolic Equations and Homogenization
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2013,07/06/2015
* Emmanuele DiBenedetto,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 190,943.00

Diffusion processes are regulated by their diffusivity, which is a "gauge" of
how fast the diffusion takes place. These phenomena include heat transfer,
expansion of gases, flow of fluids, Newtonian or not, in either homogeneous or
composite media, Brownian motions, movement of molecules in cells, etc. In all
of them the diffusivity changes as function of the diffusing quantity itself
(temperature, gas or fluid density, etc.) and/or its spacial gradient. If the
diffusion coefficient becomes zero at some point, the diffusion stops and the
phenomenon is degenerate at that point. If it becomes unbounded, the diffusion
is infinitely fast, and the phenomenon is singular at that point. The evolution
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) modeling these phenomena, seldom can be
solved explicitly, and exhibit a mathematical behavior, which is not well
understood. The project aims at exploring the local and global behavior of
solutions of these classes of PDEs. Issues of continuity, differentiability,
sudden vanishing and generation of singularities are investigated by means of
measure theoretical techniques, and Harnack-type inequalities. The central idea
is that these diffusion processes, evolve with their own intrinsic parabolic
geometry, that incorporates the evolving "gauge" of its diffusion.
Homogenization in PDEs is an essential tool in understanding the local behavior
of composite materials with periodic structures, such as alloys. Several
diffusion phenomena in biology occur in periodically structured domains
exhibiting multiple scales. An example is the diffusion of the second messengers
Calcium and cyclic Guanosine Mono Phosphate (cGMP), in rods and cones in the
retina of vertebrates. Both rods and cones exhibit a thickly layered structure,
where the layers are folded membranes. Homogenized limits will be computed for
the diffusion of the second messengers in cones. The analytical difficulty is
that the domain becomes disconnected as the thickness of the layers/folds goes
to zero. The homogenized limit permits one to compute pointwise, the
concentration of the second messengers Calcium and cGMP. These in turn control,
locally, at the boundary of the folds, the current generated by photons of light
entering a cone.

While this investigation is theoretical in nature, the Partial Differential
Equationss considered, originate from physical models such as immiscible fluids
(water-oil), non Newtonian flows (thick fluids), phase transition (water-ice-
gas), heat transfer (burning of thermal shields), and some issue in mathematical
biology (motion of molecules on the surface of living cells). As such they are
interdisciplinary, involving mathematicians, physicists engineers, and
biologists. These investigations will contribute to a deeper understanding of
the underlying physical and/or biological phenomena. The project aims also at
introducing new theoretical/mathematical tools because of the non standard
nature of these degenerate/singular diffusion phenomena. Particles move, by
diffusion, on the surface of living cells to effect specific functions. For
example a receptor, captures a signal from outside a cell and transmit it to its
interior to begin a biochemical process. The space-time location and the speed
of diffusion of a receptor affect the intensity of the signal and its
transduction inside the cell. In the homogenization of cones, the second
messengers Calcium and cGMP are the transducers of the outside signal (photons
of light) to regulate the current generated by ionic channels on the surface of
the folds. Alteration of these diffusion processes, causes improper functioning
of the visual signaling cascade, leading to pathologies (for example age-related
macula degeneration). Cones are very fragile and hard to experiment with,
calling for mathematical modeling of their behavior.
