
* 1265958
* Inverse Boundary Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,06/09/2017
* Gunther Uhlmann,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 880,000.00

This project will address the mathematical theory of several fundamental inverse
problems arising in many areas of science and technology, including medical
imaging, geophysics, and nondestructive testing. Four major topics of research
are proposed. The first is travel-time tomography in anisotropic media. In
mathematical terms this involves the determination of a Riemannian metric
(anisotropic sound speed) in the interior of a domain from the lengths of
geodesics joining points of the boundary (travel times) and from other kinematic
information. The second topic is electric impedance tomography (EIT), also
called Calderon's problem. In this inverse method one attempts to determine the
conductivity of a medium by making voltage and current measurements at its
boundary. The third topic focuses on coupled-physics or hybrid inverse problems.
In this type of inverse problem one attempts to determine the internal
properties of a medium by combining two types of waves through a physical
principle; namely, one wave that has high resolution (e.g., ultrasound) and
another that provides high contrast. Examples are photoacoustic tomography
(PAT), thermoacoustic tomography (TAT), and transient elastography (TE). The
fourth topic is on invisibility and cloaking: how to make objects invisible to
different types of waves.

In inverse boundary problems one attempts to determine the internal properties
of a medium by making measurements at the boundary of the medium. In other
words, can one "see" what is inside by making measurements on the outside? An
example is a CT scan, a commonly used medical imaging technique. One measures
the response of the body to X-rays and makes an image of what is inside from
this information. The project will investigate new proposed medical imaging
techniques, such as photoacoustic tomography. This combines the high resolution
of one imaging method with the high contrast capabilities of another. One
important medical imaging application is breast cancer detection. Ultrasound
provides a high (sub-millimeter) resolution, but suffers from low contrast. On
the other hand, many tumors absorb much more energy from electromagnetic waves
than do healthy cells. Photoacoustic tomography consists of sending relatively
harmless optical radiation into tissues. This causes heating (with increases of
the temperature in the millikelvin range), which results in the generation of
propagating ultrasound waves (the photo-acoustic effect). Another area that the
project will explore is to image the Earth's interior by measuring the time that
it takes for seismic waves to traverse it. In this way one attempts a journey
through the center of the Earth with the help of information provided by
earthquakes. A final major topic of research in the project is the study of
cloaking and invisibility. Can one make objects invisible to light, sound, and
other types of waves?
