
* 1265579
* On phase transitions and fluid flows
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2013,08/01/2013
* Gieri Simonett,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

Abstract (Simonett, 1265579)

The PI will continue studying free boundary problems in phase transitions and
fluid flows in the presence of surface tension. In particular, the PI plans to
study (1) phase transitions in two-phase viscous fluid flows with variable
surface tension and surface viscosity, (2) phase transitions in two-phase
viscous fluid flows with kinetic undercooling, and (3) phase transitions driven
by chemical potentials. Additional topics to be investigated are (4) evaporation
in the presence of surface tension, and (5) stability and instability of
solidifying processes in phase transitions. The dynamics of two-phase flows and
the motion of their separating interfaces has been a problem of scientific and
industrial interest for centuries. In the absence of phase transitions, which
means that the interface is advected with the flow, this problem is fairly well
understood. However, if phase transitions are present, the resulting models are
fundamentally more complex, as they involve the equations of fluid dynamics in
conjunction with those of phase transitions. The results anticipated will on the
one hand clarify the existence and uniqueness of solutions, and on the other
establish qualitative and asymptotic properties of these solutions. The PI
proposes a mathematical approach that is general and flexible, and that will
open up the treatment of many more problems.

Over the last decades the subject of free boundary problems has attracted
increasing attention, both because of its theoretical interest and because of
its numerous applications in the natural and engineering sciences. Typically, a
free boundary problem consists of one or more partial differential equations
that have to be solved in a domain that is a priori unknown and that has to be
determined as part of the problem. Free boundary problems are in general harder
to solve, both analytically and numerically, than the underlying differential
equations would be in a prescribed domain. They have an inherent nonlinear
structure, as two separate solutions cannot be superposed. It is not surprising,
then, that the variety of applications and the inherent difficulties of solving
free boundary problems have initiated a variety of theoretical methods, and in
many cases have determined the direction of the development of these methods.
Free boundary problems are important in many fields, such as material sciences,
fluid mechanics, hydrodynamics, thermo-mechanics, magneto-dynamics, solid-state
physics, plasma physics, geology, chemistry, and the biological and medical
sciences. Many manufacturing processes in industry lead to free boundary
problems, such as electrochemical machining, viscous sintering, the growth of
crystals, injection molding processes, etching processes, solidification
processes, casting processes, and chemical vapor deposition processes, to
mention a few. The appropriate numerical and analytical treatment is a major
challenge, both to the engineer and to the mathematician. The proposed work will
have an impact for those real-world problems and applications where surface
tension cannot be neglected.
