
* 1266383
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2013,07/06/2015
* Panagiotis Souganidis,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,000.00

The modeling of multi-scale phenomena necessitates the use of random media
(periodicity is a rather restrictive structure for many applications) and
requires the study of averaged (mesoscopic and macroscopic) behaviors. For
complex phenomena, it is also very often the case that most of the available
information is ``statistical'' (random) and not ``exact'' (deterministic).
Furthermore incorporating the fluctuations of several physical quantities leads
to equationsmwith ``singular'' (white noise type) and ``random'' dependence on
some of the variables. In this context, random homogenization and stochastic
partial differential equation become the natural mathematical objects. From the
mathematical point of view, the randomness is associated with singular
dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness both giving rise to
challenging mathematical problems. Overcoming them requires the development of
new methods and techniques. In biology, experiments at the molecular scale as
well as new theories have led to new sophisticated mathematical models. Novel
tools and ideas are needed to study these problems further and to identify all
the relevant regimes/scales of the parameters affecting the experimentally
observed and theoretically conjectured behavior. The PI proposes to continue his
program to develop methods to study nonlinear deterministic and stochastic
partial differential equation arising in continuum and statistical physics,
biology, engineering, etc.. The emphasis is on the development of theories for
(i) the homogenization of nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic partial
differential equation in spatio-temporal random media and applications to mean
field games and front propagation and (ii) weak (stochastic viscosity) solutions
of fully nonlinear, (degenerate) parabolic stochastic partial differential
equation, and (iii) the analysis of models for adaptive dynamics in mathematical
biology.

The development of mathematical tools to study complex phenomena in multi-scale
environments, especially when very often the only available information/data are
statistical (random), is of the out most importance. Nonlinear, first- and
second-order, stochastic partial differential equation and stochastic
homogenization arise in models for a wide variety of phenomena and applications
including mean field games, turbulence, phase transitions and front propagation
in random media, nucleations in physics, macroscopic limits of particle systems,
stochastic control theory, stochastic control with partial observations,
financial mathematics, etc.. The theory of stochastic viscosity solutions is
important. It allows for the study of a completely new class of fully nonlinear
stochastic partial differential equation. As the subject develops further, it is
expected that it will play a crucial role in applied areas by providing the
necessary tools to analyze previously intractable models. There has been a
resurgence in interest in homogenization in random media. The novel tools and
methods that have already been and are proposed to be developed are expected to
become the standard methodology in the field. In mathematical biology, the
proposed work is expected to enhance the understanding of concrete phenomena in
adaptive dynamics. All the proposed areas of work are current, important and
very active. The PI, who currently has four graduate students (two female) and
two postdocs (one female) plans to continue his educational and training
activities aiming towards the development of high quality researchers working in
problems in the proposed areas as well as nonlinear partial differential
equation in general.
