
* 1300157
* Pluripotential Theory and Applications to Complex Geometry and Number Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Dan Coman,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 183,908.00

This mathematics research project by Dan Coman addresses problems from
pluripotential theory, some of which arise naturally or have important
applications in complex geometry or in transcendental number theory. A unifying
theme is that the proposed problems focus on plurisubharmonic functions and
positive closed currents as objects of investigation or some of the tools to be
employed. One direction of research deals with quantization problems on complex
manifolds. Given a singular Hermitian holomorphic line bundle on the manifold,
there are natural Hilbert spaces of square-integrable holomorphic sections
defined using the metric data. Coman, will study the convergence of the sequence
of Fubini-Study currents of these Hilbert spaces and the asymptotic distribution
of simultaneous zeros of random holomorphic sections of the high tensor powers
of the line bundle. Coman will also consider these problems in the more general
case of line bundles over complex spaces. This has applications in statistical
physics (quantum chaos), as well as in number theory (quantum unique ergodicity
for modular forms). A second direction of research will study problems in
pluripotential theory on compact complex manifolds, where there are new
interesting phenomena, different from the local setting. The main goals are the
study of the complex Monge-Ampere operator, the corresponding Green functions
and their singularities, and the problem of extension and regularization of
(quasi) plurisubharmonic functions on analytic subvarieties of the ambient
manifold. A third direction of research deals with problems from pluripotential
theory in the complex Euclidean space. The questions to be considered involve
geometric properties of positive closed currents and their approximation by
analytic varieties, and the behavior of polynomials along transcendental
analytic varieties. It is expected that the latter will continue to have
applications to transcendental number theory, such as to the study of the
algebraic independence of values of entire functions.

This mathematics research project is in the areas of complex analysis and
potential theory; these subjects are central areas of mathematics, providing
powerful tools for solving important problems from other fields of pure and
applied mathematics (e.g., image and signal processing) and physics (e.g.,
quantum mechanics; statistical physics). Making progress on the research
problems in this project will contribute to the advancement of knowledge and
understanding in these fields. The project investigates the development and
applications of new techniques from complex analysis and potential theory to
problems in important areas such as mathematical physics, complex and algebraic
geometry, number theory. Thanks to the powerful methods of complex analysis, it
has been often the case that progress is made by formulating concrete problems
at first in the context of complex numbers. The project will impact the
development of human resources through summer funding of two graduate students
who will work for their dissertation under the investigator's supervision on
topics related to this project. In this way the project effectively integrates
research and education.
