
* 1300867
* Problems on the geometric function theory in several complex variables and complex geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2013,04/03/2013
* Yuan Yuan,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2013
* USD 41,690.00

This mathematics research project by Yuan Yuan concerns a number of problems in
several complex variables and complex differential geometry, consisting of the
rigidity and classification of holomorphic structures, canonical metrics in
Kahler geometry, and complex Monge-Ampere equations. These are fundamental
problems closely related to many other fields in mathematics and physics, such
as, algebraic geometry, mathematical physics, number theory, partial
differential equations. In particular, Yuan will study the uniqueness of complex
structure on Hermitian symmetric spaces and mapping rigidity between bounded
symmetric domains; and the deep relation between the (finite and infinite time)
limit behavior of the (parabolic) complex Monge-Ampere equations and canonical
Kahler metrics as well as the formation of singularities on Kahler manifolds.

The mathematics field of complex analysis took center stage starting with the
nineteenth century, when its applications became crucial to other sciences and
engineering, including electronic engineering and mechanic engineering. Over the
years, this trend has continued and in fact has been taken to the next level:
the geometric spaces studied in this mathematics research project by Yuan Yuan
can serve as the most basic models in cosmology and general relativity.
Clarifying the geometric structure of these models is extremely important in
understanding the physical laws that relate to them and can help further our
understanding of the shape of the universe. In addition to this work, Yuan will
continue to participate in, and organize seminars and workshops for
undergraduate and graduate students and young researchers. Yuan will also mentor
undergraduate and graduate students, and in this way the project will
effectively integrate research and education.
