
* 1301693
* Cocycles over hyperbolic and partially hyperbolic systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,04/04/2013
* Victoria Sadovskaya,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 102,501.00

Cocycles play an important role in classical dynamics as well as in the theory
of group actions. The main part of the proposed research is the study of
cocycles over hyperbolic and partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms. In this
context important examples of linear cocycles are given by the differential of
the diffeomorphism and by its restrictions to invariant sub-bundles of the
tangent bundle. If the bundle is trivial the linear cocycle can be viewed as a
cocycle with values in a matrix group. The PI will also study cocycles with
values in other groups, including infinite dimensional ones. The PI plans to
work on various problems in cohomology of cocycles. The questions in this area
are motivated in part by problems in smooth dynamics and rigidity of hyperbolic
and partially hyperbolic systems and group actions. The PI intends to use her
recent results as well as the projected outcomes to further the research in
these areas.

Dynamics is the area of mathematics that studies evolution of a system over time
with an emphasis on describing its long term behavior. The systems under
consideration come from mathematics, physics, and other sciences. Hyperbolic and
partially hyperbolic systems have been one of the main objects of study in
differentiable dynamics. Exponential contraction and expansion in these systems
produce chaotic behavior, and understanding the complex structure of the system
is an important goal. The derivative plays a crucial role in analysing these
systems, and it gives an example of a cocycle over the system. Cocycles also
appear naturally in linearized equations that relate two systems and thus are
useful in the study of stability, rigidity, and classification of hyperbolic
systems.
