
* 1301706
* Conference on Recent Mathematical Advances in Classical, Quantum and Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 12/01/2012,11/20/2012
* Abdelmalek Abdesselam,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 11/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The conference "Recent Mathematical Advances in Classical, Quantum and
Statistical Mechanics" will be held at the University of Virginia on March 8-9,
2013. The goal of the conference is to present a survey of some of the major
recent results in the area of mathematical analysis which studies the evolution
of physical systems with large or infinite number of degrees of freedom in a
variety of settings while emphasizing ideas and techniques which are common to
these settings. The subject of this conference is one of the most active in
contemporary mathematical physics. The conference will bring together leading
world-experts in such topics as KAM theory for partial differential equations,
rearrangement inequalities in functional analysis, Anderson localization, the
study of polaron systems and the non-equilibrium statistical mechanics of
coupled anharmonic oscillators. The conference will provide a venue for the
dissemination or recent results and methods in the area and will foster further
advances in these important topics. A strong component of this conference is
educational and aimed at disseminating recent advances in classical, quantum and
statistical mechanics. Emphasis will be placed on encouraging interactions
between senior and junior researchers. Special efforts will be made to invite
and support graduate students, postdocs, as well as mathematicians from
underrepresented groups.

The study of the evolution of systems with infinite number of degrees of freedom
is ubiquitous in modern science. In the situation pertaining to classical
mechanics, a typical example is that of the evolution of a fluid where a degree
of freedom essentially corresponds to the velocity of the fluid at some point in
space. Since there are infinitely many such points one is looking at a complex
system with infinitely many degrees of freedom in interaction. These give rise
to nonlinear partial differential equations which feature in a huge number of
applications such as the models used for weather prediction. In the quantum
case, examples of such systems are the polaron systems which describe the motion
of particles in an ionic crystal (structures similar to that of ordinary salt).
Another example studied under the name of Anderson localization has to do with
the motion of a quantum particle in interaction with a random medium. The latter
is supposed to model, e.g., the impurities in a semiconductor. Finally, a third
regime where systems with infinitely many degrees of freedom are the subject of
very active study is that of statistical mechanics, in particular in the non
equilibrium situation. An example of mathematical challenge in the area is to
understand the conduction of heat or electricity, not in an ad hoc
phenomenological description, but rather through a derivation from first
principles: the basic laws of classical or quantum mechanics at the microscopic
level.
