
* 1301558
* Sobolev Mappings and Energy-Integrals in Mathematical Models of Nonlinear Elasticity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,06/09/2017
* Tadeusz Iwaniec,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 380,000.00

The proposal continues a long term research program of the PI to advance
variational techniques in Geometric Function Theory with applied disciplines in
mind. It provides an in-depth analysis of the concept of energy-minimal
deformations between Euclidean domains (predominantly, traction free problems in
dimension two). The ambition is to gain insights into the many new phenomena
encountered in the Calculus of Variations, Minimal Surfaces, Nonlinear
Elasticity, Material Science, and so forth. Historical example would be the
celebrated mathematical structure -Teichmüller spaces, where one seeks to
minimize the supremum norm of the distortion function. Other examples could be
cited. We shall minimize the integral mean distortion instead. The existence and
uniqueness of the mappings slipping along the boundary (traction free) with
smallest mean distortion takes the challenge to a whole new level. The project
continues the efforts of the PI to bring graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars to Geometric Analysis with a wide range of applications, and to help
them to mature meaningful interaction with physicists and engineers already in
their post-doc phase. This is also a key to motivate young gifted students at
school or college to enter mathematics. The program provides such an environment
through educational materials (book in progress), Summer/Winter mini-courses,
junior-senior seminars. PI has a history of an engaging research climate and
strong international interaction on these efforts. He anticipates that the
presence of applied fields in the proposal will improve the job opportunities
for the PhD students and his numerous co-advisees.
