
* 1301619
* Harmonic Analysis and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2013,06/09/2017
* Jean Bourgain,NJ,Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 336,000.00

This mathematics research project by Jean Bourgain is focused on harmonic
analysis problems related to spectral theory. A first line of research has to do
with the behavior of eigenfunctions of compact manifolds at high energy, with
focus on the "simplest model" of the flat tori. In this setting, the
eigenfunctions are explicit but nevertheless many of their properties remain
conjectural. Bourgain intends to explore further the various moment inequalities
which these eigenfunctions are supposed to obey and which are essential to
issues in the theory of Schrodinger operators for instance, in particular to
control theory. There is by now a large array of methods involved. In low
dimension, number theory plays a key role. Input from elliptic curve theory (in
2D), distributional properties of lattice points on spheres and Siegel's mass
formula led to new insights that deserve further study. In high dimension,
recent progress came jointly with breakthroughs in the theory of oscillatory
integral operators. The challenge is to establish uniform estimates on higher
moments of the normalized eigenfunctions and some of Bourgain's recent work
comes tentatively close to this. The interaction with other fields makes this
research particularly stimulating. Spectral theory in Lie groups offers a
different problematic and panorama of conjectures. Bourgain will continue
research on spectral gaps, one of the central themes with many applications to
number theory, mathematical physics and theoretical computer science.

This mathematics research project by Jean Bourgan is in the area of harmonic
analysis with a focus on the notion of "spectral gap": such notion is known to
have broad inter-disciplinary significance, ranging from pure mathematics to
computer science, evolutionary biology and solid state physics. One can cite its
relevance to the theory of tilings and quasi-crystals, quantum computation,
error correcting codes, transport in inhomogeneous media, to mention a few. Much
of Bourgain's past work with various collaborators has to do with elaborating a
general framework enabling to prove the existence of spectral gaps. Bourgain
will also investigate wave interactions; this problem lies at the heart of the
study of solutions of many differential equations from physics and engineering.
These solutions are roughly speaking obtained by superposition of elementary
harmonics which collective effect obey deep mathematical principles. In many
important examples, for instance in the theory of Schrodinger operators, this
theory is still far from completely established. Bourgain will focus on some of
the main conjectures on the behavior of eigenstates at high energy and the
related aspects. Striking advances came from other mathematical areas, such as
dynamics and number theory, offering new perspective that deserve further
exploration. While the advances are undeniable and several conjectural phenomena
can now be justified, there remain many challenges in known and less known
territory which Bourgain will investigate through this project.
