
* 1301582
* Spectral Theory for Decaying Oscillatory Schrodinger Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,04/11/2013
* Milivoje Lukic,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 122,597.00

This project investigates spectral properties of Schrödinger operators and
orthogonal polynomials, especially in the regime of slowly decaying
perturbations, which are less understood than fast decaying and non-decaying
perturbations. One of the topics is the study of oscillatory decaying
perturbations, whose spectral properties show strong interplay between the
frequencies of oscillation and the rate of decay. This project will seek to
describe, among other things, spectral properties for very slow decay and the
asymptotic behavior of the spectral density at critical points. The proposer
also intends to study potentials which obey bounded variation conditions,
investigating an emerging theme that conditions on derivatives of the potential
can have the same spectral consequence as conditions on the potential itself.
This includes the study of higher order Szegõ theorems and higher order Baxter
theorems. Finally, the project includes some problems involving oscillatory,
non-decaying potentials and decaying multi-dimensional Schrödinger operators.

Schrödinger operators are central to quantum mechanics and their spectral
properties are connected to transport properties of electrons in a given
potential. Slowly decaying potentials show a mix of features of fast decaying
potentials, such as those describing the field of a single particle, and
oscillatory potentials, such as those corresponding to a crystal or
quasicrystal. This project is expected to bridge the gap between those two
regimes and have a potential impact in physics. Orthogonal polynomials are used
in approximation theory and many fields of science; for instance, a recent
development establishes them as a tool in the study of quantum walks, a topic in
quantum computing. Graduate students participate in some of the research in this
project, and this contributes to their education.
