
* 1301641
* Phenomena in random Schrodinger operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2013,06/09/2017
* Abel Klein,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 782,997.00

Random Schrödinger operators describe an electron moving in a medium with random
impurities. In the widely accepted picture, in three or more dimensions there
exists a transition from an insulator region, characterized by localized states,
to a very different metallic region, characterized by extended states, while in
one or two dimensions there are only localized states. This proposal aims to
further the mathematical understanding of this picture and of related topics.
Arguably the most important open question is the existence of delocalization in
three or more dimensions. Since localization has only been proved by a
multiscale analysis (or by the fractional moment method, if applicable), in
practice the region of localization is the spectral region where the multiscale
analysis can be performed. We propose to make progress on delocalization by
proving the existence of a spectral region where the multiscale analysis breaks
down, i.e., some consequence of the multiscale analysis is violated, and by
showing delocalization properties (e.g., transport) in this region. We will
continue our study of the ac-conductivity in linear response theory for the
Anderson model to obtain insight on localization and delocalization. We will
investigate the continuity of the density of states for Schrödinger operators in
four or more dimensions, and for Schrödinger operators with a magnetic field in
two or more dimensions. We will extend the bootstrap multiscale analysis to the
multi-particle continuous Anderson Hamiltonian, an interacting multi-particle
random Schrödinger operator, obtaining Anderson localization with finite
multiplicity of eigenvalues, dynamical localization, decay of eigenfunction
correlations, etc. We will also investigate localization for multi-particle
continuous Anderson Hamiltonians with no assumptions on the single site
probability distribution except for compact support, allowing for Bernoulli and
other singular single site probability distributions. We will investigate
localization for the (discrete) Anderson model in two or more dimensions when
the single-site potential is a Bernoulli random variable, a longstanding open
problem.

Random Schrödinger operators describe an electron moving in a medium with random
impurities. In the presence of impurities, a material that normally acts like a
metal (i.e., it conducts electric current) will exhibit localization and behave
like an insulator for electric currents. The impurities create a metal-insulator
transition with important practical consequences. This research will contribute
to the understanding of electronic phenomena in condensed matter physics, such
as Anderson localization and the quantum Hall effect. Some of the topics of
research are suitable for PhD theses, and will be used for the training of
future researchers.
