
* 1301282
* Mappings in Several Complex Variables and CR geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2013,06/27/2019
* Peter Ebenfelt,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,000.00

The goal of this mathematics research project by Peter Ebenfelt is to study
geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of generic real submanifolds in
complex varieties (more generally, of CR structures) and their mappings.
Ebenfelt will consider questions regarding existence, uniqueness, and regularity
of CR maps, as well as related questions that arise in connection with this
study. Ebenfelt will consider CR maps of a Levi nondegenerate hypersurface into
a nondegenerate hyperquadric of higher dimension. This study will enhance our
understanding of the CR submanifold structure of the hyperquadrics, which
themselves constitute the flat models in the theory of Levi nondegenerate
hypersurfaces. The work should also provide insight into how the local CR
geometry of such hypersurfaces (in principle completely encoded in the CR
curvature tensor) affects properties, such as e.g. various notions of
nondegeneracy and rigidity, of their CR maps. There are highly interesting and
nontrivial problems even in the special case where both the source and target
manifolds are hyperquadrics (e.g. the Gap Conjecture). Ebenfelt will continue
his study of CR maps between generic submanifolds of infinite (commutator) type
by investigating the prolongation of the system defining CR maps to a singular
Pfaffian system on the jet bundle. The PI will, in particular, focus on a
conjecture in this context regarding finite jet determination of local
automorphisms. The study is expected to shed new light on the nature of CR maps
between infinite type manifolds, and lead to a better understanding of the
Pfaffian systems arising in this context. Ebenfelt will continue his work on
normal forms for infinite type hypersurfaces in complex 2-space.; results in
this direction will yield results on the finite jet determination problem and,
possibly, on the problem of convergence of formal mappings in this context.
Ebenfelt will also study CR maps between more general CR manifolds: one topic of
interest is that of transversality, and he will try to improve recent
transversality results (joint with with Duong and Baouendi--Rothschild) for CR
maps into a higher dimensional space. Current conditions for transversality in
this context involve eigenvalues of the Levi form. Ebenfelt believes that
"deeper" invariants of the CR structures are actually involved, as in the
equidimensional case. This study will likely require development of
substantially new methods, which in turn will benefit the theory of CR maps into
higher dimensional spaces.

The study of real submanifolds in complex manifolds is central to complex
analysis and to other areas of mathematics and physics. In this mathematics
research project, tools from a wide range of areas such as real and complex
analysis, partial differential equations, and algebraic geometry are used and
further developed. The investigations carried out in this project will benefit
research in adjacent areas of mathematics as well as in areas of theoretical
physics. The methods and techniques developed will be useful in other areas of
mathematics, and likely also in physics (e.g., string theory) and engineering
(e.g., control theory; systems engineering). Ebenfelt expects that the project
will provide interesting research topics for graduate students and postdocs. The
seminar activity that results from the project should be stimulating for both
students and other researchers.
