
* 1302929
* Moduli spaces of complex dynamical systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Laura DeMarco,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 186,594.00

Polynomials and rational functions of a single variable provide basic examples
of non-invertible dynamical systems. Even the simplest families of examples
exhibit complicated dynamical behavior; the most famous is the family of complex
quadratic polynomials, where the Mandelbrot set continues to baffle researchers.
The primary goal of this project is to explore the dynamical moduli spaces of
polynomials and rational functions. The projects proposed (both the questions
and the proposed solution strategies) combine ingredients from complex analysis
and arithmetic or algebraic geometry. In one direction, the PI aims to study the
distribution of postcritically-finite rational maps within the moduli space. In
joint work with Matthew Baker, the PI has formulated a dynamical analogue to the
Andre-Oort conjecture in arithmetic geometry. Questions of this type are not
only analogies: for example, the PI aims to use dynamical techniques to recover
a result by Masser and Zannier about torsion points in families of elliptic
curves. The main tools are recent developments in analysis and dynamics on a
Berkovich analyticspace. In a slightly different direction, the PI is studying
bifurcation sets and bifurcation measures in distinguished subvarieties within
the moduli space. Here the techniques are predominantly analytic. New questions
have stemmed from experimental work, using the new computer program Dynamics
Explorer developed by Boyd & Boyd. The PI is also interested in classical
problems about the existence and classification of symmetries of rational
functions.

In the last five or ten years, "algebraic dynamics" has become an extremely
active area of research; the questions have become more refined as senior
researchers enter the subject with very different backgrounds and we uncover
connections to many areas of mathematics. Roughly speaking, algebraic dynamics
is the study of dynamical systems that preserve an underlying
algebraicstructure. Such systems arise naturally in applications (for example,
the one-dimensional logistic family is algebraic), and they play a role in the
analysis of arithmetic objects studied by number theorists (for example, in
defining height functions associated to arithmetic varieties). The PI is
actively involved in the exchange of mathematical ideas between number theorists
and dynamicists. On one hand, her questions are about the fundamental stability
of dynamical systems: under what conditions is a system insensitive to small
perturbations? On the other hand, the special class of dynamical systems she
studies exhibits a rich algebraic structure, bringing dynamical features into a
long history of arithmetic geometry. Finally, the project has an experimental
component that works very well with students and junior researchers; the PI is
actively involved in research projects and training programs for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers.
