
* 1302666
* Multivariable Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2013,07/23/2013
* Raul Curto,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 193,614.00

This research deals with multivariable operator theory, focusing attention on
three areas: (i) algebraic conditions for existence, uniqueness, and
localization of the support of representing measures for truncated moment
problems (TMP); (ii) operator theory over Reinhardt domains, with special
emphasis on spectral and structural properties of multivariable weighted shifts;
and (iii) multivariable techniques in the study of block Toeplitz operators.
Concerning the first area, the plan is to extend recent work on flat extensions
of positive moment matrices and extremal moment problems (joint with L. Fialkow,
H.M. MÃ¶ller and S. Yoo), which has led to a general framework for the study of
TMP. The principal investigator and his collaborators will develop new methods
and techniques, and apply them to the case of cubic column relations associated
with finite algebraic varieties, and to TMPs with recursively determinate moment
matrices. The second area deals with multiplication operators on functional
Hilbert spaces over Reinhardt domains. This part of the project will extend the
study of the spectral picture of subnormal 2-variable weighted shifts to
hyponormal ones, by applying previous results (joint with S.H. Lee and J. Yoon)
and by employing the groupoid techniques developed in the principal
investigator's work with P. Muhly and K. Yan. The third area deals with a
multivariable approach to subnormality of Hilbert space operators, with special
emphasis on scalar and block Toeplitz operators. The approach is to characterize
2-hyponormality, then k-hyponormality, and eventually subnormality. The
principal investigator will develop further the ideas in his previous work with
I.B. Jung, S.H. Lee, W.Y. Lee, S.S. Park, and M. Putinar. As a testing ground,
he will search for a model theory for 2-hyponormal operators, a topic that leads
to useful connections with J. Agler's abstract model theory. Using function-
theoretic and multivariable operator theory techniques, the principal
investigator has recently proved a version of Abrahamse's theorem for block
Toeplitz operators (jointly with I.S. Hwang and W.Y. Lee). He will seek a more
general version of this theorem, and the solution of a related subnormal
Toeplitz completion problem.

Many problems in physics, mathematics, and engineering can be best described by
representing complex physical entities as large arrays of numbers and
mathematical symbols, called matrices. Matrices help us visualize how linear
transformations act on vector spaces; determining their structure reveals
important properties of the transformations. Hilbert space operators are
infinite-dimensional generalizations of matrices. The generalization of a vector
is often a function, and as a result, operators are frequently modeled as
multiplications on spaces of functions. Part of this project involves finding
such models for operators. Once the models are obtained, many basic structural
questions about the operators become natural. Beginning in the 1950s, the study
of subnormal operators has been highly successful, and its theory has made key
contributions to areas such as functional analysis, quantum mechanics, and
engineering. Similarly, the classes of scalar and block Toeplitz operators arise
in a variety of areas of mathematics and physics. A separate part of the
research deals with inverse problems that occur naturally in statistics,
spectral analysis, geophysics, image recognition, global positioning tools,
signal detection theory, and economics. The principal investigator's work on
truncated moment problems has been applied in optimization theory, real
algebraic geometry, numerical analysis, semidefinite programming, and sensor
network localization. The project aims to resolve some outstanding problems in
multivariable operator theory, at the same time creating recruitment and
retention opportunities for women and minorities to pursue careers in
mathematics and other STEM fields. Several questions in this project are written
to generate research problems accessible to undergraduate and graduate students.
