
* 1304830
* A Comprehensive Program in Modern Dynamics with Emphasis on Rigidity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2013,06/29/2015
* Anatole Katok,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2016
* USD 260,000.00

The Proposed program aims at advancing of several directions of research across
the principal areas of the modern structural theory of dynamical systems:
hyperbolic (mostly and non-uniform), partially hyperbolic, parabolic and
elliptic with a particular emphasis on various kinds of rigidity phenomena and
on applicability of several powerful methods across areas. New methods and
insights have been introduced by the PI and his collaborators over the past
years. The most recent advances allowed to obtain arithmetic structure almost
everywhere smooth in the sense of Whitney on a set of arbitrarily large measure
for a class of maximal rank actions (the rank of the acting group is one less
than the dimension of phase space) under a very general assumption of sufficient
complexity. A dichotomy was established: for such actions: either there is not
exponential complexity at all, or its measure ( a version of entropy) is
uniformly bounded from below by a constant that grows to infinity with
dimension. Directions in the proposed program include extension of the
arithmeticity program to broader classes of actions with the rank not related to
dimension, applications of measure rigidity to Zimmer program, further
development of the entropy theory and entropy rigidity for higher rank abelian
actions, completing the program of differentiable rigidity of partially
hyperbolic algebraic actions of higher rank abelian groups, the study of
rigidity phenomena for totally non- hyperbolic, unipotent actions that present a
striking contrast for the classical case, non-standard KAM-types invariant curve
theorem and further investigation of the smooth realization problem.

Dynamical systems serve as mathematical models of time evolution of various
process across the areas of natural and social sciences. It also has a
surprisingly broad range of applications within core mathematical disciplines,
most particularly to various areas of geometry and number theory. Within many of
these contexts the "time" is not necessarily the usual one-dimensional time but
it can be multi-dimensional or, of even more general nature that is described by
the key mathematical concept of group. There is a crucial difference between the
classical case of one-dimensional time and that of multi-dimensional time: while
in the former case various complexity and chaotic phenomena may appear gradually
and chaotic behavior can and usually does coexists with ordered one within the
same systems (e.g. ordered planetary motions vs. chaotic behavior of some
asteroids and smaller objects in the solar system), in the latter as was
established by the PI and his collaborators) complexity is often global and in
fact chaos appears in a highly structured way and with high albeit calculable
levels of complexity as measured by a proper version of the fundamental notion
of entropy.
