
* 1316534
* Partial hyperbolicity and rigidity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2012,12/20/2012
* Anne Wilkinson,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 172,488.00

This project is guided by the far-reaching goal of developing a general theory
of partially hyperbolic systems along the lines of the hyperbolic theory
developed over the past forty years. In particular, the principal investigator
will study the following topics: ergodic properties of conservative partially
hyperbolic diffeomorphisms; physical measures for (dissipative) partially
hyperbolic diffeomorphisms; rigidity phenomena connected to partially hyperbolic
group actions; and ergodicty of singular partially hyperbolic systems. These
research goals will be carried out through a variety of modalities, including
published papers in peer-reviewed journals, a collaborative book project,
supervising Ph.D. students, and speaking at conferences, including the upcoming
International Congress of Mathematicians in Hyderabad, India.

The principal investigator is a leading expert in the field of partially
hyperbolic dynamics. A dynamical system is a system (for example, a state space
for a physical process) that evolves over time according to a deterministic set
of rules. Well-studied classes of dynamical systems include the so-called
hyperbolic systems, which display chaotic, unpredictable features at every
point, and KAM systems, which have stable regions of regular motion. The
partially hyperbolic systems are a more general class of dynamical systems than
the hyperbolic class, and include systems that combine hyperbolicity in some
directions with KAM behavior in other directions. Partially hyperbolic systems
occur widely in dynamical systems that arise in physics. For example, planetary
motion usually contains partially hyperbolic subdynamics. The principal
investigator has had a well-developed research plan for over fifteen years to
study partially hyperbolic systems and is poised to raise the theory of these
systems to a new level of generality and applicability.
