
* 1344970
* RTG Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2014,07/09/2018
* Mario Bonk,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,000,000.00

The goal of this project is to increase the number of US citizens and permanent
residents who are able to employ advanced mathematical ideas for independent
research or applications in other fields. The major emphasis of the project will
be the education of graduate students who want to obtain a PhD in mathematics,
and the promotion of the careers of postdoctoral researchers who are affiliated
with the analysis group at the University of California, Los Angeles. A variety
of measures involving members of the analysis group is intended to attract
students on all levels to mathematics and possibly to the area of analysis. The
goal is to secure a "pipeline" of suitable candidates who want to learn advanced
mathematical concepts and help them to be successful with this quest. For
elementary, middle, and high school students these initiatives include the
cooperation with the Los Angeles Math Circle that has regular meetings on
Sundays and offers expository lectures, problem-solving sessions, and study
groups. For undergraduates there will be summer review sessions with a view
towards preparation for the GRE subject test in mathematics. Incoming graduate
students will benefit from the "Boot Camp", an intensive six-week long review
session on central topics in mathematics that is intended to facilitate the
transition between undergraduate and graduate training. These additional
activities will be "vertically integrated" to ensure interactions between
students and researchers on all levels with a twofold goal in mind: improving
the communication and presentation skills of the research trainees and raising
the awareness of students, in particular among underrepresented groups, for
mathematics as an interesting and exciting field of study.

Since the times of Leibniz and Newton, analysis has been one of the core
subjects of mathematics. It has led to many spectacular applications in science
and engineering. By now analytic tools are ubiquitous in all areas of
investigation based on quantitative reasoning. Many of the more prominent recent
advances within mathematics itself rely heavily on sophisticated analytic
methods. Examples are Perelman's solution of Thurston's geometrization
conjecture for 3-manifolds, the work by Lawler-Schramm-Werner on the stochastic
Loewner equation and its applications for random processes, or the
investigations by Tao-Vu on universality laws in random matrix theory. Today
analysis is a vibrant area of mathematical investigation with a wide range of
applications. The analysis group in the Department of Mathematics at UCLA
includes many distinguished researchers and has a high standing in comparative
rankings. Its members have a broad range of research interests including
operator algebras, partial differential equations, complex analysis, harmonic
analysis, mathematical physics, probability, and analytic number theory. In
addition to the strength of its researchers, the analysis group has a long and
successful history of training mathematicians. With the diversity of interests
within the group and its strong past record, it has the unique expertise to
impart a broad vision of the field to its students and to train the next
generation of experts in analysis.
