
* 1348092
* CAREER: Adiabatic theory for nonlinear Schrodinger equations with applications in complex quantum systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2014,05/21/2018
* Christof Sparber,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 431,991.00

The mathematical language of modern physics is to a large extent based on
partial differential equations (PDEs). These equations describe the variations
of certain physical observables, such as energy, momentum, etc. with respect to
more basic variables like space and time. A particularly important feature of
PDE-based descriptions is that problems with rather diverse scientific
backgrounds can often be described by mathematically similar equations. Many
insights about the underlying scientific problem can thus be gained by studying
the PDEs themselves using analytical and/or numerical techniques. The current
project studies a certain class of nonlinear partial differential equations that
arise in the description of collective phenomena in quantum mechanics. Quantum
mechanics is one of the two fundamental building blocks in modern physics (the
other one being Einstein's theory of general relativity) and it concerns the
study of mechanical systems whose dimensions are close to, or even smaller than,
the atomic scale. The mathematical formulation pioneered by Erwin Schrödinger,
Paul Dirac, and especially John von Neumann is to a large extent based on PDEs
for so-called wave functions, which describe the state of the quantum particles
in a probabilistic interpretation. It is not surprising that more than 100 years
after its discovery, quantum theory has reached a stage of enormous complexity.
Modern experimental techniques have made it possible to design, manipulate, and
closely monitor quantum mechanical systems involving thousands of particles
interacting with each other. In order to obtain a better understanding of these
highly complicated systems, it is necessary to clearly separate the slow and
fast degrees of freedom intrinsically present within such systems. The main
objective of the current project is to develop a mathematical theory which
allows to do so by means of several different analytical techniques. Its outcome
will be a much simpler mathematical description in which the fast degrees of
freedom have been taken into account through their total cummulative effects
only. The effective model equation thereby obtained becomes accessible for a
more detailed mathematical study and for accurate numerical simulations using
the current state of computing power. All of the equations studied arise as
important physical models in the description of various quantum mechanical
phenomena. Answers to the questions raised will therefore have a strong impact
as proven statements in a wide range of theoretical physics, as well as in the
analysis of PDEs. In addition, the PI proposes an integrated plan of educational
activities related to the proposed research: A series of mini-courses and
workshops for advanced graduate students and recent PhDs will be held. They will
bring together students with renowned specialists from different fields of
mathematics. Furthermore, the PI will organize and support a weekly student
seminar for graduate and strong undergraduate students interested in applied
analysis and related fields. Finally, the PI has proposed new graduate courses
on topics at the juncture of nonlinear dispersive equations, mathematical
physics and asymptotic analysis.

Separation of scales plays a fundamental role in the understanding of the
dynamical behavior of complex systems in physics and other natural sciences. By
identifying the slow and fast degrees of freedom, it is often possible to derive
simple laws for certain slow variables, which in turn serve as an approximate
description of the full multi-scale dynamics of the problem. A particular
example is the classical adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics, going back to
M. Born and V. Fock in 1928, which can be loosely stated as follows: A quantum
mechanical system subjected to slowly changing external conditions retains its
basic form (at least approximately). For quantum systems described by linear
Schrödinger equations there is a wealth of mathematical results which give a
rigorous meaning to this basic idea. The current project is devoted to the
development of a rigorous adiabatic theory for partial differential equations of
nonlinear Schrödinger type (and related models). The intellectual relevance of
the proposed research stems from the importance of nonlinear Schrödinger
equations as mean-field models of complex many-body quantum systems.
Applications can be found in the mathematical description of Bose-Einstein
condensates, quantum wave guides, and semiconductor graphene layers. All of
these applications are at the forefront of modern experimental and theoretical
physics. The mathematical theory to be developed will provide a qualitative
description of the solutions to the respective model equation in physically
relevant multi-scale regimes, and in addition establish deep connections to
other areas, such as semiclassical analysis, homogenization theory, and to the
study of dispersive equations on manifolds.
