
* 1361701
* Uniform Rectifiability and Elliptic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,04/18/2016
* Steven Hofmann,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

This project lies within the field of harmonic analysis and its application to,
and interaction with, geometric measure theory and the theory of elliptic
partial differential equations. Roughly speaking, in harmonic analysis one
investigates properties of functions and "operators" (i.e., mappings that
transform one function into another) by decomposing them into smaller,
constituent pieces, which are easier to understand, and then reassembling the
pieces. The name itself arose by analogy with the decomposition of a musical
sound into its various frequency components ("harmonics"). Geometric measure
theory involves the study of the relationship between geometric properties of
sets, and their "measures" (the latter are generalizations of the notions of
length, area, and volume). Partial differential equations and systems of
elliptic type describe a wide variety of phenoma in the real world, including
electrostatics, steady-state temperature distributions, and elastic
deformations. A particular focus of the present project is to explore further
the relationship between geometry and the behavior of solutions to these
differential equations that arise in the physical world.

The project has two main areas of focus. First, the principal investigator plans
to characterize quantitative rectifiability properties of a closed set E, of
codimension one in d-dimensional Euclidean space, in terms of the behavior of
harmonic functions (and of solutions of linear and quasi-linear elliptic
equations more generally) in the complement of E. In particular, a primary goal
of the proposal is to prove theorems of F. and M. Riesz type, and converses,
without imposing any connectivity assumptions on either the set E or its
complement. In the classical F. and M. Riesz Theorem, and its modern
descendants, one obtains existence of, and in some cases quantitative estimates
for, the Poisson kernel (i.e., the Radon-Nykodym derivative of harmonic measure
for a domain D, with respect to arclength or surface measure on the boundary of
D), as a consequence of rectifiability properties of the boundary. In the
presence of suitable connectivity hypotheses, say when the set E is the boundary
of a domain D enjoying an appropriate quantitative version of path
connectedness, the geometry of E can be characterized in terms of the behavior
of the Poisson kernel associated to D. On the other hand, a counterexample of
Bishop and Jones precludes such results in the absence of connectivity. Thus, to
prove theorems of F. and M. Riesz type without connectivity hypotheses will
entail finding estimates for solutions of elliptic equations, estimates that
serve as appropriate substitutes for Poisson kernel regularity. In the second
area of focus of this project, the principal investigator plans to continue to
investigate solvability of elliptic boundary value problems, in particular, the
Neumann problem, for divergence form, second-order elliptic equations with
"radially"-independent coefficients in the half-space, without assuming self-
adjointness of the coefficient matrix. Previous work of the principal
investigaor and his coauthors has treated the Dirichlet and regularity problems
in this setting.
