
* 1361720
* Extending Hilbert Space Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,08/08/2016
* Jim Agler,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

In classical Newtonian physics, the position and momentum of a body are assumed
to be simultaneously knowable at an instant in time. An early discovery of
modern physics was that this situation is very much different at the subatomic
level. For example, the famous Uncertainty Principle of Werner Heisenberg
asserts that it is impossible to measure simultaneously the position and
momentum of a quantum particle such as an electron orbiting the nucleus of an
atom. In 1926, von Neumann laid the precise mathematical foundation for what it
is that can actually be measured in the case of a subatomic particle. This
seminal breakthrough involved the use of "operators," linear transformations
acting on infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces. Operator theory, the branch of
modern mathematics that studies operators, has grown over the last eighty-eight
years to become a far-reaching area of research in mathematics that has had a
major impact on many areas of mathematics, physics, and engineering. This
project involves the development of new techniques within operator theory, as
well as the application of established techniques, to attack a number of
problems within mathematics. Though it is not the major focus of the project,
the research has many possible applications to both mathematical physics and
control theory.

A pillar of modern operator theory is the Sz.-Nagy Dilation Theorem, which
models a contraction acting on Hilbert space by extending it to a co-isometry
acting on a larger space. This theorem and its numerous refinements open the
door to studying analytic functions in one and several variables through the use
of operator-theoretic methods. The principal investigator will study a variety
of problems in several complex variables and other areas of analysis using these
operator-theoretic methods. In particular, he will use operator-theoretic
methods to study the following: interpolation problems of Nevanlinna-Pick and
Cartheodory-Fejer type; the boundary behavior of analytic functions defined on
polydiscs and polyhalfplanes; the derivation and descriptive theory of extremal
holomorphic mappings arising from the Caratheodory and Kobayashi extremal
problems; and the canonical derivation of representation formulas for analytic
functions in specific classes such as the Shur, Herglotz, Pick, Loewner,
Bessmertnii, and Stieljes classes. A related focus of the research is to apply
the commutative modeling methods to develop the theory of analytic functions in
several noncommuting variables.
