
* 1361432
* Microlocal analysis for waves and inverse problems
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,04/12/2016
* Andras Vasy,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The planned research develops and applies tools of the field of microlocal
analysis. Roughly speaking, this field keeps track of the position and
frequency, or momentum, of waves (or more generally, functions) simultaneously.
The planned applications are to wave propagation and other related phenomena, as
well as inverse problems for determining a function from integrals along curves
(X-ray transform) and related problems for determining the structure of a
material from boundary measurements. Although the proposal concerns their
mathematical theory, these problems are closely connected to the physical world.
Wave propagation is ubiquitous in nature, with electromagnetic waves, such as
light, being one of the most prevalent examples; the theory of general
relativity being another important physical example. Scattering theory of
quantum particles (such as protons and electrons) is another subject governed by
microlocal analysis: these aspects enter both into the description of quantum
waves at large distances, and into semiclassical phenomena, i.e. when Planck's
constant can be regarded as small, which happens often in chemistry. The inverse
problems under study are also of broad significance: an application of the
theory developed here is the determination of an unknown variable sound speed in
an object via the measurement of travel times of waves, which for instance is
relevant to imaging to interior of Earth using the travel times of earthquake
waves.

Some of the proposed projects describe the long-time or far field behavior of
waves on curved space-times. Physically these arise in general relativity,
including electromagnetic waves on a curved background. However, there are also
examples of purely mathematical origin, such as asymptotically complex
hyperbolic (ACH) space and asymptotically Anti de Sitter spaces (AdS); the
latter does have a different connection with physics via string theory. The
microlocal approach to analysis on these spaces has made breakthroughs possible
in the author's work on linear problems asymptotically (real) hyperbolic (AH)
spaces as well as Kerr-de Sitter space. The projects here aim to extend these
tools to the ACH, AdS-type spaces, improve the understanding of Lorentzian
scattering spaces (which include asymptotically Minkowski spaces), as well as to
quasilinear PDE. Other projects concern the behavior of waves at edges,
concretely the diffraction of the Rayleigh (surface) waves of elasticity and a
refined, second-microlocal, description of diffraction of scalar or
electromagnetic waves. Yet another main area is inverse problems, where the
author, together with Uhlmann, has introduced new tools for spatially localized
inversion of the geodesic X-ray transform. The projects aim to extend this to
tensors, and to investigate boundary rigidity, i.e. recovering a Riemannian
metric from its boundary distance function.
