
* 1362525
* On regularity and singularity of solutions of some nonlinear elliptic equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,10/28/2015
* Tianling Jin,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 123,000.00

This project concerns the analysis and applications of nonlinear partial
differential equations, with emphasis on integro-differential equations.
Integro-differential equations are equations which involve both integrals and
derivatives. They arise from models such as in diffusion with long range
interactions in physics, future options in mathematical finance, and population
dynamics in social science. They also appear intrinsically in geometry. One main
goal of the proposal is to study fine analysis of a particular family of
integro-differential equations, which will be applied to understand a number of
scientific phenomena in geometry and physics. Another main goal is to develop
general mathematical theories on integro-differential equations for their wide
usage in future. Other than its applications, the analysis itself for those
equations is of independent interest. It not only extends the current theories
of partial differential equations, but also gives new insights and creates new
methods of establishing them.

This proposal focuses on regularity and singularity of solutions of nonlinear
elliptic partial differential equations. The PI proposes to develop a unified
approach to study existence and compactness of solutions to a family of
prescribed fractional order curvature problems in conformal geometry. The
investigation of their singular solutions will not only develop further the
fractional singular Yamabe problem, but also lead naturally to boundary
reaction-diffusion equations which appear as models of dislocations in crystals
and soft thin films in micromagnetism. The study on regularity of fully
nonlinear integro-differential equations, which usually arise from stochastic
control problems with purely jump Levy process, will enrich the existing general
regularity theory. The proposed research on Monge-Ampere equations is motivated
by Monge-Ampere metrics on affine manifolds with singularities. Its goal is to
address the regularity and analyze the behavior of solutions of such equations
with singularities, and to understand their connections to differential
geometry.
