
* 1362507
* Dynamics of inviscid fluids and nonlinear waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2014,07/11/2016
* Chongchun Zeng,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 227,266.00

Partial differential equations are widely used to model various problems arising
from physics, engineering, biology, finance, etc. The aims of the efforts to
understand these mathematical models rigorously are twofold. On the one hand,
the physical relevance and the validity of these ideal models are established
through the comparison between the results from theoretical analysis and the
experimental observations. On the other hand, once the meaningfulness of a
mathematical model is supported by available experimental data to certain
extent, the theoretical studies on these ideal models can provide properties of
the original physical problems that are hard to be obtained through experiments.
For physical systems involving temporal evolution, of particular interests are
those structural and asymptotic properties. These include some special
structures, such as steady states, periodic and quasi-periodic orbits, chaotic
orbits etc, and their qualitative properties like stability etc. In general, on
the one hand, only stable states are physically observable in a system, while
the ideal, but unstable, states are hardly observed due to their extremely
sensitive dependence on the parameters. On the other hand, unstable states are
also very important, partly due to the fact that they and some of their
associated structures serve as the boundaries separating different collections
of stable states in a system. In this project, the PI plans to focus on the
local dynamics near steady states in several classical nonlinear partial
differential equation systems, which all belong to the general category of
nonlinear waves. The lack of a priori damping and the complicated nonlinearity
pose most of the challenges in their mathematical analysis.

More specifically, the PI proposes to study rigorously the local dynamics of the
following partial differential equation systems. The first one is the
incompressible Euler equation, which models non-viscous and incompressible
fluids like water. The proposed problems include fluids in rigid containers and
fluids with free surfaces like ocean waves. The second partial differential
equation in the proposal is the Vlasov-Poisson system that models the
collisionless plasma, which consists of particles with both velocity and
electrical charge. The third one is the quasi-linear waves equation. Even though
there have been extensive research on these systems and many important
progresses have been made in recent year, due to their very nonlinear nature,
many issues including some fundamental ones are still not well understood after
years of efforts. The PI plans to focus on their local dynamic structures near
equillibria, including stability/instability, local invariant manifolds, special
solutions and bifurcations. While these aspects are standard notions in the
theory of smooth dynamical systems, due to the highly nonlinear nature of these
partial differential equations, their solution maps often do not have sufficient
smoothness in phase spaces for the classical theory to apply directly. In
contrast to ordinary differential equations, the relationship between the
qualitative structures and the regularity analysis of these nonlinear partial
differential equations is an essential analytical aspect of nonlinear partial
differential equation dynamics. Solving and understanding these problems,
expected to be largely based on their specific mechanical and geometric
structures, would result in substantial theoretical advances in these areas and
possibly lead to the discovery of new physical and mathematical phenomena in the
corresponding systems.
