
* 1362772
* K-theory of Operator Algebras and Its Applications to Geometry and Topology
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,03/02/2016
* Guoliang Yu,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 332,074.00

In classical geometry, one studies geometric objects whose coordinates commute.
Noncommutative geometry is a mathematical theory specifically designed to handle
"geometric objects" whose coordinates do not commute but which do occur
naturally in mathematics and physics. In the last decade or so, with the help of
new ideas from noncommutative geometry, there have been a series of advances
towards the solutions of long-standing problems in classical geometry and
topology. Higher index theory serves as a bridge between noncommutative geometry
and classical geometry and topology. The principal investigator and his students
plan to apply noncommutative geometry methods to study problems in differential
geometry and topology.

The K-groups of certain operator algebras are receptacles of higher indices of
elliptic differential operators and have important applications to problems in
differential geometry and in the topology of manifolds. Examples of such
applications include estimation of the size of the moduli space of all
Riemannian metrics with positive scalar curvature and questions concerning the
rigidity or nonrigidity of a manifold. The principal investigator intends to
apply the techniques of controlled operator K-theory, dynamic complexity, and
finite embeddability into Banach spaces to study K-theory of operator algebras
and higher index theory. He also intends to apply noncommutative geometry
methods to study analysis on infinite-dimensional spaces (e.g., loop spaces of
manifolds).
