
* 1362420
* RUI: Statistical Properties of Nonequilibrium and Extended Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2014,06/11/2014
* Mark Demers,CT,Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 168,500.00

The research funded by this grant will focus in large part on the study of
mathematical models of particle systems with collision interactions that are
central to the field of statistical mechanics, and in particular to our
understanding of chaotic dynamical systems. Such systems play an important role
in the study of non-equilibrium dynamics, which model, for example, the motion
of particles subjected to external forces or nonelastic collisions. Other
examples of non-equilbrium dynamics include systems in which mass or energy is
allowed to escape, and large-scale systems of smaller interacting components
which exchange mass or energy. Such systems have been used in theoretical
physics and chemical engineering to model atom traps, explore mechanisms for
heat conduction in solids and investigate metastability in molecular processes.
Rigorous mathematical results obtained during the course of this grant will aid
in the interpretation of these studies as well as suggest new directions of
inquiry. This grant also supports the involvement of undergraduates in
mathematics research. Using the highly visual nature and physical motivation of
the problems outlined above, the author will recruit undergraduate students to
work on these topics during each summer funded by the grant. Special emphasis
will be given to recruiting students from underrepresented groups in research
mathematics. Students will disseminate results of their research at poster
sessions and through publication in undergraduate or research journals, as
appropriate. By stimulating interest in research careers in mathematics and
creating a peer community supportive of that interest, the grant will contribute
to the important goal of integrating research and education.

Much research in dynamical systems focuses on closed systems in which the
dynamics are self-contained. In many modeling situations, however, such a global
view is not possible and it becomes necessary to study local systems that are
influenced by other unknown systems, possibly on different scales. Such
considerations motivate many of the systems to be studied during the course of
this grant: systems in which mass or energy may enter or exit through
deterministic or random mechanisms. The grant is organized around three specific
projects: The first project investigates the statistical properties of both
classical and non-equilibrium particle systems, which constitute an important
class of models from statistical mechanics as described above; the second
concerns open systems, which are inspired by physical models in which mass or
energy is allowed to escape; the third project investigates the behavior of
dynamical systems which are comprised of (possibly infinitely many) smaller
components linked together, with orbits or energy allowed to pass between them.
When focused on one component at a time, such systems generalize the discussion
of open systems in a natural way by allowing both entry and escape. The
intellectual merit of the research activity funded by the grant stems from the
depth of the analytical tools to be developed as well as the complexity and
variety of the systems under consideration. Using his recent work concerning the
spectral decomposition of the transfer operator for dispersing particle systems,
the author will investigate both equilibrium and non-equilibrium models from
statistical mechanics. This approach is expected to resolve a longstanding
conjecture by Bowen and Ruelle regarding the continuous time flow and to provide
rigorous analysis of physically important quantities such as entropy production.
A second tool the author will use is the construction of Markov extensions (a
generalization of finite and countable Markov partitions), which make no
Markovian assumptions on the dynamics and are widely applicable to nonuniformly
hyperbolic systems, including HÃ©non maps and a wide variety of particle systems.
The application of such tools to systems out of equilibrium, open coupled map
lattices and extended systems will represent significant advances in the study
of such systems. Efforts to understand these tools in one context strengthens
them and aids in their application to other areas of mathematics. Their
intellectual interest is enhanced by the application of these ideas to resolve
problems posed and approached formally in the physics literature.
