
* 1362872
* Problems in nonlinear hyperbolic equations
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2014,06/15/2017
* Sergiu Klainerman,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

A synopsis of this research project is the question "Are black holes real?"
Black holes loom large in the imagination as mysterious regions of space in
which the force of gravity is so enormous that nothing, including light, can
escape. However, black holes are mathematical constructs, first discovered as
explicit solutions of the Einstein field equations that lie at the foundation of
General Relativity. The best known family of such solutions, discovered by the
applied mathematician R. Kerr, depends on two parameters. It was only later that
physicists were able to relate some remarkable astrophysical objects, such as
quasars, to these remarkable Kerr solutions. Yet, by definition, black holes
cannot be detected by direct observation, and the claim that quasars are
associated with massive black holes is based on indirect observations deemed
consistent with the specific mathematical properties of the black hole
solutions. This project investigates three fundamental questions concerning the
mathematical theory of black holes, intimately tied to the issue of whether
black holes can be real physical objects. They are the questions of rigidity,
stability, and collapse. Stability, for example, concerns the question whether
small perturbations of the Kerr solutions can grow arbitrarily large. If this
were the case it would follow that the Kerr solutions are mathematical
artifacts, with no physical reality. It has been conjectured that the Kerr
solutions are stable, but despite some very important advances made recently by
mathematicians using innovative partial differential equation methods, the
problem remains wide open. The rigidity conjecture asserts that the Kerr family
of solutions exhausts all possible stationary solutions of the Einstein field
equations in vacuum, while the problem of collapse refers to the question of
whether black holes can form in time, naturally, from configurations free of
such objects.

The project focuses on some of the most important nonlinear hyperbolic equations
of mathematical physics. Its main part concerns three related problems in
General Relativity at the heart of the theory of black holes: Uniqueness and
stability of the Kerr solutions, and formation of black holes. It provides a
specific strategy for making progress on the problem of non-linear stability for
axially symmetric perturbations of Kerr spacetimes with small angular momentum.
In addition, building on recent work on the resolution of the "Bounded Curvature
Conjecture", the PI intends to continue the search for a scale invariant
criterion for well-posedness, i.e., a scale invariant criterion that insures
local existence and uniqueness of solutions. This is an important goal not just
within General Relativity but for any of the basic hyperbolic equations, in
fluids, elasticity, or relativity. The problems under study require new
geometric and analytic ideas as well as the development of new techniques.
