
* 1363324
* Multilinear inequalities: Combinatorial and geometric aspects, and extremization
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,06/15/2018
* Francis Christ,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 599,998.00

Mathematical research aims to discover universal mathematical laws that apply to
any possible phenomenon that can be accurately described or modeled through
mathematics. Fundamental physical laws are often expressed through the principle
that a system minimizes or maximizes (that is, extremizes) some quantity. Light
rays, for instance, follow paths that minimize travel time through media with
varying indices of refraction. Systems minimize various actions or energies.
Other physical laws are encoded in partial differential equations. Mathematical
analysis provides tools that can be used to understand both such differential
equations, and the extremization of many types of functionals. This project is
concerned with development of techniques for the analysis of functions and sets
that extremize, or nearly extremize, inequalities that are closely tied to the
underlying algebraic and geometric structures of classical (nonrelativistic)
physical space. Characterization of near-extremizers provides a more robust
understanding of exact extremizers, which takes into account small imperfections
and perturbations. Among the inequalities to be studied are some of the most
fundamental and widely used inequalities of mathematical analysis, including
inequalities governing the Fourier transform, convolutions, and sums of sets in
Euclidean space. Each of these inequalities is multilinear, involving products
or other pairwise interactions, or has underlying multilinear aspects.
Multilinear functionals lie on the frontier between linear and fully nonlinear
phenomena. Other multilinear inequalities will also be investigated as part of
this project, including variants of the Fourier transform.

Fundamental multilinear inequalities in Lebesgue space and related norms will be
investigated. Prototypes include inequalities of Riesz-Sobolev (concerning
integrals over symmetrizations of sets), Brunn-Minkowski (concerning sums of
sets), Hausdorff-Young (concerning the Fourier transform) and Young (concerning
convolutions). In a major part of the project, attention will focus on the
nature and quantitative properties of functions and sets that nearly, but not
exactly, extremize such inequalities. This will establish more robust versions
of existing characterizations of exact extremizers. Methodology for establishing
compactness for extremizing sequences, based on additive combinatorial
considerations rather than on concentration, will be developed. These tools
include characterizations of sets with small sumsets, of sets with sumsets of
moderately large but controlled size, and of sets with large additive energies.
Refined inequalities will be formulated and established, incorporating second
terms measuring structure, rather than size. Arithmetic progressions, intervals,
ellipsoids, convex sets, and Gaussian functions will provide the context for
such measurement. An improved understanding of the interplay between approximate
group structure and near extremality in affine-invariant multilinear
inequalities is a primary goal. The principal investigator will also apply
discrete multilinear inequalities to computer science. Rigorous lower bounds for
communication between elements of memory hierarchies will be proved, and methods
for computing these bounds will be devised. Other research problems to be
investigated include an inverse problem concerning the off-diagonal behavior of
Bergman kernels associated to high powers of positive complex line
bundles,inequalities for multilinear oscillatory integral operators related to
the Hausdorff-Young inequality,and a possible characterization of equality in a
class of multilinear inequalities previously analyzed by Holder, Rogers, Riesz,
Sobolev, and Brascamp-Lieb-Luttinger.
