
* 1400555
* New problems in continuum mechanics: asymptotic eigenvalue distributions, rigorous numerical stability analysis and weakly nonlinear asymptotics in periodic thin film flow
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2014,05/05/2016
* Kevin Zumbrun,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,000.00

Kevin Zumbrun proposes to attack a selection of key open problems in stability
and behavior of shock and detonation waves and of periodic patterns arising in
thin film flow, optics, and a variety of other contexts. These problems share
the features of computational complexity and delicate interactions between
processes occurring at multiple length and time scales, along with the fact that
they concern fundamental and frequently occurring physical phenomena, have been
much studied over a period of several decades, and yet at a rigorous
mathematical level remain unresolved. It is important to note that this is an
instance where mathematics is not just verifying logically already-observed
physically or experimentally principles, but finding order in settings that
current numerics and experiment are not adequate to resolve. Several of the
planned subprojects involve numerically assisted proof using scientific
computation with guaranteed error bounds. An integral part of the project is the
simultaneous development of a user-friendly numerical platform, STABLAB, for
numerical stability investigation, and the systematic exploration with this
platform of physical behavior in gas and fluid dynamics in the delicate
situations of reacting or ionized flow. Most of the proposed computations,
particularly those involving multiple dimensions and viscous effects
simultaneously, have never before been successfully carried out- hence there is
a substantial numerical/computational component to this program as well.

The problems addressed involve interesting and nonstandard issues in turning
point theory, spectral theory of nonselfadjoint operators, nonlinear partial
differential equations, and pattern formation. The problems considered are long-
standing ones of basic physical interest, whose solutions will require
significantly new tools. In particular, development of rigorous numerical
stability verification algorithms; treatment of analytic-coefficient turning
point problems on unbounded domains, and especially with turning points at
infinity; and the investigation of startling effects of viscosity in combination
with high activation energy appear likely to be transformational in the study of
stability and bifurcation of fluid- and gas-dynamical flow. Each of these
problems involve the technical difficulties of multiples scales (stiffness) and
absence of spectral gap; their successful analysis involves accounting of
delicate cancellation both at the linear level, through stationary phase and
related complex analytic methods, and at the nonlinear level, through phase
extraction/modulation techniques developed by the PI and collaborators. The
goals of rigorous analytic WKB theory, viscous detonation theory, and rigorous
numerical stability verification (proof) in particular have the potential to be
transformative. At the same time, the production of quantitative data for models
where none was available (e.g., viscous effects on detonation stability) should
be of immediate practical use.
