
* 1401035
* Sharp inequalities for derivatives and potentials in the critical cases of the Sobolev embedding theorem
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2014,05/23/2016
* Carlo Morpurgo,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2018
* USD 168,482.00

Many real world phenomena are modeled using partial differential equations,
equations that involve functions and their derivatives. For practical purposes
it is extremely important to understand the behavior of the solutions of such
equations. Even though it is often impossible to compute these solutions
explicitly, a great deal of information can be garnered from quantitative
estimates on their size, usually by means of inequalities. The purpose of this
research is to obtain many new optimal inequalities related to fundamental
equations in mathematics, physics, and geometry: from equations describing the
curvature of a surface, to mean-field equations arising in vortex models for
turbulent flows, and more. The estimates to be obtained are sharp (i.e., they
cannot be improved), and they incorporate deep information about the underlying
geometric and physical models.

In this project, the principal investigator seeks to find best constants in
several Adams, Moser-Trudinger, and Onofri inequalities in various settings,
sharp asymptotics for fundamental solutions of differential and
pseudodifferential operators, and optimal embeddings of Sobolev spaces in
rearrangement invariant spaces. On the Cauchy-Riemann sphere, sharp inequalities
are to be obtained for rather general spectrally defined pseudodifferential
operators, featuring best constants that depend explicitly on the eigenvalues.
The method includes a new asymptotic analysis of the fundamental solutions of
such operators. On Euclidean spaces, sharp inequalities will be obtained on
domains of infinite measure, filling a twenty-five-year-old gap that was left
since Adams's seminal work. The methods are new, and they are powerful enough to
allow extensions to other noncompact settings such as the Heisenberg group and
spaces endowed with hyperbolic metrics. Sharp Brezis-Merle-type inequalities and
optimal embeddings are to be obtained on reduced Sobolev spaces of barely
integrable functions. The method is based on a new theory of Adams- and Orlicz-
type inequalities on general measure spaces, for integral operators with slowly
varying kernels.
