
* 1405291
* The mathematical analysis of black holes and spacetime singularities in general relativity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2014,06/18/2014
* Mihalis Dafermos,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 189,351.00

This project strives to better understand two basic predictions of Einstein's
theory of gravity: black holes and spacetime singularities. The first major
objective to be addressed is to resolve the question of whether the simplest
examples of black holes are indeed stable objects as observed from the outside.
If they are not, then much of our astrophysical world-picture will need to be
revised. The second major objective concerns understanding what generic black
holes look like from the inside. It has long been expected that observers
entering black hole regions eventually encounter "ferocious singularities",
where the very structure of spacetime breaks down. The project will strive to
show, based in part on previous work of the proposer, that a portion of this
singularity is not as "ferocious" as previously thought. Both the above
objectives can be formulated as conjectures in pure mathematics concerning the
governing equations of general relativity, the celebrated Einstein equations,
and thus can be addressed by modern techniques of mathematical analysis. This
project will thus contribute to this long tradition of rigorous mathematics
making fundamental statements about our physical world. The subject of black
holes and spacetime singularities has inspired the popular imagination well
beyond the confines of the scientific community, and work on this proposal will
strengthen the ties between scientific research and the general public.

At a more technical level, the first objective of the proposal concerns the
dynamic stability of the Kerr metrics, a two parameter family of explicit
solutions to the celebrated Einstein equations that represent the simplest black
hole solutions. A series of projects is outlined, of increasing difficulty,
culminating in a complete resolution of the Kerr stability conjecture in the
fully nonlinear setting, the statement that small perturbations of Kerr initial
states stay close to the Kerr family in the black hole exterior and asymptote
back to it as time goes to infinity. The second major objective of this proposal
concerns the analysis of black hole interiors. The original expectation was that
generic black holes would terminate in a spacelike singular boundary where the
geometry of spacetime is completely destroyed. Previous work of the proposer in
a spherically symmetric toy problem, itself based on previous numerical work in
the physics literature, showed that singularities do indeed occur, but that (at
least) a portion of the singular boundary is null, not spacelike, and far less
"singular" than expected. Through a series of projects of increasing complexity,
this proposal aims to definitively resolve this question, now not for a toy
model, but for the vacuum Einstein equations themselves, without any symmetry
assumptions. In addition to resolving well-known fundamental conjectures about
this venerable set of equations, this project strives to introduce new
techniques of mathematical analysis which have the potential to influence more
general developments in the hyperbolic partial differential equations governing
classical physics.
