
* 1419147
* Center for Mathematics at Notre Dame, June 2-6, 2014
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,04/18/2016
* Matthew Gursky,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2017
* USD 129,375.00

Since 2011, the Center for Mathematics at the University of Notre Dame has been
organizing and hosting annual summer programs on various mathematical themes.
The goal of the Center is two-fold: first, to provide students at the
undergraduate and graduate level with the necessary mathematical background so
they can understand and appreciate recent developments in mathematical research.
This is accomplished through a series of mini-courses taught by leading
researchers, who aim their lectures at the appropriate level. The second goal is
to broadly disseminate current advances in these areas by hosting a conference
in the final week of the program. The Center also seeks to increase the
diversity of the mathematical work force by actively recruiting underrepresented
groups to attend the activities. This grant supports the programs planned at the
Center for the next three summers.

The program in 2014 will be dedicated to Nonlinear PDEs in Geometry and Physics.
Many physical principles are an expression of an underlying variational
principle; at the same time, physical laws often have a purely geometric
description. The goal of the Program in Nonlinear PDEs in Geometry and Physics
is to bring together researchers who are working on PDEs with connections to
differential geometry and mathematical physics. The program in 2015 will be
dedicated to Boundaries and Dynamics. In recent years a number of problems and
techniques have used statistical properties of a group action on an object at
infinity which can be considered as a boundary. The goal of the Program on
Boundaries and Dynamics is to explore themes involving a notion of boundaries in
geometry and ergodic theory. The program in 2016 will be dedicated to
Generalized Stability, Pseudo-finite Combinatorics and Related Topics. The last
few years have also seen a remarkable convergence of ideas in model theory,
combinatorics, Lie groups, number theory, and dynamics. The main goal of the
Program on Generalized Stability, Pseudo-finite Combinatorics and Related Topics
is to facilitate interactions between mathematicians working in these related
areas.
