
* 1460466
* Representation Theory, Number Theory, and Invariant Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2015,12/19/2014
* Ju-Lee Kim,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2017
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Representation Theory,
Number Theory, and Invariant Theory," taking place June 1-5, 2015 at Yale
University, New Haven, CT. Representation theory of Lie groups is a central
subject in current mathematics. The theory is motivated on one hand by physics
and on the other by the theory of automorphic forms, with deep roots in
classical analysis and with strong ties to differential equations. Thanks to the
diversity of motivations, goals, and methods involved, it has broad applications
to a variety of branches of mathematics, bridging many areas.

The conference will review the role of representation theory in various
disciplines such as automorphic forms, harmonic analysis, and invariant theory
developed over the past half a century, present recent progress in this field,
and chart future developments in the subject. The meeting will feature lectures
from world experts, discussion sessions among participants, and problem
sessions. The broad spectrum and great current interest of the topics will make
the conference inspiring for young mathematicians and stimulate further progress
in the field. A volume of proceedings, intended to make these results more
accessible and applicable, will be produced. Additional information can be found
at the conference website: http://web.mit.edu/juleekim/www/Howe70/
