
* 1463753
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Long-Term Dynamics of Nonlinear Dispersive and Hyperbolic Equations: Deterministic and Probabilistic Methods
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/13/2017
* Alexandru Ionescu,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 509,002.00

This project focuses on several problems connected with the long-term dynamics
of solutions of partial differential evolution equations. Equations of this type
are central to the modeling and simulation of a wide range of phenomena,
including water waves, propagation of light, behavior of plasmas, and
gravitation. The investigators are senior researchers with experience in
different aspects of the study of partial differential equations; their
complementary expertise will be brought to bear on four main research directions
in the study of solutions of dispersive and hyperbolic equations. The four
aspects of nonlinear partial differential equations are all manifestations of
the general goal of understanding the long time dynamics of solutions to
important nonlinear dispersive and hyperbolic equations.

This project is a collective effort of a group of five senior researchers from
four institutions with research experience in various areas of partial
differential equations. The investigators have been interested in both
dispersive and hyperbolic partial differential equations and will collaborate to
approach the problems under study from several different directions. The project
centers on four main research directions in the study of solutions of dispersive
and hyperbolic equations: (1) the analysis of critical semilinear evolutions,
with special emphasis on the "soliton resolution conjecture" for extended type
II solutions, (2) construction of global solutions of certain quasilinear
dispersive models, such as water wave models, plasma models, and crystal optics,
(3) stability problems in General Relativity, motivated by the outstanding Kerr
nonlinear stability conjecture, and (4) long-term dynamics of solutions
corresponding to randomized data. These four aspects of nonlinear partial
differential equations are all manifestations of the general goal of
understanding the long time dynamics of solutions. While specific major problems
are identified for the project, this is a very active field, and it is
anticipated that this project will identify and study other important problems
during the course of the investigation. The project will also enhance links and
collaborations among researchers at leading mathematical centers in the U.S.,
promoting training through active research involvement of students and
postdoctoral researchers. Research resulting from this project will be
disseminated widely in advanced graduate courses, survey articles, and
monographs.
