
* 1464150
* Complex analysis and geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Laszlo Lempert,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 228,078.00

One role of mathematics is to provide the terms in which to describe the world
around us. As we are discovering and dealing with more and more complicated
phenomena, both natural and societal, it is critical that the description
nevertheless stay simple. Mathematics achieves this by introducing new notions.
Here is an example, pertinent for this project. Quantities in the real world are
measured by real numbers, and since the invention of analytic geometry we know
that real world figures---curves, surfaces, etc.---can be described by functions
of real variables. Yet real world quantities in oscillatory phenomena, for
example voltage in an alternating current, can be described much more simply in
terms of complex numbers. It takes some investment to introduce complex numbers,
but once done, the description becomes fully transparent. By now we understand
well that complex numbers are indispensable in a vast number of problems that
arise in science and engineering. Similarly, it is often advantageous to pass
from functions of real variables and the figures they describe to functions of
complex variables and the associated geometric figures. This research will deal
with fundamental properties of functions of complex variables and of complex
geometric figures, known as complex manifolds. One component is motivated by
problems that arise in the quantum description of the micro-world, and seeks to
understand to what extent this description is independent of the somewhat
arbitrary choices one is forced to make as the mathematical description is
constructed. It turns out that this problem and various others that arise in the
study of manifolds have a common generalization, and the answer promises to
depend on the notion of curvature. The PI will study curvature in various
situations; it is the concept that unifies the three components of this
research.---As said, some of the concrete problems in the project are directly
motivated by quantum theory, and have a potential to impact theoretical physics.
By involving graduate students, the project will also serve to introduce young
people to mathematical research.

In more technical terms, one component of this project studies fields of Hilbert
spaces, generalizations of hermitian vector bundles. They arise as direct images
of holomorphic vector bundles, and the PI will seek to connect the curvature of
the direct image with the curvature of the vector bundle. A second component is
motivated by the problem of Kahler metrics of constant scalar curvature. The
existence and uniqueness of these metrics is related to the geometry of the
space of all Kahler metrics, an infinite dimensional Riemannian manifold, in
particular to the geodesics in this space. The PI will study these geodesics and
the partial differential equation that governs them. The third component is
about general hermitian metrics in holomorphic vector bundles and their
curvature. The metric can be singular and the bundle of infinite rank. The
questions here concern how to generalize to this setting the phenomena well
understood in the case of line bundles.
