
* 1500508
* Applications of Non-Commutative Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Paul Baum,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 212,262.00

One of the central themes of modern mathematics has been the fusion of geometry
and algebra. This began in the seventeenth century with Rene Descartes's
remarkable insight that associated to any equation a geometric object; namely,
the graph of the equation. Geometric properties of the graph encode algebraic
properties of the equation, and vice versa. Throughout the eighteenth,
nineteenth, and twentieth centuries, many mathematicians worked to deepen and
extend Descartes's ideas. Thus the subject of algebraic geometry was developed.
This subject has flourished and has achieved many outstanding results. In the
mid-twentieth century--largely inspired by quantum theory and other physics--a
new kind of algebra (operator algebras) emerged. More recently, this new algebra
has been combined with geometry to form the new subject of noncommutative
geometry. The mathematics of this project takes methods and results from
noncommutative geometry and applies them to problems in the older, more
traditional branches of mathematics.

The noncommutative geometry point of view has led to some startling conjectures
and results. In the representation theory of reductive p-adic groups a totally
unexpected geometric structure has been revealed. This greatly simplifies the
representation theory and links the Baum-Connes conjecture (which is a
conjecture within noncommutative geometry) to the Langlands program. For the
index of geometrically-arising Fredholm operators, the noncommutative geometry
point of view leads to the surprising conclusion that formulas like the Atiyah-
Singer index formula apply well beyond elliptic operators. Hence ellipticity is
not the essential point needed to obtain a topological formula for the index of
such operators. This project will explore the many interactions of this wide-
ranging set of ideas.
