
* 1500812
* Qualitative Properties of Eigenfunctions for some Selfadjoint and Non-selfadjoint partial differential equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Hans Christianson,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

This project considers eigenfunctions, which are objects that give information
about, for example, the vibrations of a ringing drum head. In other contexts,
these eigenfunctions can describe, for example, how fluids mix on extremely
small length scales, with potential applications to improved efficiency in
medical drug delivery and dialysis. These eigenfunctions are fundamental
building blocks to understand problems in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and
even biomedical engineering. It is precisely these important fundamental
connections between the proposed research and STEM subjects that makes this
research have broader significance within the larger context of the STEM areas.
The PI has been developing simple, instructional model problems related to most
of his research for students and younger researchers.

This project concerns research in the deep relationships between solutions to
partial differential equations, differential geometry, dynamical systems, and
mathematical physics. These different areas of mathematics are often tied
together by problems in spectral theory and microlocal analysis; that is,
problems concerned with eigenvalues, eigenfunctions, phase space localization,
and the generalizations thereof. The research in this proposal is divided
between selfadjoint and non-selfadjoint eigenfunction problems. The study of the
behaviour of solutions to partial differential equations has a rich connection
to the underlying geometry and classical phase space dynamics. For example, it
is well known that eigenfunctions tend to concentrate along geodesics. If there
are isolated periodic geodesics, one might expect a subsequence of
eigenfunctions to concentrate along such geodesics. Understanding the rate of
concentration is an extremely important question in quantum chaos. On the other
hand, if the geodesic flow is sufficiently chaotic, one might expect the
eigenfunctions to be equidistributed in phase space. It is important to
investigate how robust these phenomena are, through phase space estimates,
restriction estimates, and perturbations. For example, in the chaotic case, the
PI and his collaborators are working to understand restrictions of
eigenfunctions to hypersurfaces. With mild geometric assumptions on a
hypersurface, they conjecture the mass of such restrictions is bounded above and
below, independent of the eigenvalue. The methods of investigation will
introduce new microlocal energy techniques, demonstrating how to generalize a
problem, previously only understood on arithmetic surfaces using number theory,
to very general geometric situations. Some properties of eigenfunctions tend to
be stable under small complex perturbations, which means one can also understand
some non-selfadjoint problems. For non-selfadjoint problems with larger
imaginary component, perturbation techniques are no longer strictly valid. The
PI is working to develop a general theory of geometric control adapted to
degenerate advection-diffusion type equations of any order. This has
straightforward applications to the Fokker-Planck equation and similar equations
from statistical mechanics. This theory also has applications to certain models
in theoretic micro-fluidics, with potential applications to efficient
geometrically localized drug delivery and dialysis.
