
* 1500703
* Inverse Problems and Spectral Theory for Elliptic Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Katya Krupchyk,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 213,864.00

The project is concerned with development of the mathematical theory for several
fundamental inverse problems arising in science and technology, as well as with
achieving advances in significant questions of spectral theory coming from
problems of electromagnetism and quantum mechanics. Broadly speaking, in an
inverse problem, one wishes to determine internal properties of a medium by
performing measurements along the boundary of the medium. For instance, in
electrical impedance tomography, one attempts to recover the conductivity of a
body by making voltage and current measurements at the boundary. Since inverse
problems are at the core of a variety of engineering and scientific
investigations, including medical imaging, seismography, oil prospection, radar
imaging, and non-destructive testing, any further progress in the mathematical
theory of such problems will undoubtedly have real world applications. Spectral
theory deals with the investigation of vibrations and their frequencies for a
variety of different objects, ranging from atoms and molecules in chemistry to
obstacles in acoustic waveguides. The fundamental issues, which are of great
significance in many problems of science and engineering, from celestial to
quantum mechanics, include deciding when such vibrations occur, how to go about
computing their frequencies, as well as understanding the size and localization
of the vibrations. The aim of the project is to advance our understanding of
these issues by concentrating on model problems of quantum mechanics,
specifically in the physically relevant regime of high frequencies.

The project addresses the following significant topics: the mathematical theory
of inverse boundary problems for elliptic partial differential equations (PDE),
harmonic analysis for elliptic PDE, and spectral theory of elliptic PDE with
periodic coefficients. Although these topics have originated in distinct
mathematical communities, recent work has shown that techniques and insights in
the various topics are closely related and interact in a fruitful way. A novel
idea of the project is to expand this interaction to solve significant problems
in all of these areas. Despite an impressive body of results in the field of
inverse problems obtained within the last 30 years, many fundamental questions
still remain unsolved, including inverse problems for PDE with irregular
coefficients, partial data problems when measurements are performed only on a
portion of the boundary, and inverse problems on manifolds. The goal of the
first part of the project is to attack these problems for several fundamental
elliptic PDE, in particular the conductivity, magnetic Schroedinger, and
polyharmonic equations, as well as the Maxwell system. The second topic is
concerned with estimates for resolvents of elliptic operators on compact and
non-compact manifolds, in Lebesgue spaces. Apart from their intrinsic
significance in spectral and scattering theory, such estimates are crucial in
control theory and inverse problems. The aim here is to understand how the
dynamics of the underlying Hamilton flow of the operator and regularity of the
coefficients each impacts on the spectral estimates. The third topic deals with
the spectral theory of Schroedinger type operators with periodic coefficients,
coming from solid state physics. A central question concerns the nature of the
spectra of such operators, which one conjectures to be purely absolutely
continuous. Long known in the Euclidean case, it is still wide open for general
Laplace-Beltrami type operators. The objective is to resolve this conjecture in
several significant special cases of Riemannian metrics.
