
* 1500817
* Elliptic Boundary Problems and Evolution Equations in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Michael Taylor,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will tackle problems in two areas in
partial differential equations. The first involves equations for functions that
vary with space but not with time. Such stationary problems model many physical
systems in equilibrium, from static electric fields to configurations of elastic
bodies, and also arise in fundamental investigations in mathematical analysis,
including potential theory and analytic function theory. Problems of this type
often involve unknown functions defined on bounded regions. One goal of this
project is to extend our knowledge of how to handle such problems when the
boundaries are quite rough. The second area involves evolution equations, for
functions that vary with time. Core classes of interest in this project include
equations for wave motion, both for classical waves and variants, such as
Schrodinger equations and Dirac equations, whose origins lie in the motions of
atoms.

This project will develop tools to advance the study of elliptic systems on
domains with uniformly rectifiable boundary, which is essentially the maximal
class of domains on which one can use singular integral operator techniques. One
class of problems that will be tackled consists of Riemann-Hilbert type
problems. These were first studied on planar domains, with piecewise smooth
interfaces. This project will develop higher dimensional versions of Riemann-
Hilbert problems, on domains with uniformly rectifiable interfaces. A related
study will involve a development of the index theory of Toeplitz operators on
such rough domains. The other major part of this project concerns evolution
equations. Specific problems to be tackled include studies of wave decay, via
various mechanisms, some related to the formation of harmonics on stringed
instruments, but in a higher dimensional context. In addition, wave decay
problems will be considered on domains with rough geometry, including cases
where the main geometrical hypothesis is a lower bound on the Ricci tensor, and
the challenge is to develop a theory of geometrical optics in this setting.
