
* 1500871
* Analytical and geometrical properties of non linear diffusion equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2015,08/01/2018
* Luis Caffarelli,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 624,812.00

This research project is focused mainly on aspects of diffusion processes. The
mathematical idea of diffusion is an attempt to quantify and model how a
species, a fluid, heat, particles, or information spreads out in time due to the
effect of pressure (as in particles or populations) or by other neighbor-to-
neighbor interaction, as in the case of information dynamics. One of the ways in
which diffusion has been described mathematically is through partial
differential equations, which model infinitesimal adjacent interactions. With
mathematical modeling in fields like biology, finance, and the social sciences,
the need has emerged of understanding phenomena where the diffusion process
takes into consideration long-range information or interactions; that is the
case when particles are transported, information is communicated simultaneously
at many scales, organisms communicate by the creation of a chemical potential,
or stocks change value in discontinuous ways. The PI will study diverse
phenomena related to these processes with long interactions in space and time
(memory), such as flows in reservoirs that clog with time, segregation processes
that occur at a distance, or models in price formation where there is a gap
between buyers and sellers.

A first area of research encompasses nonlinear problems involving nonlocality in
both space and time. From the stochastic side, the model is the continuous in
time random walk equation, which involves Levy walks instead of jumps. From the
variational side, there are diverse models for porous medium flows with
potential pressures, where the medium is deformed by the flow. These involve
study of fully nonlinear equations of nonlocal type that by the nature of their
invariant properties parallel equations involving symmetric functions of the
Hessian, such as the Monge-Ampere equation. Another area of investigation
involves phase transitions and free boundary problems. One group concerns models
for segregation of species, optimal partition of a domain by disjoint subdomains
optimizing some "shape" value function. Another group deals with the
homogenization of fronts in random or periodic media, and a third concerns the
regularity of free boundaries for some stationary or evolution problems. The
issues described above are universal in the sense that the same paradigm
reappears in geometry and analysis, fluid dynamics and material sciences,
financial mathematics, and more recently biology and stochastic geometry.
