
* 1500449
* Endpoint Behavior of Modulation Invariant Singular Integrals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,04/17/2015
* Francesco DiPlinio,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2016
* USD 151,237.00

Harmonic analysis studies how signals (functions) break up into a superposition
of basic harmonics--signals with a well-specified duration, intensity and
frequency--and how operations (filtering) applied to these components affect the
reconstructed signal. Variants of this time-frequency decomposition process are
performed in countless real-world applications, such as audio or image
compression and filtering, image pattern recognition, data assimilation and
denoising. One of the broad objectives of this project is the investigation of
the theoretical feasibility threshold of the time-frequency techniques in terms
of the relative size and smoothness of the input. An analogous procedure is
adopted in tomographic imaging, where a solid body is reconstructed by means of
sampling its density along penetrating waves, mathematically described as lines
in three-dimensional space. This project will study mathematical toy models of
sampling along lines or curves, whose theoretical understanding may play a
significant role in the derivation of improved analytical image reconstruction
methods. An integral component of the project is the training of graduate and
undergraduate students within the active research group in harmonic analysis at
Brown University, with the particular intent of attracting young and promising
researchers to the field. The central objects of study of this project are
modulation-invariant singular integrals and their behavior at or near the
boundary of their known boundedness range. The model question, involving
Carleson's maximal partial Fourier sum operator, is the characterization of the
sharp integrability order sufficient for the almost-everywhere pointwise
convergence of the Fourier series of a periodic function. The second, deeply
related question concerns the extension of the Lacey-Thiele Holder-type
estimates for the bilinear Hilbert transform to the boundary of the known range.
Together with his collaborators, the principal investigator has recently
obtained the current best results for both problems, relying in particular on a
newly developed Calderon-Zygmund decomposition adapted to the modulation-
invariant setting. It is expected that further developments of this technique
will lead to additional improvements towards the solution of these two central
questions, as well as of other significant open problems. A standout question is
the extension of the known uniform estimates for the bilinear Hilbert transform
to the full expected range of exponents, completing the original program of
Calderon for the boundedness of the first commutator. Another central direction
of the proposed investigation is the study of singular integral operators with
rotational symmetries, a prime example of which is the Hilbert transform along a
smooth vector field in the plane, by means of multiparameter time-frequency
analysis techniques. Further improvements of the aforementioned techniques are
also expected to impact on several questions concerning summability of multiple
Fourier series.
