
* 1500829
* Nonlinear partial differential equations and continuum limits for large discrete sorting problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,05/04/2015
* Jeffrey Calder,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2016
* USD 76,362.00

The goal of this project is to study algorithms for sorting large amounts of
high-dimensional data. Sorting, or ordering, data is one of the most fundamental
problems in computational science, and in today's data-driven world, there is a
need to develop new algorithms and tools for handling massive amounts of data in
novel ways. Many sorting algorithms are computationally intensive, but have a
highly predictable structure when applied to very large amounts of data. A deep
mathematical understanding of this structure will lead to new insights that have
the potential to significantly improve performance. Applications of sorting are
ubiquitous in science and engineering, and include the analysis of DNA
sequences, sorting of hits in web searches, and fingerprint identification. A
significant improvement in any sorting algorithm would have a broad impact on
many fields of science and engineering.

This project will study two algorithms for sorting multivariate data: non-
dominated sorting, and convex hull ordering. Non-dominated sorting is
fundamental in multi-objective optimization, which is commonly used in
scientific and engineering contexts. It has recently been shown that non-
dominated sorting of random points in Euclidean space has a continuum limit that
corresponds to solving a Hamilton-Jacobi equation. The first objective of this
project is to study the regularity of viscosity solutions of this Hamilton-
Jacobi equation, and to develop highly accurate numerical schemes for
approximating its solution. The second, and main objective, is to study convex
hull ordering, which is widely used in robust statistics. It is conjectured that
convex hull ordering has a continuum limit that corresponds to affine invariant
curvature motion. This project aims to study, and prove rigorously, this
conjectured continuum limit. This result provides an asymptotic distributional
theory for convex hull ordering, which is an open problem in robust statistics.
Another goal of this project is to exploit this continuum limit to develop a
fast algorithm for approximate convex hull ordering that can handle massive
amounts of data.
