
* 1500943
* Invariant objects in dynamical systems: Analysis and numerics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2015,06/13/2017
* Rafael de la Llave,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 375,000.00

Many problems in the natural sciences are modeled by a system with a simple rule
that gives the next state of the system as a function of the present one. It has
become increasingly apparent that many of these rules lead to complicated
behavior when applied repeatedly. This complicated behavior is often called
"chaos". To understand the behavior of a system and make useful predictions is a
deep mathematical problem. One possible approach is to find "landmarks". A
landmark is a small subsystem that behaves in a simple manner and which anchors
the behavior of the system. If enough of these landmarks can be found, they can
provide a skeleton for the dynamics which gives a global understanding of the
system itself.

The plan is to develop systematic and accurate methods for the calculation of
landmarks. Another goal is to prove theorems which show that the calculations
satisfying some conditions are correct. It is planned to obtain results which
show that if certain landmarks are found in some configurations (which can be
verified with finite accuracy calculations) then conclusions can be obtained for
all times. The hope is to make contact with concrete problems motivated by
questions in solid state physics and chemistry. The work in the project will
also be used as a training ground for graduate students, postdocs and visitors.
For over 50 years, the most commonly used landmarks in dynamical systems have
been normally hyperbolic manifolds and quasi-periodic orbits as well as their
stable and unstable manifolds. Here, it is proposed to develop a systematic way
of computing these objects theoretically as well as numerically. Another goal is
to prove constructive existence theorems that validate approximate solutions and
also to develop and implement fast and accurate algorithms. The unifying
principle is to look for functional equations that describe the invariance and
then use a variety of methods to try to solve them. The methods will vary from
geometry to functional analysis. A further part of the proposed work is to begin
studying special solutions in some infinite dimensional problems including
partial differential equations and delay differential equations with state
dependent delays.
