
* 1500461
* Decouplings and applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Ciprian Demeter,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 213,788.00

The principal investigator, in collaboration with Jean Bourgain, has recently
created a new set of tools that can successfully address a wide range of
problems in the fields of number theory and partial differential equations.
Until recently, many of these problems seemed unrelated. In light of his work
with Bourgain, these problems are now understood as part of a more general
theory that the two call "decoupling." The methods pertain to the field of
modern harmonic analysis, a natural framework that allows for the formulation of
a general enough theory. This project seeks to enlarge the range of
applicability of decouplings, with some high-value targets in sight. A
surprising feature of the research is that it removes certain restrictions on
frequencies that were thought to be necessary in earlier work. In particular,
the old requirement that frequencies have integer coordinates is replaced with
the weaker assumption that sufficient spatial separation exists between
frequencies. It is expected that the tools that will be developed will be
accessible and useful to a large part of the mathematical community.

Decouplings are certain generalizations of the Littlewood--Paley theory in the
presence of curvature. The principal investigator's progress in pursuing the
line of research related to this subject has relied hitherto on the interplay
between multilinear and linear multiscale analysis. He has successfully
addressed the case when the relevant manifold is a hypersurface with nonzero
Gaussian curvature. He now proposes to develop the optimal decoupling theory for
nondegenerate curves. Such a theory has the potential to achieve almost
unprecedented applications of harmonic analysis to number theory. One notable
example is the resolution of Vinogradov's mean value theorem. There is an
interesting related circle of problems for the cone. The fact that it has zero
Gaussian curvature poses a new level of difficulty that will most certainly
require new ideas. Understanding the cone is part of a more ambitious project
that will aim at understanding the decoupling theory for real analytic surfaces.
There are further important related questions that remain to be explored, in
connection with various restriction theorems and the Kakeya conjectures.
