
* 1500647
* Geometry and Topology of the Heisenberg Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/14/2017
* Piotr Hajlasz,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 401,190.00

The Heisenberg group appeared for the first time in Herman Weyl's proof that the
Schrodinger and the Heisenberg approaches to quantum mechanics are
mathematically equivalent. However, the scope of applications of the Heisenberg
groups goes far beyond quantum mechanics. The Heisenberg groups play an
important role in many areas of mathematics and also in the mathematical biology
in the development of a mathematical model of the visual cortex. Although the
Heisenberg groups have been studied for several decades now, recent
developments, leading to applications in new areas of pure and applied
mathematics, provide new perspectives. This research project will advance this
very active area of contemporary mathematics. The project will provide ample
opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral associates to be trained in
this important area that bridges different fields of mathematics. Four graduate
students and two postdoctoral associates will actively work on topics related to
the project.

The research will lead to a development of the program introduced in a seminal
work of M. Gromov and it will consist of several independent, but related tasks.
Most of the tasks will be carried out as a joint projects of the PI with his
graduate students, postdoctoral associates and other researchers from the US and
Europe. The project will investigate the following problems. (1) Develop the
theory of Lipschitz homotopy groups of the Heisenberg groups. Unlike the
classical homotopy groups, the Lipschitz homotopy groups provide a deeper
insight into the geometry of Holder, Lipschitz, and Sobolev mappings into the
Heisenberg group. (2) Characterize the pairs of the Heisenberg groups that have
the Lipschitz extension property. The Lipschitz extension property is very
difficult to study, because the methods of the classical topology fail and a
more quantitative and analytic methods are necessary. (3) Solve the problem of
the Whitney extension for mappings into the Heisenberg group. While the Whitney
extension theorem has proven to be one of the most influential results in
analysis, the Heisenberg group provides a non-linear constraint that has not
been investigated so far. (4) Develop the differential calculus of Holder
continuous maps. This subject has recently and independently been discovered by
many researchers working in different areas of mathematics and the goal of the
PI is to find a unified approach which will lead to a simplification of some
results of Gromov and will link the methods developed for the Heisenberg group
with the geometric rigidity problems in convex integration. (5) Construct a
counterexample to a conjecture of M. Gromov about Holder mappings into the
Heisenberg group. Numerical examples show unexpected results, but they have to
be verified rigorously. (6) Find a new characterization of mappings of bounded
length distortion, a study motivated by unrectifiability of the Heisenberg
group. Other topics under study in the project are: approximation of convex
functions, boundedness of maximal functions in Sobolev spaces, homeomorphisms
whose Jacobian changes sign, and continuity of Sobolev mappings with positive
Jacobian.
