
* 1500893
* Asymptotic Analysis of Partial Differential Equations and Systems with Emphasis on Boundary Layers
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,10/06/2015
* Christophe Prange,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2015
* USD 29,830.00

This research proposal is devoted to the understanding of the effect of small
scale heterogeneities on solutions of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs).
Systems having structures at several spatial and temporal scales, micro-, meso-
or macroscopic scales, are ubiquitous in industry (composite materials,
microfluidics), in biology (tissues, cell membranes, brain), in geophysics
(seabed), in meteorology (clouds), in fluid mechanics (turbulence) and in
physics (granular materials, structure of matter). The general spirit of the
mathematical study is to figure out how one can integrate these small scales
into asymptotic simplified models. Moreover, this work focuses on the
understanding of the interactions between the different scales from a dynamical
point of view: memory effects, energy transfers, instabilities and out of
equilibrium dynamics. This fundamental research has far reaching consequences.
This work underlies the design of new numerical methods, aims at proving the
accuracy of numerical schemes and enables to improve their efficiency.

This proposal focuses on the study of the boundary behavior of solutions and on
the analysis of equations and systems with low regularity, either in the
coefficients, or in the boundary. A lot of the existing theory of PDEs, even for
elliptic problems, has been developed for equations, in smooth domains, with
constant or smooth coefficients, with symmetry. Similarly, the derivation of
asymptotic models often relies on strong structure assumptions such as
periodicity. New applications have made the need for relaxing these assumptions
even more important. These questions lead to many challenging open problems. The
primary goals are to (i) develop the tools for non symmetric elliptic equations
and systems with non constant coefficients, (ii) investigate highly oscillating
boundary conditions, (iii) relax structure assumptions in problems concerned
with oscillating boundaries, (iv) make progress in the analysis of stationary
linear or nonlinear systems in infinite energy spaces motivated by the study of
boundary layers, (v) provide tractable results for numerical homogenization and
(vi) justify rigorously some asymptotic models in oceanography and in the theory
of viscoelastic fluids. This area of research is currently very active, and the
proposed problems are important. The PI and his collaborators have elaborated
new methods in recent works to deal with such questions. Developing these tools
further will not only help solve the problems (i)-(vi) but also bring new ideas
to many fields of PDEs: homogenization, harmonic analysis, elliptic equations
and systems, and fluid mechanics.
