
* 1501103
* Operator algebras between theory and application
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2015,06/09/2017
* Marius Junge,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Order matters. The order in which certain operations are performed can
dramatically change the outcome in real life and in the sciences. However, in
the usual multiplication of numbers the order is irrelevant. Since the product
AB is the same as BA one says that the factors A and B commute. Inspired by the
fundamentals of quantum mechanics, mathematicians have investigated a new type
of multiplication that respects the order of operations. During the last century
this has led to spectacular new discoveries in mathematical theories embracing
noncommutativity (i.e., allowing AB to be different from BA) such as
noncommutative geometry or quantum (i.e., noncommutative) probability. In this
line of research a similar program is applied to fundamental concepts in
classical harmonic analysis such as Fourier series and estimates for solving
differential equations in noncommutative spaces. Quite surprisingly, the
abstract tools developed in this investigation are also useful in other
disciplines. The research of the principal investigator will include a thorough
analysis of quantum channels in quantum information theory. Research in quantum
information theory usually takes place in computer science and physic
departments. However, as long as quantum computers are not available in large
numbers, the limitations and advantages of quantum computers can be understood
only using theoretical, mathematical tools. The same applies for the capacities
of devices transmitting information through the use of quantum mechanics.
Interdisciplinary research in this work will also include mathematical aspects
of big data and compressed sensing. All aspects of this research will also serve
to enhance the teaching mission of the university, and in particular the
formation of students who are familiar with pure mathematics and certain
applications alike.

The theory of operator algebras provides many important tools that are essential
in understanding noncommutative aspects of classical objects, such as Brownian
motion, derivatives and derivations, tangent and cotangent spaces, Laplace-
Beltrami operators, singular integral kernels, quantum channels, and capacity of
quantum channels. The project will aim to connect theoretical aspects of the
theory of completely positive maps with more applied aspects in quantum
information theory and harmonic analysis, in particular those analytic
properties of operators that have a geometric or metric flavor. The proposed
work on the Grothendieck program for triple-tensor norms belongs to the core
subject in operator space theory but is also motivated by quantum information
and compressed sensing. Previous research of the principal investigator related
to quantum information theory has already demonstrated the potential to connect
to topics in computer science and physics. The proposed new research on private
capacity of channels may even have an impact beyond science.
