
* 1501007
* Variational Problems and Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2015,05/06/2020
* Eric Carlen,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 10/31/2020
* USD 324,500.00

The research is aimed at solving mathematical problems that are not only
significant as mathematics, but that have been suggested by problems arising in
physics and biology. The analysis of the equations governing physical and
biological processes often requires a precise quantitative understanding of the
relative sizes of various quantities involved in these processes, and this is
provided by mathematical inequalities, often of a geometric nature. The quest
for a better understanding of these processes is in part quest for new and more
precise mathematical inequalities. One way of discovering and proving such
mathematical inequalities, which is central to the project, is through the
consideration of auxiliary dynamical processes that evolve the state of a system
into a form that is amenable to analysis. This area of research has been
fruitful not only in producing results that are of interest to a wider
scientific community, but also in engaging the interest of Ph.D. students. The
intellectual merit of the research is that it will produce not only significant
new mathematics, but results that are relevant to physical and biological
sciences as well. These applications in other fields guarantee a broad impact of
the work, which is further enhanced by the involvement of students, contributing
to training of the next generation of researchers.

Among the many nonlinear evolution equations that arise in the description of
physical and biological systems are the Boltzmann equation and the Keller-Segel
equations for chemotaxis. For both of these, an essential source of information
on the behavior of solutions is a priori functional inequalities. For example,
solutions of the Boltzmann equation tend towards equilibrium solutions, and the
rate at which this happens is governed by an inequality relating relative
entropy and the entropy production forced by the evolution. Such functional
inequalities are established by completely solving a variational problem:
finding the minimum value of some functional, determining the full set of
minimizing functions, and finally, proving results that assert that if the value
of a functional is close to the optimal value, then its argument must be close
to an optimizer. Such complete solutions of variational problems are not only of
interest for studying the evolution of physical systems, but also, variational
problems can sometimes be best solved by studying an appropriate dynamics
associated with them. This interplay between nonlinear dynamics and variational
problems has been the source of much recent progress. This project focuses on
variational problems and on nonlinear evolution equations, with emphasis on
those problems in which the investigator expects a particularly fruitful
interplay. A second focus is on operator and trace inequalities for quantum
systems. Investigation of these is motivated by problems in quantum statistical
mechanics and quantum information theory, and again there is close interplay
between quantum dynamics and the inequalities to be investigated, except that
here functions are replaced by operators and non-commutativity issues arise.
