
* 1501049
* Inverse Problems: Visibility and Invisibility
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/23/2017
* Ting Zhou,MA,Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 188,798.00

Some of the most powerful methods of understanding the world around us use forms
of wave propagation: electromagnetic waves (e.g. light or radio); sound waves;
elastic waves and so on, because they can interact with different media in an
understandable way while exerting little influence on those media. The non-
intrusive nature of these sensing methods is applied in many areas of science
and technology including medical imaging, geophysics, non-destructive testing,
remote sensing and so on. The fundamental mathematical theory behind such
enhancement of "visibility" is the main aspect of inverse problems, while
another aspect of the subject seeks to hide an object from detection by waves,
that is, to make it "invisible". These projects concern both aspects, visibility
and invisibility, for various waves. For visibility, the investigator plans to
develop mathematical techniques to address some of the challenging questions in
inverse problems that may have real world applications in the future. For
instance, the Thermo-acoustic Tomography (TAT) medical imaging modality has the
potential to detect breast cancer cells at a much earlier stage than is
currently feasible. The simultaneous improvement in contrast and resolution
resulting from such coupled-physics modalities is the subject of intensive
mathematical study. Another example is the CT scan, whose mathematical theory is
the fundamental tool in integral geometry. Analysis of the mathematics of wave
propagation in complicated materials is essential for interpreting seismic
information about the earth. As for invisibility, the development of "meta-
materials" permits the customization of electromagnetic or acoustic media and
has inspired the theory of transformation-optics based invisible cloak design.
At the mathematical level, this leads to further applications based on
electromagnetic waves (e.g., light) manipulation. These projects will focus on a
couple of issues, known as the artificial blackhole and Eaton lens.

The first major topic of the project is inverse boundary value problems for
Maxwell's equations. Challenging questions to be investigated include: inverse
electromagnetic problems with incomplete data of measurements and inverse
electromagnetic problems on a medium with anisotropic parameters. We will also
consider some special solutions to Maxwell's equations that describe a type of
bending accelerating wave packets. This part of the project also concerns
electromagnetic invisibility and other applications based on transformation-
optics, such as artificial black holes. The PI is also proposing to investigate
another construction idea of cloaking device based on singular geometry, known
as the Eaton lens. The second major topic of the project focuses on inverse
problems arising in nonlinear wave propagation, where the nonlinearity provides
new information. This also leads naturally to the third topic of the project due
to the connection between hyperbolic wave propagations and geometric boundary
rigidity problems. These inverse problems form the basis of several tomography
methods. The PI plans to work on this topic for more generalized cases, and with
limited measurements. In the last part of the project the PI plans to consider
coupled-physics (i.e., hybrid) medical imaging modalities. In particular, the PI
is interested in the uniqueness of the reconstruction of electrical properties
from the internal absorbed radiation map.
