
* 1501019
* Weak Turbulence
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Pierre Germain,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Turbulence is the phenomenon by which a fluid flow, initially very smooth, can
develop smaller and smaller eddies, structures at smaller and smaller scales,
until it looks completely chaotic. Though anybody can observe this phenomenon,
and though it is of paramount importance in physics, aerospace engineering,
etc., it is very poorly understood at a conceptual level. Weak turbulence is a
related phenomenon, which is also poorly understood, but which might be
theoretically more approachable. Rather than fluid flows, it describes
situations where waves interact. The aim of this proposal is to develop
theoretical tools, and apply them to concrete physical examples, leading to a
deeper understanding of weak turbulence.

To be more specific, the main object of focus will be the nonlinear Schroedinger
equation set on a compact domain, which is one of the simplest and most used
models to describe nonlinear wave, or dispersive phenomena. It is believed by
physicists that the right regime to observe weak turbulence involves three
limits: weakly nonlinear (small data), big box (large domain), random phases
(decorrelation of the Fourier modes in a statistical sense). The aim of this
project is to investigate how these three limiting procedures can be made
rigorous. It involves spectral questions (understanding the eigenvalues and
eigenmodes of the Laplacian on domains), nonlinear aspects (how these eigenmodes
interact) and statistical questions (finding the right probabilistic description
of the stationary state).
