
* 1501067
* Free Boundary Problems and Other Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2015,06/09/2017
* Antoine Mellet,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 270,000.00

One aspect of this research project concerns the mathematical analysis of so-
called self-organizing phenomena, that is, the process by which a large group of
agents (which could be fish, birds, molecules, etc.) behaves as a coherent
structure without the direction of a leader but through only local interactions
of individual agents with their nearest neighbors. The goal of the project is to
investigate how the one-to-one interactions between the agents determine the
global behavior of the group. A second aspect of this project concerns the
mathematical study of the motion of small droplets of liquid on a solid support.
Various models have been developed to describe this phenomenon; this project
investigates the detailed mathematical properties of several of these models, as
a step toward better understanding which models can be used to accurately
describe specific behaviors of the droplets. Of particular interest are the
geometric properties of the contact line (the interface where air, liquid and
solid meet). Finally, this project also investigates mathematical problems
related to the modeling of heat propagation through certain materials (mostly
insulating crystals). One of the challenges is to better understand how the
microscopic laws, which describe the motion of the atoms of the crystals, yield
the classical macroscopic models for heat diffusion (such as the classical
Fourier law).

Most of the mathematical problems under study in this project are free boundary
problems (partial differential equations to be solved on domains that are not
known a priori, but must be found as part of the solution). This is the case in
particular of the moving drop problem, where the free boundary is the contact
line mentioned above. The project investigates how various models (corresponding
to different choices of free boundary conditions) affect the regularity of the
contact line. The project also studies the relationship of self-organizing
phenomena under simple attraction/repulsion mechanisms to fine regularity
properties for some obstacle problems of order higher than two (such as the
biharmonic obstacle problem). While the harmonic obstacle problem is a classical
free boundary problem, there are still many unanswered questions concerning its
higher order counterpart. Many classical tools (such as the maximum principle)
seem no longer relevant, while other tools, in particular tools from geometric
measure theory, should play an important role. The project also investigates
related evolution problems that model the phenomenon of phase separation
(leading to patches with positive concentration separated by empty regions). The
equations under study are reminiscent of Cahn-Hilliard equations, but involve
degenerate and non-local diffusion phenomena. Finally, the project explores the
rigorous derivation of non-local integro-differential equations from kinetic
models for heat propagation (and other transport phenomena). One such kinetic
model is the Boltzmann phonon equation. The study of this equation is still in
its early stage compared to the considerable amount of work devoted to the
Boltzmann equation for dilute gases, and the project will contribute to the
development of this theory.
