
* 1502632
* RTG: Analysis on Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2015,07/08/2022
* Ezra Getzler,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,185,074.00

Analysis on manifolds is a broad area of mathematics that arose historically in
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries from the study of physical problems. It
relates to questions such as the shape of a soap bubble, the overtones of a
drum, and even to basic questions in number theory, such as the distribution of
primes. The gravitational force is described with great success by Einstein's
theory of General Relativity, and the theory of the recently discovered Higgs
boson also depends on the study of differential equations on manifolds. This
Research Training Group project aims to increase the number of US students
interested in pursuing the study of analysis, and more specifically, analysis on
manifolds.

This grant will support a rich educational environment, for undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in the field of analysis on
manifolds, mentored by junior and senior faculty in the area. We will establish
a summer workshop for advanced undergraduates and students at the threshold of
graduate study, to increase their fluency in the language of modern analysis. We
will enhance the courses in analysis available to our undergraduate students,
and expand the range of research experiences for undergraduates. We will also
conduct outreach activities among high school students and teachers in the
Chicago region. The larger goal is to increase the number of well-prepared US
citizens who pursue careers in the mathematical sciences, with a particular
effort to increase the numbers of under-represented minorities in this field.
