
* 1554456
* CAREER: Noncommutative Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2016,05/20/2020
* Anna Skripka,NM,University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 449,963.00

This research project centers on noncommutativity in various problems of
analysis and its applications to mathematical physics. An operation * on the
elements of a set is said to be commutative if x*y is equal to y*x for all
elements x and y in the set. For example, the usual operations of addition and
multiplication on the set of real numbers are commutative, whereas the operation
of division is not commutative since, for instance, 2 divided by 3 is not equal
to 3 divided by 2. Noncommutativity is an inherent phenomenon in many areas of
modern mathematics and its applications. It has been a source of intricate
obstacles as well as mathematical depth and beauty since J. von Neumann's
formulation of quantum mechanics. The integrated program of research and
education in this project is aimed at treating noncommutativity effects that
arise in various problems of analysis and its applications to noncommutative
geometry, mathematical physics, and operator algebras, as well as to
strengthening connections between these areas of mathematics. Research and
career development of students will be facilitated by workshops targeted at
graduate students and junior researchers, organized in conjunction with research
conferences for the broader mathematical community. University students will
participate in an outreach program to enhance mathematical skills and knowledge
of high school students and teachers and raise appreciation of mathematics by a
general community. The research projects are vertically integrated to provide
ample opportunity for student research at different levels.

This research project includes establishing properties of single and
multivariate operator functions that are similar to classical properties of the
respective scalar functions, deriving bounds for related Schur multipliers and
similar transformations, describing spectral characteristics of perturbations of
differential operators, understanding geometry of higher order perturbations and
finding its meaning in noncommutative geometry, and describing structure of
elements in operator algebras. Resolution of these problems depends on
development of innovative operator theoretic methods that are expected to emerge
from a synthesis of various techniques in analysis and operator theory. The
project aims to ultimately benefit areas of mathematics beyond the topics
investigated in the project.
