
* 1565388
* Qualitative Studies of Nonlinear Elliptic and Parabolic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,07/02/2016
* Peter Polacik,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 179,998.00

This project is concerned with nonlinear parabolic and elliptic partial
differential equations. Parabolic equations are evolution equations--the unknown
function (i.e., the solution) depends on one or several spatial variables and
one more distinguished variable playing the role of time. Such equations are
widely used in models in applied sciences, in particular, in chemical
engineering, combustion theory, and ecology. Given an initial state of the
system, the problem is to describe its future states. Mathematically, this
translates to an understanding of the spatial structure (e.g., homogeneity,
symmetry, concentration) of the solution at large times, as well as of its
temporal behavior, such as approach to a time-independent steady state or
periodic behavior, or possibilities of an even more complicated behavior.
Elliptic equations are equations whose solutions can be viewed as time-
independent solutions, or equilibria, of parabolic equations (and many other
types of evolution equations). Naturally, therefore, analysis of elliptic
equations is one of the key basic steps toward understanding the dynamics of
parabolic equations. Of particular significance to the present project are
symmetry properties of steady states and the global structure of the whole set
of steady states for certain elliptic equations. Qualitative analysis of
solutions to be carried out in this project is important for the internal
development of the mathematical theory of partial differential equations as well
as for improvement of their modeling relevance. Rigorous analysis maintains its
indispensable role even in the presence of the high computing power currently
available for numerical analysis. Not only does it provide guidelines for and
simplifications of otherwise formidable computations, in many situations
qualitative analysis is the only way to deal with difficult problems concerning
general solutions of nonlinear equations.

The research in this project will develop along several main topics. For
parabolic equations on the real line, the principal investigator will first
analyze the behavior of front-like solutions and their approach to propagating
terraces (stacked systems of traveling fronts). He will then take a closer look
at quasiconvergence properties of general solutions with respect to a localized
topology. For multidimensional parabolic problems on the entire space, one of
the basic questions to be addressed is whether bounded solutions converge to
equilibrium, at least along a sequence of times, as solutions of the one- and
two-dimensional equations do. Two other problems deal with Liouville-type
theorems for entire solutions of nonlinear parabolic equations. In one of them,
the principal investigator suggests a way of using a Liouville theorem in a
proof of the approach to propagating terraces for solutions of multidimensional
parabolic problems. In the other one, scaling techniques in parabolic partial
differential equations and a Liouville theorem are used for analyzing solutions
with singularities. A major problem in this area is to determine the optimal
range of exponents for the validity of the Liouville theorem. In elliptic
equations on the entire space, one of the problems concerns solutions that decay
to zero in all but one variable. The principal investigator seeks to establish
the existence of solutions that are quasiperiodic in the nondecay variable. He
will also continue working on his projects on symmetry and the nodal structure
of nonnegative solutions of elliptic and parabolic equations and on threshold
solutions in various parabolic problems.
