
* 1600650
* Mappings and Measures in Sub-Riemannian and Metric Spaces
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,07/26/2021
* Jeremy Tyson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 269,784.00

The goal of this project is to investigate geometry and analysis in spaces with
rough or fractal structure. The project focuses especially on spaces which are
poorly described by classical Euclidean language, such as fractals and sub-
Riemannian spaces. The latter occur as mathematical models for problems in
robotics, neurobiology, celestial mechanics and other physical systems. In each
of these models, the underlying geometry is inherently nonsmooth. The proposed
research will consequently contribute to developing the mathematical framework
which simultaneously underlies a variety of physical applications. On the
geometric side, nonsmooth notions of curvature will be studied. Curvature is a
fundamental concept in modern geometry. For instance, general relativity
predicts that curvature is the primary geometric feature of space responsible
for gravity. Nonsmooth generalizations of curvature and their relationship to
the structure of measures will also be studied. Measure theory is a wide-ranging
mathematical generalization of fundamental concepts of length, area, and volume.
Finally, analysis refers to the dynamic properties of transformations acting
between spaces. Since the classical Newton--Leibniz theory of the derivative is
not well-adapted to transformations of nonsmooth spaces, there is currently
significant interest in developing a new analytic toolkit to extend the
machinery of calculus beyond its usual context. The principle investigator will
continue to train graduate students, postdocs and early-career researchers.
Results of this research program will be disseminated via talks at conferences
and workshops, publication of journal articles, and exposition for a general
mathematical audience. The PI is currently coauthoring a graduate textbook on
analysis in nonsmooth spaces. The ongoing preparation of this book will be
coordinated with advances in the field, including those obtained as part of this
research program.

The project concerns the geometry of measures and submanifolds in, and mappings
between, sub-Riemannian manifolds. Three coordinating themes will be considered.
The first set of problems concerns density of measures and the geometry of
submanifolds. The main goal is a sub-Riemannian analog of a celebrated theorem
of David Preiss characterizing rectifiability (a measure-theoretic notion of
smoothness) via densities. This line of investigation will extend to the sub-
Riemannian setting some fundamental aspects of Euclidean geometric measure
theory tied to notions of curvature for submanifolds. The primary methodology
for this investigation involves the approximation of sub-Riemannian spaces by
Riemannian spaces, and an analysis of the limiting behavior of geometric
quantities in the Riemannian approximations. The second theme concerns iteration
of conformal and quasiregular mappings. Such iterative schemes provide a basic
combinatorial model for fractal objects. They arise naturally in both hyperbolic
geometry and number theory. Building on his previous work for similarity
mappings, the principle investigator will extend the analysis to conformal
mappings. The goal is a detailed description of the geometry of self-conformal
limit sets in sub-Riemannian spaces and natural measures on such sets. Finally,
the principle investigator will study the type problem for sub-Riemannian
quasiregular mappings. The goal here is to understand both the flexibility of
quasiregular mappings as well as inherent geometric obstructions to their
construction. The principle investigator will also investigate new constructions
of Sobolev mappings inducing optimal measure and dimension distortion, as well
as criteria for the density of Lipschitz mappings in spaces of Sobolev mappings
with sub-Riemannian targets. The principle investigator will take advantage of
his prior expertise in all of the aforementioned areas, as well as the latest
advances in related fields, to pursue answers to the proposed problems. The
proposed research will have a broad impact; it addresses a wide range of
questions at the intersection of different mathematical areas. The principle
investigator will use this broad framework to identify specific problems
suitable for beginning graduate students and postdocs.
