
* 1600749
* Linear and Nonlinear Dispersive Waves: Solitons, Nonlinear Resonances and Spectral Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2016,06/20/2016
* Avraham Soffer,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The research in this project is focused on the analysis of wave dynamics. Wave
propagation and other properties are the backbone of modern Science and
Technology. Quantum waves control the nano world, electromagnetic waves manifest
as light, lasers, heat, and are responsible for chemical reactions and
electronic devices. Gravity theory is described by Einstein wave equation as
well. The analysis of complex systems via such wave equations is extremely
difficult, and even super fast computers cannot do the job. Therefore, deeper
understanding of the equations provides new tools for the relevant features of
the solutions. At the same time, the acquired knowledge opens new directions of
research in mathematics. In this proposal the behavior of special solutions,
called coherent states, of fundamental equations of mathematical physics are
studied. In particular, focus is given to the effect of disturbances of such
solutions over long periods of time, in an effort to control the stability, life
time and evolution of such solutions. The cases mostly considered are solutions
called solitons- which are clumps of self trapped waves in some small domain.
The solitons formed by laser beams going through an optical fiber play a key
role in fast communication and other future planned optical devices.

Soliton dynamics of the nonlinear Schroedinger equation will be studied. While
the complete understanding of the solutions of such equations for all initial
data seems remote, a novel direction is proposed: The interaction of solitons
with radiation, with large potential terms, and with each other, will be
analyzed by identifying processes which are adiabatic in time. Relevant
adiabatic dispersive theory will be used, previously developed by the PI and new
planned methods. It is expected to complete a gap in our understanding of a
fundamental aspect of nonlinear scattering: interaction process of a soliton
with large perturbation. The study of nonhomogeneous nonlinearities of the long
range type, initiated by the PI, which are fundamental to many nonlinear
scattering problems (e.g. Kink scattering), uncovered a new, subtle resonance
phenomena: the unbound growth of some Invariant Sobolev norm of such systems. It
is the aim of the research to understand the implications of these new
processes. Dispersive estimates for linear equations play a central role in
spectral and scattering theory. The PI's recent and future work is to develop an
alternative, abstract theory. By avoiding the need to study the explicit (eigen)
solutions or fundamental solutions of the linear equation, one can expand the
dispersive theory to new classes of problems, including dynamics on manifolds.
