
* 1600371
* Research in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2016,04/01/2016
* Debraj Chakrabarti,MI,Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 102,290.00

This project combines two very powerful ideas of mathematics -- that of complex
numbers and that of the calculus. Complex numbers include quantities such as the
square root of negative one. The calculus studies how physical or geometric
quantities vary in space or time. The combination of these ideas (called complex
analysis) leads to far-reaching and beautiful results about smoothly varying
complex quantities (called holomorphic functions). One may use these ideas to
model various natural phenomena such as electrical attraction or the motion of
liquids. These considerations also have surprising consequences in other parts
of mathematics, such as the properties of prime numbers, the geometry of higher
dimensional spaces, and the study of equations (called partial differential
equations) used to describe many physical processes such as heat conduction and
the propagation of waves. This research project studies the behavior of
holomorphic functions as one approaches the boundary of the region in higher
dimensional space where the function is defined. The investigator will also
continue his successful mentoring of undergraduate student research in related
topics.

The behavior of holomorphic functions of several variables is well-understood on
strongly pseudoconvex domains. In this project, the goal is to study the
extension of such results to new and more general types of domains. Among the
questions under study are estimates for the solutions of the solutions of the
inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann equations, understanding what happens when there
are no such estimates, and the boundary behavior of holomorphic functions. The
domains to be studied include piecewise smooth domains (in particular product
domains), Levi-flat Stein domains in complex manifolds, and non-pseudoconvex
domains, both with and without "holes." The research will involve both the
investigation of general questions and the careful study of particular examples,
which can exhibit unexpected phenomena associated to these domains. Tools
employed in this project to study these problems include a priori estimates,
integral formulas, and algebraic methods based on sheaf theory, as well as
insights from other parts of mathematics such as partial differential equations,
functional analysis, and differential geometry.
