
* 1600129
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2016,06/13/2018
* Panagiotis Souganidis,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2019
* USD 260,000.00

The modeling of many phenomena in the physical and social sciences and
engineering, such as porous media, composite materials, turbulence and
combustion, traffic models, spread of crime, agent models and others, involve
heterogeneous media described by partial differential equations. These typically
depend upon many parameters and vary randomly on a small scale. In addition,
often the available information (e.g., data used in weather prediction) is not
exact (deterministic) but statistical (random), with large fluctuations. On
macroscopic scales that are much larger than the ones of the heterogeneities,
the models often exhibit an effective deterministic behavior, which is much
simpler than the original one. The process of averaging such data is known as
homogenization. Mathematically, this means that the original random problem is
replaced by a deterministic one. When this averaging is not possible, which is
typically the case when the fluctuations are too strong (wild), it is necessary
to deal with so-called stochastic media (stochastic partial differential
equations), which have rather singular behavior in space and time. The
mathematical study of both the stochastic averaging and the stochastic partial
differential equations requires original ideas and the development of new
methodologies, since both topics fall outside the traditional theories of
averaging and partial differential equations. Another burgeoning area of
research in which similar issues surface is mathematical biology, where
experiments at the molecular scale, as well as theoretical advances, have led to
new, sophisticated mathematical models. Novel tools and ideas are needed to
study these problems further and to validate all the relevant regimes/scales of
the parameters affecting the experimentally observed and theoretically
conjectured behaviors.

This project is directed at the development of general methodologies to study
random homogenization, nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations, and
applications to front propagation, phase transitions, and mathematical biology.
Random environments are much more general than periodic ones. The latter
basically involve fixed translations of a certain equation, whereas the former
can be thought of as involving all possible (relevant) equations. This leads to
considerable issues concerning the lack of compactness. It is therefore
necessary to develop novel arguments that combine both the differential and
random structures of the media under scrutiny. In this setting, the equation is
the random variable and the special dependence signifies the location in space
where the equation is observed. The principal investigator and his collaborators
were the first to consider stochastic homogenization in stationary ergodic
environments. A large part of the project is dedicated to further development of
the theory. Stochastic partial differential equations have coefficients with
very singular (Brownian) behavior. In the linear context, this can usually be
handled by known methods, such as the classical martingale approach. This method
is based on the linear character of the higher order part of the equation and
thus cannot be used for nonlinear problems, where it is necessary to find
appropriate alternative notions of solutions. These, in the context of first-
and second-order nonlinear equations, are the stochastic viscosity and pathwise
entropy solutions that have been introduced by the principal investigator and
his collaborators. A part of the project is the study of the qualitative
behavior/properties of these solutions. In the context of mathematical biology,
the principal investigator plans to work on models of adaptation/selection as
well as on models of the biology of development. The former concerns questions
related to the adaptation of species to global change, the resistance of insects
to pesticides, etc. The latter aims at developing models to study how positional
information is provided to proliferating cells, the main questions being the
formation and location of sharp and precise boundaries.
