
* 1600360
* Translation Surfaces and Their Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2016,07/11/2016
* David Aulicino,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 05/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to advance our understanding of a
fundamental mathematical object called a "translation surface." From an
elementary perspective, translation surfaces can be viewed as a polygon with a
recipe for gluing its edges. For example, gluing opposite sides of a square
produces a torus, which is the mathematical name for the shape of a doughnut.
Most spectacularly, these polygons quickly lead to deep mathematics at the
frontiers of research and they intersect a wide range of fields including
algebra, geometry, and dynamical systems. Furthermore, translation surfaces have
started to appear in mathematical physics with connections to quantum mechanics.
From an educational standpoint, polygons arise in high school geometry and the
PI has successfully explained to high school students how to find periodic
trajectories of a ball on a rectangular table, using standard reflecting rules,
using translation surfaces. The elementary nature of polygons allows
undergraduates to meaningfully experiment with them using software, such as
Sage, which is open source software that is freely available on the internet.
The PI has already developed projects for undergraduates concerning translation
surfaces.

The goals of this project are threefold. First, the PI will study the geometry
of orbit closures of translation surfaces through classification problems.
Secondly, the PI will apply his knowledge of the geometry of orbit closures to
resolve questions concerning dynamics in moduli space and on translation
surfaces. He will approach problems concerning the anomalous behavior of
Lyapunov exponents of the Kontsevich-Zorich cocycle through a conjecture he
proposes. Finally, he will study the structure of quadratic differentials with
higher order poles on finite genus Riemann surfaces, which has applications to
mathematical physics.
