
* 1600643
* Analysis of Extremal Black Holes
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2016,04/15/2016
* Stefanos Aretakis,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2019
* USD 175,511.00

Black holes have captured the imagination of scientists and the general public
since they were predicted by Einstein's general theory of relativity. The PI
intends to investigate fundamental mathematical problems concerning the dynamics
of black holes in the context of the initial value problem for the celebrated
Einstein equations. One of the most outstanding problems in this direction is
the black hole stability conjecture, namely that black holes are indeed stable
under perturbations from the outside. The resolution of this conjecture would
underpin the relevance of black holes in the physical theory. Previous works of
the PI uncovered a novel instability property of the so-called extremal black
holes under a special class of perturbations. This instability has been further
studied by several research groups worldwide both from the point of view of
rigorous mathematics and numerics. The PI will strive to provide a complete
description for the stability and instability properties of extremal black
holes, obtaining in particular mathematically rigorous results for associated
physical phenomena predicted by numerical simulations. The project will also
investigate important global aspects of the Einstein equations including
radiative properties of gravitational waves. Work on this proposal will improve
our society's understanding of black holes, and consequently the structure of
our universe.

The focus of the project is the study of three central problems relating to
local and global properties of hyperbolic partial differential equations arising
in general relativity. First, the project will investigate the stability problem
for extremal and sub-extremal black holes. In this direction, the PI and his
collaborators have developed a new method in the context of spherical symmetry
which addresses various difficulties at the event horizon and null infinity and
is expected to have a wide range of applications in hyperbolic partial
differential equations (PDEs). The PI intends to extend this method and also
obtain finer boundedness and decay properties of linear waves in order to obtain
global results for the black hole stability problem. This project will probe
various instabilities in the extremal case which originate from the convergence
of non-axisymmetric quasinormal modes to finite values on the real axis and the
coupling of the so-called trapping effect and superradiance. These phenomena are
of fundamental importance in black hole dynamics and have been the object of
extensive numerical simulations in the physics literature, but no rigorous
results are presently available. Second, the project will investigate the gluing
problem for characteristic initial data of hyperbolic equations, which is an
extension of the Riemannian gluing problem, the latter being intensively studied
in geometric analysis. Finally the project will develop a scattering theory for
the Einstein equations which is expected to provide new insights into the global
behavior of the Einstein equations and in particular the study of gravitational
waves. The PI strongly believes that the proposal will lead to the discovery of
genuinely new analytical techniques applicable in a wider spectrum of problems
in geometry, analysis, PDEs and mathematical physics.
