
* 1600857
* Von Neumann Algebras: Rigidity, Applications to Measurable Dynamics, and Model Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2016,08/16/2018
* Thomas Sinclair,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,000.00

The theory of von Neumann algebras was initially developed in the 1930s and
1940s by Francis J. Murray and John von Neumann as a vast generalization of
matrix algebra necessary to capture the mathematical complexities of quantum
mechanics by encoding the symmetries of the quantum mechanical system in roughly
the same way that matrix algebra encodes the symmetries of classical mechanics
and general relativity. Over the intervening decades it has been realized that
von Neumann algebras represent the symmetries of many objects studied in the
physical and biological sciences, leading to applications in diverse fields such
as the theory of statistical mechanics, the structure of DNA molecules, the
theory of error correcting codes, and the theory of quantum information theory
and quantum computing. The building blocks of these symmetries are called
"factors." The main goal of the theory of von Neumann algebras is to provide an
effective classification of factors to understand how symmetries arise in these
various settings. One approach is through so-called rigidity, where it is shown
that a small, known group of symmetries actually describes the entire, vast set
of symmetries of a factor. Another direction addresses the computability of the
symmetries of a factor via the ability to simulate the factor in a computer by
matrix algebras, what is known as the Connes embedding problem.

The last decade has seen a rapid growth in the understanding of the structure of
factors, due to the development of deformation-rigidity theory that was
initiated by Sorin Popa in the early 2000s. These results and approaches have
additionally had a remarkable impact on the fields of measurable dynamics of
groups, descriptive set theory of Polish group actions, probability theory, as
well as on geometric group theory and coarse geometry. Working to develop and
expand this theory, the principal investigator's research focuses on the
connections between operator algebras, geometric and measurable group theory,
Lie groups, and ergodic theory, specifically through the use of geometric
deformations that were first investigated in work by the principal investigator
and Ionut Chifan. The principal investigator is also interested in the
application of logic and model-theoretic techniques to operator algebras. The
project aims to achieve the following broad objectives: (1) to continue
developing a perspective from which tools from Lie groups and geometric group
theory can be used to classify the structure of and to demonstrate new examples
of rigidity phenomena in the context of group and measure-measure space von
Neumann algebras; (2) to find applications of these techniques to measurable
group theory, probability theory, and the classification of C*-algebras; (3) to
further explore and develop connections between continuous model theory and von
Neumann algebras, C*-algebras, and the theory of operator systems with
applications to the Connes embedding problem. The principal investigator will
continue to teach advanced courses and organize seminars in operator algebras,
working closely with graduate students to develop and foster talent and
discovery. He will also continue to broadly and actively disseminate his
research through publications, seminar and colloquium talks, and conferences and
workshops, at both the national and international level.
