
* 1600688
* Rigidity in von Neumann Algebras: Connections and Applications to Orbit Equivalence, Geometric Group Theory, and Continuous Model Theory
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,06/08/2021
* Ionut Chifan,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 234,458.00

The study of von Neumann algebras began in efforts to understand particle
physics but subsequently became an independent discipline that has stimulated
the development of powerful mathematical theories, bringing valuable insight to
other areas of physics (statistical mechanics), biology (DNA structure), and
engineering (cell-phone design). This project further advances research in this
field and is expected to reveal new applications and establish new bridges to
other areas in mathematics (ergodic theory, group theory, logic, and
probability). The activities of this project provide ample dissertation subject
matter for three graduate students who are involved in the research.

This research project explores new boundaries and technical inputs in
deformation/rigidity theory towards the classification of von Neumann algebras
arising from groups and their actions on probability spaces. The project targets
the following specific themes: find new natural examples of actions of groups on
probability spaces that are remembered by their von Neumann algebras; construct
the first examples of property (T) groups that can be reconstructed from their
von Neumann algebras; investigate the structure of von Neumann algebras arising
from mapping class groups and outer automorphisms of free groups; find new
invariants to classify ultrapowers of factors and explore in depth their
applications to continuous model theory. To achieve these goals the principal
investigator will develop new methods to implement algebraic, cohomological,
geometric, and dynamical information about a group and its actions into the
analytic framework of von Neumann algebras. In addition, the project pursues new
analytic tools towards the calculation of the symmetry groups of ultrapower
factors. The results arising from this project are expected to reveal
significant new applications and connections to representation theory, geometric
group theory, orbit equivalence, and logic.
