
* 1600705
* Conference: Harmonic Analysis, Complex Analysis, Spectral Theory and All That
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/01/2016,12/07/2015
* Tadeusz Iwaniec,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,200.00

The conference "Harmonic Analysis, Complex Analysis, Spectral Theory and All
That" will be held at The Mathematical Research and Conference Center (MRCC) in
Bedlewo, Poland, July 31-August 6, 2016. The conference enter belongs to the
Institute of Mathematics of Polish Academy of Sciences - International Banach
Center. It is expected that about 100 participants will come from Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Norway, Poland, Spain, Russia, Sweden, USA and
other countries. A significant number, about 30, of the participants will be PhD
students and postdoctoral fellows. One of the aims of the conference is to bring
graduate students to geometric harmonic analysis where there are a wide range of
applications. The conference organizers aim to reach the critical mass of young
scholars, women and men, that will intensify interdisciplinary interaction
already in their post-doc phase with senior researchers. This conference, in
major part, focusses on recent advances in harmonic and complex analysis with
numerous connections and important applications in mind. The aim is to strongly
promote linkages between the modern theory of 2D-geometric analysis (in its
various manifestations, including holomorphic dynamics, inverse conductivity
problems, partial differential equations, geometric measure theory calculus of
variations, fractal geometry) with other possible developments, thereby bringing
new ideas and results to each field. The organizing committee's background and
experience affirm those goals.

More information can be found on the conference website:
http://bcc.impan.pl/16Harmonic/
