
* 1600568
* Dynamics and Kinetics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2016,05/21/2018
* Leonid Bunimovich,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

The project addresses several central problems in the analysis and prediction of
the evolution of complex systems, i.e. the systems with complex dynamics and/or
systems with a large number of interacting components (networks). Real world and
engineering networks often have tens of thousands of components. Theory,
developed by the principal investigator, allows one to compress networks of any
type into much smaller networks while preserving important information about the
initial large network. In the proposed project, this theory will be further
developed. And, in collaboration with Center for Disease Control (CDC)
researchers, applied to an analysis of transmission and cross-immunoreactivity
networks for Hepatitis C. Cross-immunoreactivity means that antibodies produced
by the immune system to fight some specific type of viruses sometimes fights
other types of viruses as well. Cross-immunoreactivity is found for Hepatitis C,
influenza, dengue, and is a basis for a mathematical model developed by the
author with CDC colleagues. Traditional views on evolution of systems with
complex dynamics suggest that only long term predictions for such systems are
possible, since one should wait until the system stabilizes. A new approach,
proposed by the principal investigator, allows one to make short term
predictions on the evolution of chaotic systems. It will be possible to answer
questions such as, "which state of the system is most likely?". This research
will extend this approach to a larger class of systems with complex dynamics and
also address problem of recurrence. Understanding of a fundamental mechanism of
chaos, called defocusing, will be essentially extended. Discovery of this
mechanism by the principal investigator has already found numerous applications
in theoretical and experimental physics. New visual models of systems with
various types of chaotic behavior can be included into basic and advanced
courses on complex systems and chaos.

The proposed research addresses some long standing and technically challenging,
as well as new natural problems, in the theory of dynamical systems and
statistical mechanics. A new area of finite time qualitative properties of
dynamical and stochastic systems, pioneered by the principal investigator, will
be further developed. This will make use of combinations of methods and ideas of
symbolic dynamics, discrete mathematics and probability. The theory of
isospectral transformation of networks will be further developed with a special
emphasis on analysis of attractors of sequences of such transformations in the
space of networks. Understanding the mechanism of defocusing, a fundamental
mechanism of hyperbolicity (chaos), will be advanced. This uses new classes of
chaotic billiards where focusing components are not forced to be far from each
other. Classical Ehrenfests' gas will be shown to have unexpected properties
thanks to a new observation that billiards with a point and with a finite size
particle can have quite different dynamics.
