
* 1600779
* Well-Posedness and Long Time Behavior of Some Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,12/20/2016
* Hao Jia,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 145,000.00

The proposed projects aim to solve important problems for fundamental nonlinear
partial differential equations from areas of mathematical physics, including the
Navier Stokes equations and the nonlinear wave equations, which describe the
flow of incompressible fluid and a wide variety of wave phenomenon respectively.
In practice, the questions about solutions to these equations that we are
interested in can be simple, such as what is the drag force of a boat with a
given shape, or when nonlinear interference between different electro-magnetic
waves becomes too serious. The answers to these simple questions can however be
quite complicated, and usually depend on deep understanding of the underlying
mathematical equations. These equations are nonlinear, for which our current
understanding is still fundamentally incomplete. As is often the case,
relatively few ``global quantities" are already sufficient to provide
satisfactory control on the most interesting aspects of the complicated
solutions. It is an ultimate goal in many theoretic studies of nonlinear partial
differential equations to find these quantities and the mechanism through which
they control the solutions. These quantities can play an essential role in
guiding practical applications of these fundamental equations, such as in the
design of numerical schemes to calculate the solutions, by allowing us to focus
on relatively few important parameters, while ignoring large amount of other
non-essential parameters.

The projects on Navier Stokes focus on the following problems. 1. The regularity
of axi-symmetric solutions with small initial swirl component. Since the other
components can still be large, compactness arguments are not sufficient to
obtain regularity and suitable dynamical control on the solution is needed. 2.
The spectral assumption related to large scale invariant solutions. Such
spectral assumption appears naturally in the study of large scale invariant
solutions in the non-perturbative regime, and has profound applications in the
uniqueness problem of Leray-Hopf weak solutions. 3. Large distance asymptotics
of steady state solutions. For such problems, it is well documented that
nonlinearity is important even for small solutions. The projects on energy
critical nonlinear wave equations are centered around the soliton resolution
conjecture for various models. For the focusing energy critical wave equation
and energy critical wave map equations, the PI aims to prove the soliton
resolution conjecture along a sequence of times in the non-radial case, based on
recent partial results. The PI also aims to establish full soliton resolution
under certain additional conditions, such as in the case of one bubble
concentration, or in the radial case. Another model the PI plans to study is the
defocusing energy critical wave equation with a trapping potential, in the non-
radial case. In this case, basic questions such as the ``ground state
conjecture" are still open. More interestingly, it appears that one can now
describe rigorously the generic and non-generic behavior of solutions in a non-
perturbative regime. The PI plans to address some of these questions.
