
* 1645673
* Dynamical System Approach in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2016,06/14/2020
* Nan Lu,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 88,365.00

The main goal of this project is to study dynamical behavior of special
solutions for some hyperbolic type partial differential equations (PDEs), which
include nonlinear wave equation, nonlinear Schrodinger equation and compressible
Euler equation. These equations are widely used to model various problems
arising from physics, engineering, biology, finance, etc. The PI aims to
construct certain special solutions for those aforementioned equations and their
perturbations to understand the modeled phenomena. The perturbations considered
in this project have either different scales or randomness, which requires new
mathematical ideas and tools to handle. The successfully constructed solutions
will not only provide new theoretical results but also stimulate efficient
numerical algorithms to compute solutions in multi-scale and stochastic
dynamical systems.

More specifically, the PI intends to study the following problems rigorously.
The first category of problems is to construct special dynamical structures for
three kinds of hyperbolic PDEs, which include a system of nonlinear wave
equations, the cubic focusing Schrodinger equation and quasilinear Schrodinger
equation in high dimensions. All these problems have multiple spatio-temporal
scales, which requires new mathematical ideas and analytical tools to handle.
The next problem is to study the persistence of Sine-Gordon breather under
multiplicative noise perturbation. The main aim is to understand the effect of
stochastic forcing. A new method stemming from invariant manifold, random
dynamical system and ergodic theory needs to be developed. The last problem in
this project is to study the asymptotic behavior of solutions near some steady
states for isentropic and non-isentropic compressible flows by using ideas of
invariant manifold. The PI will extend existing ideas and develop techniques
both on geometric and analytic aspects to provide not only a solution but also a
new perspective of this problem.
