
* 1656845
* Quantitative and Qualitative properties of solutions of partial differential equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2016,08/10/2016
* Jiuyi Zhu,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 92,859.00

The proposal is concerned with the analysis and applications of nonlinear
partial differential equations. The model problems in this proposal arise from
the study of various nonlinear phenomena and other scientific disciplines,
including condensed matter physics, elasticity, inverse problem,
electrodynamics, quantum mechanics, fluid mechanics, mathematics biology,
differential geometry, etc. The focus of the proposal research is the
investigation of the quantitative and qualitative properties of solutions for
partial differential equations. Providing quantitative and qualitative
information for the solutions is fundamental and essential in the study of
partial differential equations, which lies in the core of mathematical analysis.
It is often the case that the most effective and economical way in scientific
research is to explore properties of solutions and then to develop algorithm in
accordance. Besides being very useful in applied science, the investigation of
various kinds of structures and properties of solutions for various types of
equations absolutely leads to new theories in mathematics.

The proposed projects include quantitative uniqueness, eigenfunction and
eigenvalue estimates, as well as Liouville-type theorems. Techniques and ideas
from analysis area, such as elliptic estimates and Fourier analysis, will be
combined and applied into this project. The proposed research should enhance the
understanding of classical and Steklov eigenvalue problems, semilinear and
higher order elliptic equations, wave equations, fractional Laplacians, fully
nonlinear equations, etc. Further research will be devoted to the study of
quantitative uniqueness of parabolic differential equations and other important
equations from mathematical physics. Another related direction is the study of
phase separations phenomenon in Bose-Einstein condensate. Emphasis will be
placed on the two components Gross-Pitaevskki system. An important part of
proposed research is on eigenfunction and eigenvalue estimates. Techniques and
insights in the various areas cross-fertilize each other in a fruitful way in
this area. The topics consist of measure of nodal sets (zero level sets),
asymptotic behavior of eigenvalues, Lebesgue norm estimates, as well as doubling
estimates of Steklov eigenfunctions and classical eigenfunctions. Much effort
will be made towards Yau's conjecture asserting that the size of nodal sets is
comparable to its frequency. The principal investigator will also continue the
previous investigation on Liouville-type theorems on nonexistence of solutions
for fractional Laplacian equations and fully nonlinear partial differential
equations.
