
* 1664369
* Rigidity of Lipschitz and Related Mappings on Metric Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,07/06/2017
* Guy David,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 119,071.00

The most basic setting for differential calculus is the study of smoothly
changing functions on the real line. In this project, more general, non-smooth,
functions that are defined on geometric objects (metric spaces) that may be very
different from the real line will be investigated. These geometries may be
abstract objects with no reasonable embedding into any Euclidean geometry, or
they may be fractal, or they may otherwise admit complicated behavior at all
scales. Far from being a technical curiosity, non-smooth analysis and geometry
have now become important tools in many areas of pure and applied mathematics
and computer science, where non-Euclidean geometries may arise. For example,
from discrete groups or dynamical systems, as limits of smooth objects, as large
data sets, or in computational problems.

In more precise terms, the goal of this project is to study the relationship
between, on the one hand, the infinitesimal and global geometry of non-smooth
spaces and, on the other hand, the analysis of Lipschitz and related classes of
mappings defined on these spaces. One specific goal is to further understand the
spaces which allow for differentiation of real-valued Lipschitz functions (in
the sense of Cheeger): what topological and geometric properties can such spaces
possess, and can we construct new examples? Another goal is to understand
rigidity theorems for Lipschitz mappings and rectifiable curves in metric
spaces. For example, when must Lipschitz mappings between metric spaces have
more rigid (e.g., bi-Lipschitz) behavior on large subsets of their domains? Can
we characterize rectifiable curves in metric spaces via local flatness
conditions, as in the "Analyst's Traveling Salesman Theorem" of Jones in the
plane? Understanding these questions involves combining techniques from
classical geometric measure theory with those of the newer field of "analysis on
metric spaces". Analytic investigations like these have also provided, and
should continue to provide, insights into the geometry of the non-smooth.
