
* 1664297
* Questions in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 212,566.00

The project focuses on the studies of partial differential equations describing
fluid flows. These equations play an important role in many areas of science and
engineering, and they are at the basis of computer codes used today for modeling
fluids, from weather prediction to aircraft and car design, and any number of
other applications. Mathematically, the equations are notoriously difficult to
solve and even if we use large computers, our computer models are still not as
reliable as we would like. It is interesting to compare the situation for
example with calculating the stress in complicated rigid structures. The stress
calculations are governed by a different set of equations, and in many cases,
they can be done with very good precision. One of the reasons is that the
underlying equations for stress in rigid structures are much better understood
mathematically. The difficulties with fluid calculations are essentially two-
fold. First, the solutions are intrinsically complicated, regardless of how good
our theory is. Second, our theory is fundamentally incomplete, and therefore we
have to deal with a lot of uncertainty in a very difficult computational
environment. While there is not much we can do about the first difficulty, the
second difficulty can be addressed by improving our mathematical understanding
of the equations. The ultimate goal of the research is to understand the
behavior of the solutions to the degree that we would be able to design better
algorithms for the solutions. The role of good theory in solving differential
equations can be well illustrated on a simpler problem of solving equations of
motion for planetary systems. In that case, if we use deeper mathematical
properties of the equations of motion, we can significantly extend the precision
of the algorithms, and make predictions for much longer time-scales. With fluid
equations, the situation is more difficult, because ultimately we cannot hope to
follow every drop of water when simulating, say, an ocean current, or a fast
flow in a large water turbine. In the end, we have to use some averaging, and
the right choice of averaging is the most difficult part. A good mathematical
knowledge of the theoretical issues surrounding the fluid equations is important
for achieving these goals.

At a more technical level, the research will focus on the following areas: the
generation of small scales and long-time behavior of 2d fluids, the limits of
perturbation theory, model equations, and 2-d turbulence and partial damping. By
way of example we will describe our program in the study of turbulence. This
work will test (at the mathematical level) our best theories of turbulence, in
the 2d environment. (The 3d problems are currently out of reach). Currently, the
turbulence theory is based on some heuristic assumptions about averaging. Can
the heuristics be justified mathematically? At a more technical level, what
happens if we remove viscous damping on a few high Fourier modes? The heuristic
turbulence theory predicts that this will have hardly any effect on the overall
behavior of the fluid (in a turbulent regime). Due to recent advances in
mathematical methods, this problem may now be within reach (although it is still
difficult). The remaining problems are similarly intricate, however the
principal investigator has developed new methods for each of them and it is
expected that significant progress will be made.
