
* 1665115
* Geometric Methods in the Analytic Theory of Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Alexandre Eremenko,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

Theory of differential equations is a fundamental mathematical tool of physics
and engineering. Few differential equations can be solved explicitly, and
approximate numerical solutions do not always give essential features of the
behavior of exact solutions. A class of simple differential equations that
frequently occur in applications has been studied by mathematicians for
centuries; their solutions are called special functions of mathematical physics,
and they are widely used in science. The general goal of this project is to
extend this class of well-understood equations. Building on earlier work
relevant for applications to physics, control theory, and materials science,
this project aims to apply a variety of recently-developed methods to study
longstanding questions of intrinsic mathematical interest. The work is
anticipated to further improve understanding of the qualitative features of
analytic functions defined by some basic differential equations arising in
mathematical physics and geometry.

Most of the special functions of mathematical physics are defined by linear
differential equations with at most three singularities. Solutions of the Heun
equation (with four regular singularities) and the Painlevé VI equation (non-
linear, with four fixed singularities and no movable singularities) lie on the
boundary of the class of special functions. Because of their intrinsic
mathematical interest and numerous applications in science, they have been
extensively studied since the beginning of the 20th century. This research
project aims to advance understanding of these important functions through the
use of new geometric methods. The main topics of this project are the
qualitative study of real solutions of the Painlevé VI equation, the study of
Riemannian metrics of constant positive curvature with conic singularities, with
the emphasis on the metrics with four singularities closely related to the Heun
equation, and finally the study of the eigenvalues of some parity-time symmetric
anharmonic oscillators.
