
* 1665534
* Operator Algebras, Operator Theory and Free Probability Investigations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2017,04/29/2019
* Dan-Virgil Voiculescu,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2021
* USD 196,992.00

Operators on Hilbert space provide the infinite-dimensional linear algebra
framework for quantum mechanical observables. Since composition of two linear
maps depends on which of the maps acts first, this is a noncommutative
mathematics setting where noncommutative analogues of basic mathematical
theories are being developed. The principal investigator will work in two
directions involving Hilbert space operators, following recent realizations in
his research. On one hand the exploration of invariant properties of n-tuples of
operators under certain types of perturbations leads to the study of the rings
of operators which almost commute in a certain sense with the n-tuple.
Connections to operator theory questions as well as to noncommutative geometry
in the sense of Alain Connes are appearing. The second direction is in the area
of free probability, the most noncommutative among noncommutative probability
settings. Free probability, which was initiated by the principal investigator,
has important connections to random matrices, combinatorics and to operator
algebras. Via the random matrix connection, there are applications to certain
models in physics and to models of multiuser communication systems. Recently the
principal investigator found that free probability has an extension to a so-
called bifree probability theory, which is a fast developing new area, with many
open problems and which will also be part of the free probability problems
studied.

In more detail, the principal investigator will explore on one hand commutants
modulo normed ideals of operators, smaller than the ideal of compact operators,
which constitute a new operator algebra framework for the study of normed ideal
perturbations of operators and on the other hand the bifree extension of free
probability, to systems with noncommuting left and right variables. The operator
theory questions involve obstructions to quasicentral approximate units relative
to a normed ideal with diverse relations to almost normal operators, entropy and
supramenable groups. The commutants modulo normed ideals are Banach algebras
with involution of operators on Hilbert space, which have unexpectedly many
relations to C*-algebras, like in the appearance of C*-algebras which are
coronas of non-C*-Banach-algebras. The K-theory aspects of these algebras are
also of interest, for instance they provide a new angle on results about
invariance of absolutely continuous spectra under perturbations . On the side of
free probability and of its bifree extension the emphasis will be on the
analysis, while other researchers emphasize the combinatorics. Trace-class
commutators of hermitian operators appear both in questions about commutants
modulo normed ideals and in free and bifree probability, with the possibility of
being a point where the two subjects meet. The principal investigator expects to
attract young mathematicians to research in areas of his investigations and in
particular to continue organizing conferences and seminars about free
probability, which has many connections to other fields in mathematics and
provides good training for young mathematicians.
