
* 1700282
* Asymptotics of solutions for dispersive quasilinear problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,08/08/2019
* Benoit Pausader,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 227,971.00

This project aims to study several phenomena in the broad category of nonlinear
dispersive problems. These problems arise from varied domains of physics, such
as the interaction between the structure of space-time and matter in general
relativity, the influence of changes in the topography on the propagation of
ocean waves, or simply some toy models from plasma physics and laser propagation
devised to understand the possible buildup of energy in smaller dispersive
channels. These situations are different and yet all result from complex
interactions between several different "modes of propagation" combining to
create new dynamics that cannot simply be predicted by looking at each component
of the system in isolation. A better understanding of these effects allows one
then to develop better and simpler models that accurately describe the behavior
of the system under consideration for large time. The objective of this project
is to describe in detail examples where such effects are relevant and to
highlight the underlying common mathematical structure, while at the same time
isolating the specific features responsible for each particular phenomenology.

The main theme of this project is the study of the long-time behavior of three
different nonlinear hyperbolic and dispersive systems in cases where scattering
does not hold and nonlinear effects have a strong impact on the qualitative
behavior of solutions. The principal investigator will consider the following:
(i) a problem from general relativity, namely, the stability of Minkowski space
for the Einstein equations in the presence of a massive scalar field; (ii) a
model (NLS) problem that involves the possible growth of Sobolev norms on
domains of smaller volume; (iii) a model from water-wave theory that seeks to
demonstrate how a sudden and localized change in the bottom topography
influences the propagation of solitary waves. In each case the principal
investigator will focus on controlling solutions globally using a combination of
Fourier and harmonic analysis, bilinear estimates, ordinary differential
equations and geometric methods (vector fields, normal forms, tools from
Hamiltonian dynamics), and adapted function spaces. The objective is to derive
improved "effective" dynamics that control asymptotic behavior.
