
* 1700011
* Pluripotential Theory and Applications to Complex Geometry and Number Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2017,05/12/2019
* Dan Coman,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 156,000.00

This research project is in the areas of complex analysis, complex geometry and
potential theory. Complex analysis deals with the study of functions that depend
on complex variables, and many times concrete questions were answered by
considering them in the context of complex numbers. Complex analysis and
potential theory are central to modern mathematics and they provide powerful
tools for solving important problems from other fields of pure and applied
mathematics (e.g., image and signal processing) and physics (e.g., quantum
mechanics; statistical physics). Making progress on the research problems in
this project will contribute to the advancement of knowledge and understanding
in these fields.

This mathematics research project deals with problems from pluripotential theory
which arise naturally and have important applications to complex geometry or to
transcendental number theory. A unifying theme is that the proposed problems
focus on plurisubharmonic functions and on positive closed currents as objects
of investigation or as some of the tools to be employed. The first direction of
research is concerned with quantization problems on complex spaces. These have
applications to statistical physics (quantum chaos), as well as to number theory
(quantum unique ergodicity for modular forms). Coman will consider sequences of
singular Hermitian holomorphic line bundles over complex spaces, and will study
the Bergman spaces of square-integrable holomorphic sections defined using this
metric data. In particular, he will study the asymptotics of the Bergman kernel
functions and the convergence of the Fubini-Study currents associated to these
spaces, and the asymptotic distribution of common zeros of random sequences of
m-tuples of holomorphic sections. In the special case of the sequence of powers
of a single line bundle, Coman will study the asymptotics of partial Bergman
kernels corresponding to spaces of holomorphic sections of vanishing to high
order along a complex hypersurface. The second direction of research addresses
problems in pluripotential theory on compact Kaehler manifolds. Here there are
some interesting new phenomena different from the local setting. The goals are
to describe the domain of definition of the complex Monge-Ampere operator and to
study the corresponding Green functions and their singularities. Coman will also
consider the problem of extension and regularization of (quasi) plurisubharmonic
functions on analytic subvarieties of the ambient manifold. The third direction
of research deals with problems from pluripotential theory in complex Euclidean
spaces and considers questions about geometric properties of positive closed
currents and their approximation by analytic varieties, and about the behavior
of polynomials along transcendental analytic varieties. It is expected that the
latter will continue to have applications to transcendental number theory, such
as to the study of the algebraic independence of values of entire functions.
