
* 1700314
* Problems in Spectral Theory and Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,04/13/2017
* Wencai Liu,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2020
* USD 101,631.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop analytic tools to study
Schrodinger operators, the main object of quantum mechanics. The theory
describes how a physical system, say a bunch of particles subject to certain
forces, will change over time. This is important to predict the behavior of the
quantum particles, such as electrons, atoms and molecules. The principal
investigator will develop some fundamental methods to understand the spectra and
quantum dynamical behavior of Schrodinger operators. In particular, the project
focuses on the conductance properties and transport of quasi-periodic media. The
results not only provide a good explanation for some phenomena in physics and
chemistry, but may also have fruitful applications to modern engineering devices
such as semiconductors. Undergraduate and graduate students will have
opportunities to participate in some of the research.

This project aims at studying several aspects in mathematics by methods of
functional, harmonic and geometric analysis. Quasi-periodic Schrodinger
operators describe the conductivity of electrons in a two-dimensional crystal
layer subject to an external magnetic field of flux acting perpendicular to the
lattice plane. The principal investigator will investigate the spectral theory
of quasi-periodic operators, including spectral transitions, structure of
eigenfunctions in the pure point spectrum regime, and quantum dynamics of
spectral measures in the singular continuous spectrum regime. The principal
investigator will also study the spectral theory of Laplacians on noncompact
complete Riemannian manifolds. The focus is on the existence of eigenvalues or
singular continuous spectra embedded into essential spectra of Laplacians on
asymptotically flat and on asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds, as characterized
by the radial curvature. The goal is to better understand relations between
geometric quantities and properties of eigensolutions. Lastly the principal
investigator plan to study the independence of the time-frequency translates of
various classes of functions, which is stated as HRT conjecture. The priority is
to prove the HRT conjecture for special configurations and HRT conjecture for
exponentially decaying functions.
