
* 1700279
* New Tools in the Study of Wave Propagation: Dynamical Systems for Kinetic Equations, Inviscid Limits for Modulated Periodic Waves, and Rigorous Numerical Stability Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,06/24/2021
* Kevin Zumbrun,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2022
* USD 285,915.00

The PI will study a selection of key open problems in the theory of wave
propagation arising in a variety of settings including thin film flow, pattern
formation, detonation, and the kinetic theory of gases. The problems considered
share the features of computational complexity, multiple length/time scales, and
genuine physical interest in applications. Many concern questions that current
numerics and experiment are not adequate to resolve. Several of the planned
subprojects involve numerically assisted proof using scientific computation with
guaranteed error bounds, up to and including rigorous numerical proof. An
integral part of the project is the simultaneous development of a user-friendly
numerical platform, STABLAB, for numerical stability investigation, and the
systematic exploration with this platform of physical behavior in gas and fluid
dynamics in the delicate situations of reacting or ionized flow.

The problems addressed involve issues in dynamical systems, singular
perturbation theory, spectral theory of linear operators, nonlinear partial
differential equations, and rigorous scientific computation, and should result
in the development of new mathematical tools of general application. In
particular, development of dynamical systems tools for kinetic shock and
boundary layer problems would unify and extend results obtained for Boltzmann
phenomena by the "Kyoto School" of Sone et al using a variety of formal and
analytic methods. Likewise, the introduction of new inviscid stability criteria
for roll waves and of Kreiss symmetrizer techniques for analysis of modulated
fronts open new directions in the study of periodic modulation. The problem on
galloping detonations, if solved, will answer a longstanding question, while
associated rigorous Wensel,Kramers, and Brillouin method developments will be of
wide general use. Determination of simple stability criteria for roll waves in
shallow water flow are of practical interest in hydraulic engineering. Finally,
the development of rigorous numerical proof and error estimate techniques is
potentially transformative, having broader implications for standards in
scientific computing.
