
* 1700293
* New methods for the study of supercritical wave equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2017,04/13/2017
* Marius Beceanu,NY,SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 107,522.00

In this project the principal investigator will study dispersive critical and
supercritical partial differential equations, further developing several
recently introduced methods. Partial differential equations provide a rigorous
mathematical description of many important physical, ecological, and economical
theories (e.g., Einstein's theory of general relativity, the Black-Scholes model
of option pricing in finance). They are studied both analytically and
numerically in order to determine the long-term behavior of solutions and their
dependence on initial data. In many cases, physically meaningful concepts, such
as energy, mass, and momentum, play important roles, since having good control
of these quantities may enable one to prove that solutions exist globally in
time and to study their behavior. However, it is of great interest to study
equations (called energy-supercritical) for which such quantities are
insufficient to govern the solution. This class of highly nonlinear equations
includes many famous and important ones that arise from modeling physical
phenomena (e.g., Einstein's equations, the Navier-Stokes equation, the Yang-
Mills equations, and Euler's equations).

The goal of the project is to understand, as far as possible, the behavior of
"large" solutions to wave equations of supercrticial type, about which little is
currently known. The principal investigator's potential contribution to the
subject is based on two methods: (1) splitting solutions into incoming and
outgoing parts and (2) a comparison principle for the wave equation. His
preliminary results apply only to some (canonical) model cases, but seem
promising. It will be interesting to generalize them to the nonradial case, to
all dimensions, and to other types of nonlinearities and equations. One
objective of the project is to take techniques (comparison principles, sub- and
supersolutions) specific to the study of elliptic and parabolic equations and
apply them in a meaningful way to the supercritical wave equation. The author's
approach is different from those of Kenig and Merle and of others (Tao, Krieger
and Schlag, Li, Wang and Yu). It leads to unconditional results and to sharp
scattering criteria in several cases. Another avenue of investigation is that of
linear and nonlinear evolution equations driven by time-dependent potentials.
The potential can be deterministic or random (e.g., Brownian motion). This has
clear applications to the study of soliton stability and some physical problems.
The methods that the principal investigator has introduced, such as a structure
formula for wave operators and the use of an abstract Wiener theorem to prove
dispersive estimates, provide an improved way of looking at such equations, by
allowing a more general time dependence of the potential, and permit stronger
conclusions to be reached.
