
* 1700003
* Partial Differential Equations in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Mei-Chi Shaw,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 201,000.00

Complex analysis in one and several variables plays a special role in
mathematics and mathematical physics. The use of complex numbers has been
essential in the development of mathematics. Partial differential equations and
several complex variables are employed in string theory and twistor theory,
physical theories that try to unify different physical force fields. The
existence and regularity of solutions to such partial differential equations are
still not fully understood, and they form some of the most challenging problems
in mathematical analysis. The current study is not only important for the
development of mathematics, but it may lead to new understanding of physical
phenomena as well, with potential applications in other sciences and technology.

This research focuses on some of the most important equations in several complex
variables, the Cauchy-Riemann equations and the induced tangential Cauchy-
Riemann equations. The topics investigated in this research project include
function theory on complex manifolds, Hausdorff property of Dolbeault cohomology
groups, Levi-flat hypersurfaces and complex foliation, and the Cauchy-Riemann
operators on complex projective spaces and negatively curved manifolds.
Understanding the geometric aspects of these equations under the curvature
conditions and their relations with function theory in complex manifolds is a
challenging and important problem. New approaches have been introduced to study
these problems which connect the topology of domains in complex manifolds with
the topology of Dolbeault cohomology groups. The study of several complex
variables in a geometric setting has provided interesting new questions with
fresh insight to problems in topology, foliation theory, complex dynamics,
algebraic and complex geometry. This project aims to deepen understanding in
this area.
