
* 1700102
* Emergent Topology and K-Theory of Matrix Models
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2017,05/22/2018
* Terry Loring,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 183,658.00

Our ability to guide waves of light, electrons, or sound is growing rapidly, due
to protected modes of motion governed by topological attributes of material
systems. Guiding light via topological protection is particularly exciting due
to its economic and scientific importance. Theoretical descriptions of
topologically protected modes often use non-standard forms of topology,
described in terms of matrix models. The project aims to develop the theory of
matrix models, and the broader theoretical subject of operator algebras, in ways
that are inspired by the advances in physics. It also intends to make knowledge
from the area of operator algebras available to physicists in the form of
algorithms and formulas applicable to light waves and electronic waves. The
project aims to develop an unusually direct connection between this work in
mathematical analysis and current research on graphene-based electronics and
silicon-based photonics. However, the emphasis will be on a theory of matrix
models with symmetries that is robust enough to work equally well with various
types of systems, and on advances in matrix theory that will support future
applications and future theoretical work in the area of analysis known as
noncommutative topology.

Models of free fermionic systems that allow hopping within a manifold can be
naturally formed into a group that is abstractly isomorphic to more standard
groups associated to a manifold. This suggests that there is a reformulation of
the common homology theories used in operator algebras. Central to this project
will be finding such a computable reformulation of homology theories for the
whole categories of operator algebras that have zero, one, or two added
symmetries. There is now a need for numerical algorithms to analyze many of
these matrix models quickly. Although the classical matrix invariants from
geometry can be dealt with by hand calculations for small problems, physicists
now require calculation of these invariants on multitudes of large matrices.
Progress in such calculations can be enhanced by improved mathematical
understanding of these invariants. For example, researchers in driven photonic
systems use the Bott invariant for almost commuting unitary matrices, which is
on good theoretical grounds. However, there is a related invariant, based on the
emergent topology of a matrix model, that can be computed by a much faster
algorithm. This invariant will be studied, with a goal of putting it in a better
theoretical context. The emergent topology of condensed matter and other
physical systems will also be used to enhance visualization of the structure of
matrix models.
