
* 1700009
* Spectral Properties of Random Band Matrices and Related Questions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,04/13/2017
* Tetiana Shcherbyna,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,998.00

This research project intertwines mathematical and physics-related areas
including matrix theory, probability, classical analysis and operator theory, as
well as topics in physics such as quantum field theory and supersymmetry. The
method of supersymmetry is widely used in theoretical physics, especially in
particle physics, but its rigorous mathematical foundation is still a challenge
for mathematicians. The aim of the project is to develop a broad mathematical
understanding of supersymmetry.

More precisely, random band matrices (RBM) represent quantum systems on a
d-dimensional lattice with random quantum transition amplitudes effective up to
distances of some order W, which is called a bandwidth. They are natural
intermediate models in the study eigenvalue statistics and quantum propagation
of disordered systems; they interpolate between Wigner random matrices and
random Schrodinger operators. Wigner matrix ensembles represent models without
spatial structure, where the quantum transition rates between any two sites are
independent identically distributed random variables. In contrast, random
Schrodinger operators have only a random diagonal potential in addition to the
deterministic Laplacian on a large box in a d-dimensional lattice. The main
feature of RBM is that they can be used to model the Anderson metal-insulator
phase transition in three or more dimensions. It is conjectured that the
crossover for RBM can be investigated even in dimension one by varying the
bandwidth W; however, on a mathematical level of rigor the question is still
open. The investigator is going to attack the problem using the supersymmetry
approach in combination with powerful analytic and statistical mechanics
techniques, including saddle point analysis, transfer operators, and multi-scale
analysis.
