
* 1702411
* Research at the Interface of Harmonic Analysis and Arithmetic Combinatorics: Geometric Ramsey Theory and Higher Uniformity Norms
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2017,07/09/2019
* Neil Lyall,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 149,968.00

This project deals with the occurrence of geometric patterns in sufficiently
large but otherwise arbitrary sets, a field of mathematics most commonly
referred to as (geometric) Ramsey theory. It is specifically focused on the
study the question of determining whether or not such sets will be guaranteed to
contain a translated and rotated copy of a given finite set, or of its
sufficiently large dilates. This study has potential applications to analyzing
and determining the true complexity of large data sets. Over the last twenty
years, specifically after the groundbreaking work of Gowers on quantitative
questions concerning the existence of arbitrarily long sequences of equally
spaced numbers in any sufficiently large subsets of the integers, there has been
remarkable progress in the study of general linear patterns via the development
of so-called higher-order Fourier analysis. Perhaps the most notable achievement
here is the celebrated result of Green and Tao on arbitrarily long sequences of
equally spaced prime numbers. This project builds on these developments, and one
of its major objectives is the development of analytic tools to understand the
aforementioned occurrence of geometric and arithmetic structures in large sets.
The problems under consideration arise in the context of both the integer
lattice and classical Euclidean spaces. The principal investigator's approach
blends the well-established delicate interplay between techniques from discrete
harmonic analysis and number theory, with a new general approach based on the
modern point of view of additive combinatorics.

The existence of prescribed geometric structures in large subsets of the integer
lattice and also in large measurable subsets of Euclidean spaces is currently
not well understood. The project aims to address several such problems using the
modern point of view of additive combinatorics. Specifically, the approach of
showing that the count of isometric copies of a given finite configuration
contained a given set is controlled by certain norms of its so-called balance
function. These norms measure the uniformity or randomness of the set and, if it
is sufficiently small with respect to the set's density, then the set will
contain the expected number of isometric copies. The next step is to establish
an inverse theorem showing that the largeness of the norm of the balance
function implies that the set correlates or can be approximated by some
structured object on which one can iterate this procedure. Recent results of the
principal investigator with collaborators indicate that this should indeed the
correct framework within which one should be approaching these problems and
suggest that questions concerning geometric configurations of different levels
of complexity can be tackled in a systematic way using appropriate higher
(geometric) uniformity norms. The ultimate goal of this project is to
characterizing those finite geometric configuration for which all its
sufficiently large dilates can be realized in subsets of Euclidean space of
positive upper density, strengthening existing connections between additive
combinatorics and classical harmonic analysis, and establishing the analogous
characterization in the discrete setting of the integer lattice.
