
* 1702278
* The Birkhoff Conjecture, Spectral Rigidity for Convex Reflecting Particle Systems, and Stochastic Arnold Diffusion
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,07/03/2019
* Vadim Kaloshin,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 205,000.00

Analysis of the motion of a particle moving inside of a convex domain without
friction and reflecting elastically against the walls was initiated by
mathematician G.D. Birkhoff in 1927. This mathematical dynamical system serves
as a good approximation to several important physical systems, for instance,
sound propagation inside of a chapel or a cathedral. This research project
targets classical inverse problems for such dynamical systems, for example: if
we know some properties of the particle's motion, can we infer properties of the
underlying domain? This is closely related to the question, "Can you hear the
shape of a drum?" That is, can one reconstruct the shape of a drum solely from
the sound it produces? It turns out that properties of sound inside of a convex
domain are closely related to properties of the possible trajectories of the
associated reflecting particles inside of the same domain. This project aims to
deepen understanding of related mathematical questions in the analysis of
dynamical systems.

The first part of the project is to study perturbations of convex billiards and
to derive necessary conditions for integrability (for perturbation of ellipses)
and for isospectrality of deformations of convex domains. The former condition
is closely related to the phenomenon of whispering galleries and the Birkhoff
conjecture about characterization of integrable billiards, while the latter
problem is closely related to deformation spectral rigidity. M. Kac's question
can be expressed in terms of the spectrum of the Dirichlet problem for the
Laplace equation inside of a convex planar domain. Due to the wave trace
function the Laplace spectrum generically determines the length spectrum of the
associated billiard inside of the same domain and connects analysis with
billiards. The second part of the project is about proving stochastic Arnold
diffusion, that is, stochastic diffusing behavior for nearly integrable systems
and the Chirikov conjecture. One of challenging goals is to establish stochastic
diffusive behavior inside of Kirkwood gaps for the three-body problem.
