
* 1764143
* Geometric Harmonic Analysis: Affine and Frobenius-Hormander Geometry for Multilinear Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2018,07/20/2018
* Philip Gressman,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The mathematics of geometric averages, also known as Radon-like operators, is of
fundamental importance in a host of technological applications related to
imaging: CT, SPECT, and NMR, as well as RADAR and SONAR applications, all depend
on a deep understanding of the Radon transform, and related ideas appear in
optical-acoustic tomography, scattering theory, and even some motion-detection
algorithms. Somewhat surprisingly, there are many basic theoretical problems in
this area of mathematics which remain unsolved despite the many incredible
successes the field has already achieved. This project proposes to study a
family of questions in the area of geometric averages which, roughly speaking,
correspond to quantifying the relationship between small changes in the imaged
objects and the expected changes in measured data (which in practice is
processed computationally to recover an approximate picture of the original
object). Achieving the main goals of this project would lead to advances in a
number of related areas of mathematics and may influence future imaging
technologies.

More precisely, the project will focus on several topics in mathematical
analysis related to the development of new geometric methods for multilinear
operators, with specific emphasis on the establishment of uniform estimates. The
specific classes of operators to be studied include multilinear Radon-like
averaging operators as well as related nonsingular oscillatory problems of the
sort first studied by Christ, Li, Tao, and Thiele. Major special cases deserving
mention include multiparameter sublevel set estimates, maximal curvature for
Radon-like transforms of intermediate dimension, degenerate Radon transforms in
low codimension, Fourier restriction and related generalized determinant
functionals, Phong-Stein operator van der Corput methods, and multilinear
oscillatory integrals of convolution and related types. A secondary goal of the
project is to apply these ideas to PDEs. A geometric and combinatorial approach
will be used as the main toolkit since these methods have a consistent record of
success, and the principal investigator has, in particular, made major progress
in this direction in recent years. These methods incorporate ideas from a wide
variety of areas in mathematics, including Geometric Invariant Theory, Geometric
Measure Theory, Convex Geometry, and Signal Processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
