
* 1764167
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,05/19/2020
* Laszlo Lempert,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 270,000.00

This project studies geometric figures that are given by equations, much like
curves in the plane or surfaces in our three dimensional space. However, the
figures studied here are higher, sometimes infinite dimensional, and they are
given in terms of equations that involve complex numbers, rather than the real
numbers that would occur with curves and surfaces. Even if these high
dimensional and complex geometric figures are hard to visualize, as they do not
fit in the space we are familiar with, they have proved to be most relevant to
the description of our physical world, both on the atomic and subatomic levels
(quantum theory), and on the astronomical scale (relativity). A central notion
in geometry and its applications is that of curvature. A straight line has zero
curvature: in general, curvature measures deviation of figures from straight.
The project will explore curvature properties of figures that arise in various
contexts, and implications that can be drawn if the curvature is known to be
positive or negative.

The project has three parts. The first concerns the space of Kahler metrics on a
compact complex manifold, an infinite dimensional space that is known to have
non-positive curvature. The goal is to find shortest curves connecting points in
this space, symmetries of the space, and investigate how symmetries interact
with certain much studied functionals, such as Mabuchi's energy. The second and
third parts concern general holomorphic Hilbert or Banach bundles, endowed with
metrics. One problem is how curvature properties of the metrics change if the
bundle and its metric are subjected to certain transformations. Another is to
exploit curvature properties to estimate operators that arise in harmonic and
complex analysis, by the technique of extrapolation. The methods will come from
complex analysis and geometry, operator theory, and partial differential
equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
