
* 1764417
* Mathematical Analysis of Nematic Liquid Crystals and L-infinity Variational Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,05/20/2020
* Changyou Wang,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 240,000.00

The problems to be solved in this project are not only very challenging
mathematically but also have strong connections and profound applications to
other fields such as fluid mechanics and complex fluids, applied physics and
material sciences, and control engineering.  Rigorous analysis of both the
existence and the smoothness of certain kinds solutions to our models can
predict the formation of singularities, allow researchers to gain insights into
the turbulence phenomena, and justify both computational and experimental
studies made by applied scientists and engineers. The proposed problems in
the project will also serve as tools to train graduate students, and
constitute as main parts of future research monographs aimed at both advanced
graduate students and researchers.

The technical side of this project is to study analytic issues in the three
parts: (i) the hydrodynamic flow of nematic liquid crystals, (ii) variational
problems on both liquid crystal droplets and the isotropic-nematic phase
transitions in liquid crystals, and (iii) the L-infinity variational problems.
The first part  deals with the Ericksen-Leslie system modeling the hydrodynamics
of nematic liquid crystals, which is a strongly nonlinear-coupled system between
the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation of the underlying fluid velocity field
and the transported heat flow of harmonic maps for the orientation director
field of the nematic liquid crystal molecules. The objective is to establish
existence and partial regularity for Leray-Hopf type weak solutions in dimension
three for arbitrary large initial data. The second part investigates
both existence and classification of possible optimal configuration in the
liquid crystal droplets and the formation of sharp interface between the
isotropic and nematic phases by employing the Ericksen's model of variable
degree of orientations for uniaxial nematic liquid crystals. The third part is
to study the uniqueness of Aronsson's equations or absolute minimizers of
L-infinity functionals that involve Hamiltonian functions with spatial
dependence, the regularity of viscosity solutions to general Aronsson's
equations, and the Liouville property of infinity harmonic functions in
any dimension. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
