
* 1764266
* Lipschitz Analysis in Normed and Metric Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,06/25/2020
* Leonid Kovalev,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 144,767.00

The notion of distance, or dissimilarity of objects, is ubiquitous in geometry,
data analysis, image and signal processing, and other disciplines. Naturally
associated to it is the notion of transformations that distort the distances by
at most a fixed amount. For example, in order to represent high-dimensional data
visually, one needs to reduce the number of dimensions while keeping the
distortion of distances low. Another example is image recovery, where the goal
is to produce a geometrically natural image (with crisp lines and low noise)
that has a small measure of dissimilarity from a given noisy image. Signal
recovery by error-correcting codes depends on the concept of distance
minimization as well: a corrupted sequence of bits is replaced by the nearest
sequence that conforms to the specifications of the encoding. The principal
investigator will introduce graduate and undergraduate students to these
concepts and associated research problems.

The project aims to advance the understanding of the Lipschitz geometry of
metric spaces, focusing on their embeddings, retractions, and bi-Lipschitz
equivalence. It aims to solve open problems concerning the possibility of
retracting finite subset spaces onto each other; the process of symmetrizing and
extending bi-Lipschitz maps with linear control of their distortion, the
feasibility of robust recovery of a vector from the absolute values of its frame
coefficients, the geometry of removable sets and quasi-convex sets, and the
relation of low-dimensional representations of a metric space with the geometry
of its tight span. An array of methods from analysis, geometry, and geometric
measure theory will be employed, such as gradient flows on metric spaces and
probability measures supported on them, comparison estimates on spaces with
curvature bounds, constructive methods of geometric mapping theory, and the
calculus of variations as applied to geometrically motivated problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
