
* 1764245
* Research in Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,04/15/2020
* Sergey Denisov,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

This project investigates several questions in mathematical analysis. The topics
under study are related to important areas of application, including the
scattering process in electromagnetic and acoustic wave propagation, an
important and ubiquitous physical phenomenon. Several of the questions concern
the circle of ideas surrounding the Steklov conjecture in the theory of
orthogonal polynomials. The project also studies other questions in
approximation theory and complex analysis, many of which are of central interest
in probability and mathematical physics.

A primary goal of this project is to study how the size of an orthogonal
polynomial depends on the properties of the measure of orthogonality. To improve
the upper estimates, the project aims to develop methods based on techniques
related to singular integral operator estimates in weighted spaces. Another goal
of this project is to obtain the spectral characterization of all measures on
the real line for which the logarithmic integral converges. This condition,
known as the Szego condition, plays a key role in the theory of Gaussian
stochastic processes with continuous time. The project also aims to develop
spectral theory based on the theory of multiple orthogonal polynomials. In
addition, the project will explore wave propagation in multidimensional
electromagnetic and acoustic scattering, investigating the minimal assumptions
on coefficients in elliptic operators that guarantee existence of wave operators
and presence of absolutely continuous spectral type. The questions to be
addressed are central for analysis; the results are expected to have impact in
probability, mathematical physics, and other areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
