
* 1764295
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2018,06/12/2020
* Andreas Seeger,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

Methods from the mathematical discipline of analysis have found wide
applications in understanding physical phenomena in the natural sciences and
engineering. This project is concerned with topics in harmonic analysis that are
designed to provide efficient mathematical tools for these disciplines and that
are expected to contribute to the unification of seemingly unrelated areas. Of
particular interest is the study of various integral transforms, such as the
Fourier and the X-ray transforms, and some of their relatives. The Fourier
transform decomposes a signal (mathematically a function) into the frequencies
that make it up. It has been found to be relevant for solving many mathematical
problems arising in science and engineering and can be regarded as a special
case of a larger class of oscillatory integral operators. The X-ray transform is
an operator that assigns to a function its integral over lines. It is relevant
to problems in medical imaging and can be considered as a special case of a
larger class of Radon type transforms and averaging operators. A main goal of
the project is to expand the current mathematical toolbox in harmonic analysis
to contribute towards a deeper theoretical understanding of these integral
transforms and their generalizations.

The principal investigator will work on several projects in harmonic analysis.
The first project is concerned with the application of decoupling theory to
regularity questions for averaging operators and generalized Radon transforms,
and to boundedness problems for associated maximal functions. The second project
deals with a new multiplier problem for Haar expansions in spaces of Hardy-
Sobolev type, in ranges where the Haar basis is not unconditional. The third
project investigates spectral multipliers for the Kohn Laplacian on the
Heisenberg group and the behavior of the corresponding multiplier
transformations on Lebesgue spaces. It is proposed to prove new space-time
estimates for solutions of the wave equation associated with the Kohn Laplacian
and to use them to bound the multiplier operators. The principal investigator
will also work on other projects, related to almost everywhere convergence of
Bochner-Riesz means, local improving inequalities for maximal functions with
application to sparse domination results, and boundedness of multilinear
singular integral operators. The project involves mentoring of graduate
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
