
* 1764403
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations: Integrating Deterministic and Probabilistic Methods
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,06/10/2020
* Gigliola Staffilani,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 240,000.00

We interact with waves all the time and everywhere. When we listen to music,
when we use our cell phones, when we warm up a dinner in a microwave, when we
look at the stars in the sky and when we relax on a sunny beach. But wave
phenomena may also affect the lives of millions of people when earthquakes shake
and propagate, tsunamis form or nuclear radiations get out of control. Indeed,
waves naturally arise occur in a variety of physical systems such as nonlinear
optics, atmosphere and ocean waves, quantum mechanics and plasmas. The study of
waves is fundamental for the understanding of phenomena at both a very small
scale, such as the Bose-Einstein Condensate, and at a very large one, such as
collusion of galaxies. These expressions of nature are never too smooth and
rarely too simple: interactions of small waves can produce very large outcomes,
such as freak waves, while complicated objects such as solitons almost do not
see each other when they cross. Phenomena such as these are the byproduct of
nonlinear wave interactions, and understanding what are the possible outcomes,
given the initial state of a system of waves, is fundamental to predict and to
control it, hopefully to our advantage.

In this NSF supported research the PIs present a series of projects at the
cutting edge of research in nonlinear wave phenomena in which deterministic
approaches, classically based on harmonic and Fourier analysis, are implemented
alongside probabilistic ones to capture basic properties of wave phenomena. It
has become clear in recent years that deterministic methods and probabilistic
ones naturally feed off each other and when combined not only contribute to our
understanding but also open the door to new paradigms to move research forward
in various directions. More precisely, the PIs propose four projects at the
forefront of nonlinear evolution equations, where the interplay of deterministic
and probabilistic approaches is the key to make progress. The problems range
from the study of weak turbulence for dispersive and fluid equations to the
analysis of integrable structures, from the definition of Gibbs type measures to
the probabilistic existence and stability of certain geometric flows enjoying
null form nonlinearities. The probabilistic component of PIs' work in the last
few years has contributed in bridging the dispersive and wave nonlinear
equations community with that specialized in stochastic partial differential
equations. This interaction has created ongoing collaborations between members
of these two communities. The work that the PIs, their students and
collaborators will generate in solving the problems described in this project
will further solidify the interactions between these two vibrant communities.
The broader impact component of the project aims at fostering the training of
doctoral graduate students and junior researchers in the US, thus fundamentally
contributing to the STEM workforce. It will also enhance dissemination and
collaborative research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
