
* 1800811
* Statistical Properties of Hyperbolic Dynamical Systems and Applications to Statistical Physics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,05/03/2018
* Peter Nandori,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 10/31/2019
* USD 75,161.00

It is practically impossible the predict the future behavior of one trajectory
in a chaotic dynamical system as any small measurement error leads to huge
uncertainty in relatively short amount of time. Many such chaotic systems have
been proposed in both the mathematics and physics literature to model some real-
life phenomena. For example, a deterministic system of interacting particles
could model the microscopic motion of electrons. This research project studies
such systems. The goal is to prove, in a mathematically rigorous way, that these
systems on the long run behave as if they were random. Consequently, ideas from
the theory of random processes can be applied to derive the emergence of
statistical macroscopic order from microscopic disorder, that is when the system
size or the time of observation is large and the initial state is typical. For
the above-mentioned example, this approach provides a derivation of the heat
equation from some microscopic deterministic models, which is a central question
in the mathematical theory of statistical physics.

Specifically, three research projects will be studied. In the first one, some
large system of deterministic interacting balls is considered. Motivated by the
common separation of time scale phenomenon is physics, a so called rare
interaction limit will be studied, that is when the system can be approximated
by independent Sinai billiard particles between any pair interactions. The
second project is about advanced statistical properties of hyperbolic systems in
both finite and infinite measure case. For example, the local central limit
theorem, as a very useful tool in many applications including project one, as
well as its connections to infinite measure mixing will be studied for
hyperbolic maps and flows. The third project studies stochastic systems of
interacting particles. The problems to be studied include the emergence of local
equilibrium for systems forced out of equilibrium and joint transport of mass
and energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
