
* 1800527
* Continuous and Discrete Free Boundary Problems for Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2018,07/18/2018
* Arshak Petrosyan,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Free boundary problems are problems for partial differential equations (PDEs)
which are defined in a domain with a boundary that is not known beforehand (i.e.
"free"). A further quantitative condition must be then provided at the free
boundary to exclude indeterminacy. Problems of this sort arise in a large number
of areas of applied and industrial interest. The paradigm example is the
classical Stefan problem describing the melting and solidification of the ice:
the free boundary here is the moving interface between the regions occupied by
the water and the ice. Other important examples occur in filtration through
porous media, where free boundaries occur as fronts between saturated and
unsaturated regions, and others come from combustion (propagation of the flame
front), mathematical finance (optimal time for exercising an option), biology
(regions occupied by different species) and so on. Because of the abundance of
applications in various sciences and real world problems, free boundary problems
are considered today as one of the most important directions in the mainstream
of the analysis of partial differential equations and offer opportunities of
collaboration among mathematicians, physicists, engineers, material scientists,
finance practitioners and other industrial researchers, biologists, and other
scientists.

This project consists of two main parts. The first part concerns problems that
naturally exhibit free boundaries of codimension two, which are often called
thin free boundaries. Such problems appear in many applications, such as
elasticity, math finance, boundary phase transitions. They are also related to
problems for nonlocal integro-differential operators such as the fractional
Laplacian through extension operators. The second part concerns the fascinating
limiting configurations in various growth/aggregation models such as the Abelian
sandpile growth model, which can be viewed as a discrete version of Poincare's
balayage problem in potential theory and is closely related to the classical
obstacle problem. While there has been a significant progress in such problems
in recent years, there are still many important questions that remain to be
answered and the current project aims to contribute in that directions.
Particular questions to be studied include various thin free boundary problems:
for parabolic PDEs with variable coefficients, for almost minimizers (elliptic
case), properly stated two- and multi-phase problems, as well as the systematic
study of the limits of discrete-valued least superharmonic majorants (so-called
discrete-valued Perron method). This may lead to better understanding of the
formation of polygonal and piecewise-quadratic limits in Abelian sandpile and
other growth/aggregation models and related PDEs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
