
* 1800841
* On the Mathematical Theory of Black Holes
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2018,08/12/2020
* Sergiu Klainerman,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

At the most basic level Black Holes are nothing but special, explicit, solutions
of the Einstein equations of General Relativity. To have physical reality they
have to possess properties which make them detectable to observations. Chief
among them is stability to perturbations. This translates to a very difficult,
deep and beautiful mathematical conjecture which is the main focus of the
proposed research. The goal is to show that any small perturbation, at a given
time, of a given black hole solution remains small for all later times. Thus all
the important features of a unperturbed black hole are preserved by the
perturbations.

To solve the problem of stability of black holes one has to overcome a large
range of difficult issues. The high non-linearity of the Einstein equations
makes it hard to separate them; they are all interconnected. At the heart of all
these difficulties is the issue of gauge. That means, roughly, that one cannot
solve the stability problem without finding a specific coordinate system in
which one can establish decay of the perturbations, i.e. to show that the
perturbations converge to zero for large times. In collaboration with J. Szeftel
in France the PI had proposed a new method to construct these coordinates based
on the full covariance properties of the Einstein equations. The main
methodology of the PI is to combine this new method, called Generally Covariant
Modulation theory, with the the so called vector-field method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
