
* 1800769
* Non-Standard Sparse Estimates and Weighted Inequalities
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2018,07/12/2018
* Amalia Culiuc,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 129,981.00

Mathematical analysis of models arising in fields such as physics and
engineering often requires an understanding of functions both from a
quantitative (size, rate of growth) and a qualitative (boundedness) point of
view. Harmonic analysis provides tools for answering these questions through
decomposing a function in a convenient way, analyzing the components, and then
reassembling the information about the components to provide an overall
understanding. This project investigates and further develops a new,
surprisingly powerful approach in harmonic analysis known as sparse domination
principles. In broad terms, sparse domination gives a way of studying general
functions by comparing them to positive, localized, easy-to-understand versions,
thereby obtaining results of the same strength and sharpness as with much more
involved techniques. One of the main advantages of this new approach is its
versatility: it can be employed not only in the classical setting, but also,
after a potential redefinition of the objects involved, in a variety of more
general scenarios. This project intends to explore the full strength and
versatility of sparse domination techniques.

The project comprises three research directions aimed at a deeper analysis of
the concept of sparse bounds. One direction concerns matrix weighted estimates
on vector-valued function spaces, an area that has enjoyed renewed interest,
partially due to its connections to elliptic partial differential equations.
Some recent sparse domination results, which reinterpret the traditional
definition of function averages, suggest that progress on resolving the so-
called A2 conjecture may be within reach. The principal investigator plans to
continue research into the matrix A2 conjecture, seeking both further evidence
in support of the result and potential counterexamples. A second direction, the
theory of discrete operators, relates analytic number theory and harmonic
analysis. Until recently, no weighted bounds had been established in the
discrete setting, but the use of sparse domination has yielded new results and
problems, such as the question of weighted estimates for the discrete
oscillatory Hilbert transform with a general polynomial phase and the problem of
weighted bounds for discrete fractional singular integrals. The principal
investigator intends to study such functions with the goal of providing a
broader weighted theory for arithmetic operators. A third direction concerns a
different interpretation of sparse collections, previously considered only with
respect to cubes. The principal investigator is interested in developing methods
with cubes replaced by rectangles to answer questions regarding Bochner-Riesz
operators and boundedness results involving averages associated to the Kakeya
maximal function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
