
* 1800057
* Applications of Harmonic Analysis to Riesz Transforms and Commutators beyond the Classical Settings
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Brett Wick,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,758.00

The mathematical discipline of analysis has been fundamental in understanding
physical phenomena in the natural sciences and engineering. The behavior of a
function (size, smoothness, quantitative information) that are solutions to
differential equations are important. In understanding a function it is
frequently useful to have "simpler" building blocks to work with. Particular
mathematical tools that have proved extremely useful in addressing questions of
these types and providing a framework to analyze these simple building blocks
lie within the realm of harmonic analysis. A main goal of this project is to
provide a deeper understanding of some of the simple building blocks that arise
in important function spaces connected to function theory and partial
differential equations by using and advancing the tools of harmonic analysis.

This project outlines a research program combining recent results with
motivation from function theory and operator theory to study questions related
to the boundedness of commutators associated to Riesz transforms arising from
differential operators and understanding the boundedness of the Riesz transform
on a manifold with ends. The research direction couples the past work by the
principal investigator with questions about boundedness of commutators with
Riesz transforms associated to differential operators. In particular, the
problems discussed are aimed at obtaining a better understanding of the
differential operators and geometry where one can characterize appropriate BMO
spaces in terms of commutators with Riesz transforms; equivalently demonstrate
that the appropriate Hardy space possesses a weak factorization. A second
research direction provides a holomorphic functional calculus on a manifold with
ends and studies the open question of obtaining the boundedness of the Riesz
transform using ideas from non-homogeneous harmonic analysis and the techniques
developed by the principal investigator. Graduate students with whom the
principal investigator works will be included in these and related projects, and
will receive advising and career mentoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
