
* 1800251
* Multipoint Pade Approximation, Orthogonal Polynomials, and Random Matrices
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2018,03/29/2018
* Doron Lubinsky,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2023
* USD 259,243.00

It was the French mathematician Charles Hermite who in 1873 proved that the
constant e is a transcendental irrational, that is, e is not the root of a
polynomial with integer coefficients. Nine years later, Ferdinand von Lindemann
use Hermite's method to resolve the old problem that the number pi is
transcendental. Hermite's tool was something we now call the Hermite-Padé
approximant. His doctoral student Henri Padé studied a special case, a type of
rational function that is now called the Padé approximant. These have turned out
be a useful tool in problems as varied as scattering physics, numerical solution
of differential equations, and rational approximation. Indeed, calculators still
use rational approximations related to Padé approximants for calculating special
functions. There are a great many unsolved problems about convergence of
sequences of Padé approximants. One of the project goals is to resolve some of
these problems. Orthogonal polynomials turn out to be the denominator
polynomials in certain Padé approximants, but are an even more important topic
in their own right. They have applications in areas ranging from statistics to
mathematical physics.

The specific goals of the project include investigating the notion of 'exact
interpolation' for sequences of multipoint Padé approximants. The PI recently
proved that when there is exact interpolation, namely no extra interpolation
points, then subsequences or full sequences of Padé approximants converge
uniformly in compact sets. The PI intends to establish explicit conditions for
exact interpolation. On orthogonal polynomials, the PI recently discovered that
universality limits for random matrices can be turned into pointwise asymptotics
for orthogonal polynomials at the endpoints of the interval of orthogonality.
The PI intends to explore this in the bulk. On the flip side, the PI intends to
use recent asymptotics of Eli Levin and the PI to establish universality limits
for eigenvalues, as well as distribution of spacings of successive eigenvalues.
Additional goals include establishing explicit formulae for Dirichlet orthogonal
polynomials. The results will be disseminated in papers and at conferences. The
PI recently co-organized a Computational Methods and Function Theory conference
in Lublin, and will help co-organize the next one, most probably in Chile. The
PI is also hoping to train another graduate student.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
