
* 1800740
* Workshop in Analysis and Probability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2018,05/07/2018
* David Kerr,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 40,000.00

The 2018 Workshop in Analysis and Probability, to be held at Texas A&M
University from July 2 to August 19, 2018, will bring together senior and junior
researchers and advanced graduate students in analysis and probability and
related fields in order to broaden the education of the younger participants and
to promote interaction among researchers working in different areas. It will
provide support to many researchers not on sponsored research grants who will
benefit from being in an environment that is research friendly and from contact
with participants who are leaders in the field. An emphasis is put on the
support of junior researchers, minorities, women, and graduate students. The
main session of the Workshop will take place during the period from July 2 to
August 19.Activities sponsored by the Workshop include the three-day general
conference SUMIRFAS (Informal Regional Functional Analysis Seminar)to be held
from August 17 to 19, the Concentration Week "Noncommutative Geometry and Index
Theory for Group Actions and Singular Spaces" to be held from May 21 to 25, and
the Concentration Week "Random Walks in Correlated and Dynamic Environments" to
be held from August 13 to 17.

The Workshop activities have a wide impact by providing intellectual stimulation
for all participants as well as giving an opportunity to a diverse group of
junior participants to increase the breadth and depth of knowledge and to
interact with senior researchers in several areas of mathematics. There is also
significant outreach to applied mathematics and computer science, and indeed an
important aspect of the Workshop is to promote cooperation among researchers in
different fields. The Concentration Weeks will include introductory lecture
series designed to acquaint junior researchers and non-experts with the basics
of an area. All Workshop participants will be invited to disseminate their work
through seminars. More details are available at
http://www.math.tamu.edu/~kerr/workshop/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
