
* 1800161
* Notions of Curvature and Their Role in Analysis on Metric Measure Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2018,06/17/2020
* Nageswari Shanmugalingam,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 260,900.00

The sphere, a flat surface such as a flat piece of paper, and a hyperbolic
surface such as a saddle behave differently from each other. On the surface of
the ball curves of least length (geodesics) emanating from a point in different
directions tend to not move away from each other in the short term, or at least
less rapidly than in the flat surface, whereas in the saddle surface the
geodesics curve away from each other rapidly. This behavior is related to the
curvature of the surface, with the sphere of positive curvature, the flat
surface of zero curvature, and the saddle of negative curvature. Analogs of this
behavior hold in higher dimensional objects that occur in nature. Curvature
plays a key role in how natural phenomena such as dissipation of heat and
electricity behave, and this is true also in objects that are not as smooth as
the three types described above. Such non-smooth objects occur in nature and
have creases, bumps and fractal-like structure, and so the classical theory of
curvature does not apply to them. The focus of this project is to use the analog
of curvature developed for the non-smooth setting recently, and explore how that
dictates the behavior of natural phenomena such as heat dissipation in such
objects.

The goal of this project is to explore links between the notions of negative
curvature of a metric space on the one hand, and nonlinear potential theory and
quasiconformal mappings on the other hand. The spaces considered are equipped
with a uniformly locally doubling measure supporting a uniformly local Poincare
inequality. A prototype space equipped with a uniformly locally doubling measure
supporting a uniformly local Poincare inequality but does not support their
global analogs is the smooth hyperbolic manifold, and experience tells us that
such spaces have exponential volume growth at large scales. This project is
divided into three parts. In the first part of the project, the focus is the
large scale negative curvature of the space (as given in optimal mass
transportation) and its connections to large-scale potential theory (non-linear
``heat" energy dissipation) and hyperbolicity of ends. In the second part the
aim is to construct geometric families of curves connecting pairs of points in
the space when the space has lower bounded Ricci curvature in the sense of Lott
and Villani. The third part of the project is to consider bounded doubling
nonsmooth spaces as boundaries of Gromov-hyperbolic filling and use this
perspective to study non-local potential theory and regularity of nonlocal
energy minimizers on poorly pathconnected spaces. The research described herein
forms a part of the program of quasiconformal classification of nonsmooth
spaces. Such spaces arise in the study of smooth manifolds when considering
Gromov-Hausdorff limit spaces as in the works of Cheeger, Gromov, and Perelman.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
