
* 1800544
* Dynamics with a Combinatorial Bent
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2018,03/18/2020
* Bryna Kra,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports the principal investigator's work on a program of research
on problems in dynamics, education, and outreach. The research portion is to
study the long-term behavior of systems whose dynamics is too complicated to be
understood locally. The problems lie within dynamics, but have strong
connections to numerous other fields of mathematics. The education portion
involves directing undergraduates in advanced topics and graduate students in
doctoral students, educating researchers in fields with links to dynamics, and
organizing interdisciplinary meetings. The outreach involves conference
organization, running mentoring group for women all levels at Northwestern, and
working to increase the number of women applying to graduate school in
mathematics.

The principal investigator will work on problems in ergodic theory, studying
questions of convergence, recurrence, and equidistribution, and problems in
topological dynamics, studying properties of recurrence, shift systems, and
complexity. In symbolic and topological dynamics, this will build on past
results to further understand relations between complexity, periodicity,
dynamical properties of the system, and the algebraic properties of naturally
associated groups. In ergodic theory, this will build on previous research in
multiple recurrence and convergence, with the study of different averages,
equidistribution results, and building of systems with particular properties.
The problems proposed lie within dynamics, but there are strong connections to
problems from other fields, including combinatorics, number theory,
combinatorics of words, and computer science. The goal is to explore these deep
links, developing applications to these other areas and making use of recent
advances in these other areas to address problems within dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
