
* 1802107
* Variational approach to Geometric Function Theorem, Nonlinear PDEs and Hyperelasticy
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2018,05/11/2020
* Tadeusz Iwaniec,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

Applied sciences are important in formulating and solving interesting
mathematical problems. Conversely, researchers in science and engineering fields
often seek improvements in both theory and practice via mathematical arguments
to explain and confirm experimental results. This project involves partial
differential equations, geometric function theory, calculus of variations and
related problems that arise in real-world applications including: nonlinear
elasticity, microstructure of materials, and crystals to name a few. The
proposed physical interpretations of mathematical objects, like Sobolev
homeomorphisms that are viewed as elastic deformations, have proven useful in
understanding and solving challenging problems in nonlinear elasticity. The
primary aim here is to develop new, and improve old, methods to meet these
challenges. The new mathematical concepts such as free Lagrangians allow one to
establish the existence of traction free energy-minimal deformations. Further
advances in Hopf-Laplace differentials could lead to predictions of the
formation of cracks in deformations, and in understanding the principle of
interpenetration of matter. Theoretical prediction of failure of elastic bodies
caused by cracks would have a broad impact to both mathematical analysts and
researchers in the engineering fields. The research topics in this project,
although in general mathematically challenging, also take on questions that are
suitable for graduate students. The ultimate goal is to attract graduate
students and young scholars, both women and men, to geometric function theory
with a wide range of applications, to encourage them to participate in the
interdisciplinary efforts, and to prepare and help them to develop meaningful
interactions with physicists and engineers. The principal investigator is
currently working with Jani Onninen on a joint monograph designed for
researchers as well as graduate students in geometric function theory.

The principal investigator has a history of strong efforts to gain from an
interplay between pure and applied mathematics. It resulted in the solution of
several mathematical problems such as the Nitsche conjecture in the theory of
minimal surfaces, the Evans-Ball conjecture on approximation of Sobolev mappings
with diffeomorphisms, the novel concept of free Lagrangians in the calculus of
variations, formation of cracks along trajectories of Hopf differentials,
rigorous description of the phenomenon of interpenetration of matter, and the
partial answers in the dimension two to the legendary Morrey's conjecture on
quasiconvexity of the rank-one convex functionals; in particular, sharp
inequalities of Burkholder's stochastic integrals. The latter include the
complex Beurling-Ahlfors singular integral transform. The eminence of this
transform lies in the fact that it connects two homotopy classes of the first
order elliptic systems in the complex plane: one whose solutions are orientation
preserving mapping and the other with orientation reversing solutions. The
notoriously difficult problem has been to identify the Lp-norm of the Beurling-
Ahlfos transform. The status of the problem goes on as never before.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
