
* 1802682
* Finite Rank Perturbations and Model Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,05/30/2019
* Constanze Liaw,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 145,243.00

Many physical systems are modeled by differential operators. One way of
describing a system's long-term behavior is through spectral theory, which
includes the finding of frequencies naturally exhibited by the system. Imagine a
vibrating string or beam of fixed length. Clearly, its frequency (think "sound")
depends on how its ends (aka boundaries) are clamped down or otherwise
restricted. In general, the spectrum of a differential operator and with it the
properties of a physical system can change drastically when the conditions
imposed on the boundary are changed. In many cases, we know the complete
spectrum for one set of boundary conditions. From there, we can gain knowledge
about the system under other conditions via the theory of so-called finite rank
perturbations. The primary goal of the project is to systematically study
spectral theory of finite rank unitary perturbations by tightening the
relationship to corresponding functional models. The rank one setting is
reasonably well-understood, while a general treatment of the finite rank problem
presented several digressions. Initially, non-cyclic unitary unperturbed
operators posed an issue. This problem is now resolved. The general problem
involves matrix-valued Herglotz and Cauchy-type transforms. The study of these
transforms as part of this project will provide insight into finite rank
perturbation theory. A regularization of the so-called exterior Cauchy transform
(as was done in the rank one setting) is planned. Further investigations will be
made into the difficult case of infinite rank perturbations with defect
operators in the trace class. The analogous self-adjoint setting, as well as
concrete applications to differential operators, will also be investigated.
