
* 1827376
* Aspects of Sofic Entropy and Algebraic Actions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/28/2017,02/08/2018
* Benjamin Hayes,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 51,313.00

The mathematical theory of dynamical systems concerns itself with states of
certain physical systems (e.g., the amount of a certain gas inside a room, the
population of a species, the temperature inside a building) as they evolve in
time. It happens to be useful and natural to make "time" itself more abstract
and replace it with any other discrete system of symmetries, say of some object
(such symmetries form what is a called a discrete group). In the case of a very
chaotic physical system, one cannot effectively predict its future state. This
fact gives rise to an important quantity, the entropy of the system, that
measures how unpredictable it is. Entropy was originally defined directly within
an information theoretic context, but it turns out that, if one views it instead
from the perspective of a statistical mechanics formalism, the scope of entropy
theory is increased to encompass a very large class of groups known as "sofic
groups." Seen through this new lens, entropy becomes a measurement of how many
finitary approximations the physical system has. The general question of how
well an infinitary process can be approximated by a finitary one is a
fundamental question of scientific inquiry, and the class of sofic groups
includes many natural examples coming from geometry and number theory. This
project also sheds light on the connection to physics that is inherent in its
statistical mechanical and information theoretic origins. Moreover, the subject
has proven to have interesting links to diverse areas of mathematics, including
the following: functional analysis, ergodic theory, combinatorics, and operator
algebras. Many of the links are direct consequences of the principal
investigator's research. The project is part of ongoing activity to strengthen
and understand such connections.

This project revolves around three main problems. The first is to understand the
orbit equivalence consequences of positive or complete positive entropy for
actions of nonamenable groups. For example, the principal investigator has shown
that actions with complete positive entropy are strongly ergodic and that
positive entropy actions are not weakly compact. He seeks to prove that actions
with compete positive entropy are solidly ergodic, as defined by Chifan and
Ioana, which will give further indication of the Bernoulli-like behavior that
these actions exhibit. Part of the interest in this objective is that it places
the theory of entropy for actions of nonamenable groups in stark contrast to the
study of entropy for actions of amenable groups, where it is impossible to
derive any orbit equivalence consequences of entropy. These consequences of
complete positive entropy apply to algebraic actions (i.e., actions on compact
groups by automorphisms), for the principal investigator can already demonstrate
that algebraic actions related to invertible convolution operators have complete
positive entropy. A second problem is concerned with investigating the entropy
theory of algebraic actions of equivalence relations, which is joint work with
Lewis Bowen and Dylan Airey. One aim of this part of the project is to
generalize the principal investigator's results on entropy and Fuglede-Kadison
determinants from the group case to the equivalence relation case. Lastly, the
principal investigator will further the connections between dynamics and
operator algebras by defining sofic entropy for actions on operator algebras.
