
* 1845416
* CAREER: New Methods and Applications for Smooth Rigidity of Algebraic Actions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,07/19/2022
* Zhenqi Wang,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 313,144.00

The field of dynamical systems originated from differential equations and
celestial mechanics. It studies the long run behavior of a system subject to
laws of motion. The study of rigidity phenomenon is one of the central themes in
dynamical systems, with applications to number theory, geometry, and
mathematical physics. Roughly speaking, an action is rigid if various properties
of the system are preserved under appropriate modifications. So far, systems
with strong chaotic properties have been well understood. In many systems of
interest however, only weak chaotic behaviors can be observed. The goal of this
project is to develop new tools to study such systems and then apply these
results to study other areas of mathematics, such as number theory and
representation theory. The research plan is complemented by educational and
outreach activities involving the training of undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral associates, and fostering collaborations among female
researchers in different areas.

The proposed research plan consists of several coherent projects, ranging from
dynamical systems, harmonic analysis for Lie groups, representation theory and
number theory. The principal investigator plans to establish cocycle rigidity
and to study (twisted) cohomological equations for a large class of algebraic
partially hyperbolic and parabolic actions by using representation theory. The
results and techniques from the study of parabolic actions will be applied to
number theory for the study of effective equidistribution for certain unipotent
flows and maps on some homogenous spaces of semidirect product groups. The
principle investigator will also combine KAM approach and representation theory
to general partially hyperbolic and parabolic algebraic actions to study local
rigidity. A large class of new examples whose geometric properties are
distinctly different from existing examples will be explored.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
