
* 1845037
* CAREER: Quasilinear Dispersive Evolutions in Fluid Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,07/21/2022
* Mihaela Ifrim,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 388,669.00

Nonlinear dispersive equations model physical phenomena arising in fluid
dynamics (oceanography), quantum mechanics, plasma physics, nonlinear optics,
all the way to general relativity. The purpose of this project is to improve the
mathematical and scientific understanding of those equations via (i) concrete
research projects aimed at studying the long-time behavior of solutions to such
equations, and (ii) an educational component aimed at introducing such problems
to a new and diverse generation of mathematicians. A primary focus of the
principal investigator will be the analysis of the two-dimensional water wave
equations, which govern the evolution of a free fluid surface, or of the
interface between two fluids. The goal is to provide a better description of
both the local dynamics (e.g. low regularity solutions and formation of
singularities) and of global dynamics in fluid flows. Here, by singularities in
free boundary problems, the principal investigator means evolutions where the
interface loses smoothness, possibly forming a corner-like singularity followed
by "wave breaking''. Such a behavior is exhibited in many physically important
phenomena, like turbulence in ocean waves, tsunami formation, just to mention a
few. While this wave breaking is easy to observe and has very strong
manifestations in nature, its scientific understanding is rather poor, and the
mathematical justification of the phenomena based on the constitutive equations
is rather difficult and is fully open at this time. This project aims to tackle
a selection of key open problems related to singularity formation and to long-
time properties of solutions to several classes of dispersive and hyperbolic
equations that arise from a physical or geometric context, largely motivated by
fluid dynamics. The project includes an educational component aimed at raising
the interest of a younger generation of researchers in those fundamental
problems through workshops, seminars, REU projects, etc.

One of the main goals of the project is to understand the long-time behavior of
solutions of the water waves. This includes lifespan estimates as well as global
in time dynamics and scattering properties, where possible. From this
perspective there are two key properties that play a role: one is the
"dispersive decay'', and the other is the ``resonance analysis''. Some of the
key tools developed by the PI and collaborators (the "quasilinear modified
energy method'', and the "testing with wave packets method'') will contribute to
a better understanding of the proposed problems, but nevertheless, improvements
of the existing methods and the need to develop new and robust techniques remain
essential in order to describe, for instance, the singularity formation
mechanism. The quasilinear nature of these equations plays a crucial role in the
difficulty associated with the analysis of the long- time behavior and
properties of the solutions. Water waves and related models are effective
equations for the ocean dynamics that are derived in the physics literature from
heuristic considerations and have very important implications on the long-time
behavior of dispersive partial differential equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
