
* 1854147
* FRG: Collaborative Research: New Challenges in Geometric Measure Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,06/27/2019
* Camillo De Lellis,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 503,072.00

In mathematics, computer science and operations research, optimization problems
are ubiquitous. The questions are often formulated as follows: does there exist
a best element (with regard to some criterion) from some set of available
alternatives? Attempts to address this type of questions have played a
fundamental role in the development of modern mathematics. In 1760 Joseph-Louis
Lagrange asked whether there exists a surface with minimal area and prescribed
boundary. This problem known as the Plateau problem was named after the
physicist Joseph Plateau whose experiments with soap films yield a similar
mathematical problem. The existence and regularity of such surfaces are part of
Geometric Measure Theory (GMT). More generally, GMT combines methods of
mathematical analysis with concepts from differential geometry, to develop the
appropriate setting for studying critical phenomena in Partial Differential
Equations and in the Calculus of Variations, often arising from optimization
questions. Recent developments in the field forecast an imminent boom. It is the
PIs' objective to capitalize on this extraordinary opportunity they are uniquely
positioned to take advantage of. Fulfillment of their scientific goals will
yield to developments that will shape the field for years to come. The
vertically integrated structure of the PIs' teams ensures that this project will
have a considerable impact in human resources. One of the PIs' main goals is to
educate the next generation of researchers in Geometric Measure Theory.

Pioneered in the work of Besicovitch in the thirties, the subject boomed in the
fifties and sixties with the work on the multidimensional Plateau problem by De
Giorgi, Federer, Fleming, Reifenberg and Almgren. The ideas developed in that
extremely creative period have deeply influenced the further development of the
theory of Partial Differential Equations and of the Calculus of Variations, with
noticeable effects in Geometric Analysis and Mathematical General Relativity,
and Harmonic Analysis and Potential Theory. The current project focuses on three
major challenges in GMT, all of which are poised to have a significant impact in
other areas of analysis. The PIs and their associates are expected to lead the
efforts to address these problems. The challenges investigated in this project
are: - Understanding singular sets of minimal surfaces and free boundaries; -
Developing regularity and rigidity theorems for degenerate elliptic or non-
smooth surface energies; - Quantifying local-to-global geometric rigidity
results. These problems share common traits of: (i) they exemplify the most
interesting open questions in the area; (ii) they have been the subject of
striking recent developments, which increase the chances of their successful
study; (iii) their resolution promises to have relevant impacts outside of GMT;
(iv) requiring a broad approach which is encompassed by the expertise of the
three PIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
