
* 1854788
* Regularity vs. Singularity for Elliptic and Parabolic Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Connor Mooney,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 143,764.00

This project investigates partial differential equations that arise in several
areas of pure and applied mathematics including meteorology, elasticity, and
differential and complex geometry. The proposed problems concern the regularity
(smoothness properties) of solutions. Key challenges that these problems share
are that ellipticity (an agent of regularity) degenerates, and that solutions
can be vector-valued. Overcoming these challenges will not only require
significant new mathematical ideas, but could also help us better predict
weather patterns and assist in the design of cars. The results will be
communicated by publication in peer-reviewed journals, and through the writing
of expository notes that the PI intends to make publicly available and will be
useful to researchers and students alike.

The first project tackles regularity questions for the real Monge-Ampere
equation, motivated by applications to meteorology and differential geometry.
The PI will investigate singularity formation for the semi-geostrophic system,
which models large scale atmospheric flows. Certain examples of irregular
stationary solutions in a half-plane may be useful models for blowup at boundary
points. The second project concerns local regularity for the complex Monge-
Ampere equation, which arises in complex geometry. Difficulties include the non-
convexity of solutions, and invariance under adding certain quadratic
polynomials. The PI has initiated the study of a model equation that captures
these difficulties. The third project concerns non-concave uniformly elliptic
equations. A challenging problem is to construct singular solutions in low
dimensions. An obstruction is that in 3d, linear equations with rough
coefficients have no nontrivial one-homogeneous solutions; the PI will instead
consider solutions with "spiraling" one-homogenous symmetry. The fourth project
concerns minimizers of variational integrals with convex integrand. A conjecture
is that scalar-valued minimizers have the same regularity as the Legendre
transform of the integrand. The PI proposes to confirm this when the degeneracy
set of the integrand satisfies certain geometric conditions, and to construct a
counterexample when these conditions aren't met. The last project aims to answer
classical regularity and stability questions for parabolic systems, especially
in low dimensions. The PI recently constructed examples of singular solutions to
linear parabolic systems in the plane, answering a long-standing question. This
may open the way to tackling related problems, e.g. to identify conditions on
coefficients that prevent singularities in the linear case, and to determine
regularity vs. singularity for nonlinear structures of porous medium type.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
