
* 1856155
* Orbit Closures in Moduli Spaces of Surfaces and Surface Subgroups of Mapping Class Groups
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,05/30/2019
* Alexander Wright,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 319,999.00

Moduli spaces of surfaces play a central role throughout mathematics and
theoretical physics. Each such moduli space can be thought of as a universe of
all possible shapes that a surface can take. Just as the laws of gravity
prescribe the orbits of the planets and stars of our universe, a different set
of laws, called the GL+(2,R) action, prescribe orbits of surfaces in these
universes of all possible surfaces. The first part of this project aims to
obtain classification results for these orbits. Such classification results
would provide a table of possible behaviors, and would give deep information
about the surfaces themselves. This information could be used in more concrete
mathematical and physical applications involving dynamics and polygonal shapes.
The second part of this project aims to give insight into the mapping class
group, which encodes all ways of wrapping a surface onto itself, as well as four
dimensional shapes called surface bundles. Aspects of this research provide an
ideal training ground for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students,
and connect to the principal investigator's ongoing efforts to further
popularize Maryam Mirzakhani's inspiring work in this area.

Specifically, the PI proposes to engage in research at the intersection of
Teichmueller theory and dynamics, in two related programs. The first program
concerns GL+(2,R) orbit closures of quadratic and Abelian differentials, also
known as (half) translation surfaces. The principal investigator proposes to
classify orbit closures that have large rank, by employing recent theorems
concerning cylinder deformations and degenerations developed by the principal
investigator and his coauthors, as well as the seminal results of Eskin-
Mirzakhani-Mohammadi. In the second program, the principal investigator proposes
to investigate convex cocompact surface subgroups of the mapping class group,
employing dynamical and geometric results concerning the Teichmueller geodesic
flow. The existence of such surface subgroups is known to be equivalent to the
existence of surface bundles over surface with Gromov hyperbolic fundamental
group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
