
* 1856491
* Qualitative Properties of Solutions of Nonlinear Elliptic and Parabolic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2019,07/10/2019
* Peter Polacik,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 290,283.00

This project is concerned with nonlinear parabolic and elliptic partial
differential equations (PDEs), with special focus on problems posed on an entire
Euclidean space. Parabolic equations are evolution equations?the unknown
function, or the solution, depends on one or several spatial variables and one
more distinguished variable playing the role of time. Such equations are widely
used in models in applied sciences. Given an initial state of the system, the
main goal is to describe its future states. Mathematically, this translates to
questions about a possible development of singularities in the solutions, and,
in the absence of such singularities, about the behavior of the solutions as
time increases to infinity. One asks if the solution approaches in some way a
time-independent steady state or if it may exhibit a more complicated behavior.
Elliptic equations on Euclidean spaces represent steady states (equilibria),
solitary waves, traveling fronts, or self-similar solutions of many different
types of evolution PDEs. Naturally, therefore, analysis of elliptic equations is
one of the key basic steps toward understanding of the dynamics of these
evolution equations. The project?s problems in elliptic equations concern
qualitative properties, such as symmetry, periodicity, and more complex
oscillatory behavior of individual solutions, as well as the global structure of
the solutions, such as their multiplicity and bifurcations (changes as
parameters in the equation vary). Qualitative analysis of solutions to be
carried out in this project is important for the internal development of the
mathematical theory of PDEs as well as for improvement of their modeling
relevance. Although the project is mainly theorical, its results concerning
fundamental properties of solutions could be of interest in research fields
beyond PDEs. For example, even with high computing power currently available for
numerical analysis, computations involving nonlinear PDEs are often formidable
without a guideline from qualitative analysis. Also, when a specific PDE model
from applied science is to be investigated, general qualitative results on
possible behavior of solutions of equations of the given type provide a valuable
information. This project contains component projects and activities for
graduate students, and the award provides graduate student research
assistantship and summer support, and support for student participation at
conferences.

The research in this project will develop along several main topics. In certain
elliptic equations on the entire space, one of the problems concerns solutions
which decay to zero in all but one variable. Employing techniques from the
center manifold and KAM theories, the PI wants to examine the existence of
solutions which are quasiperiodic in the non-decay variable. Another class of
elliptic equations to be considered arises as an equation for self-similar
solutions of the semilinear heat equation. The PI will study the multiplicity of
the solutions and their bifurcations from a singular solution as the exponent in
the power nonlinearity varies. For parabolic equations on the real line, the PI
will continue his research on quasiconvergence properties of solutions with
respect to a localized topology. For multidimensional semilinear parabolic
equations on the entire space, one of the basic questions to be addressed is
whether in high enough spatial dimensions, the solutions may exhibit some sort
of oscillatory behavior while staying away from steady states on any
sufficiently large bounded region. Two other problems deal with Liouville-type
and classification theorems for entire solutions (that is, solutions defined for
all times, positive and negative) of nonlinear parabolic equations. In one of
them, the goal is to prove the nonexistence of positive entire solutions for an
optimal Sobolev-subcritical range of exponents. In another one, the existence of
nonstationary entire solutions is to be investigated for a range of
supercritical exponents. Liouville and classification theorems have many
interesting applications in the theory of blowup of solutions of parabolic
equations and some of them, such as the characterization the type of blowup and
existence of spatial blowup profiles, also belong to the expected outcome of
this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
