
* 1856010
* New Developments at the Interface of Banach Algebras and Complex Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2019,04/15/2019
* Alexander Izzo,OH,Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 234,342.00

This project will advance research at the interface of complex analysis and
functional analysis, areas of mathematics that provide the mathematical tools
used in physics, engineering, and computational chemistry. Several longstanding
problems will be studied using new concepts recently introduced by the principal
investigator. The results of this research project will be disseminated via
talks in seminars and conferences and via publications in widely available
journals. The principal investigator will continue to mentor junior
mathematicians in related areas by suggesting to them problems motivated by this
research project that are well matched to their particular strengths. He will
also continue to encourage students to pursue university degrees in STEM fields.

The principal investigator will use methods from functional analysis and complex
analysis in one and several variables to study problems in four distinct,
related areas of mathematics: the corona problem in several complex variables,
Arveson's conjecture in multivariable operator theory, problems concerning
analytic structure in commutative Banach algebras, and problems concerning
homeomorphism groups. A major focus of the research will be the close connection
between commutative Banach algebras and analyticity which, despite over 60 years
of investigation by many mathematicians, remains in many ways mysterious. The
principal investigator recently discovered a new concept of analytic set: in
addition to providing a new perspective on analytic structure in commutative
Banach algebras, this concept also provides a new perspective on the corona
problem and suggests the development of a field that could be described as
"nonsmooth complex analysis". Another major focus of the research will be Banach
algebras invariant under group actions and their connections to an important
conjecture of Arveson concerning Hilbert modules with wide ranging ramifications
in operator theory and C*-algebras.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
