
* 1856235
* Harmonic Analysis and Periodic Homogenization
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,05/30/2019
* Zhongwei Shen,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating coefficients are used to
describe various processes in materials with rapidly oscillating
microstructures, such as composite and perforated materials. The theory of
homogenization, whose goal is to describe the macroscopic properties of
microscopically inhomogeneous or heterogeneous materials, shows that such
strongly inhomogeneous material, whose characteristics change sharply with
respect to space variables, may be approximately described via a homogenized or
effective homogeneous material. As a result, the theory of homogenization of
partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating coefficients has many
important applications in physics, mechanics, and materials science. The long-
term goal of this project is to establish optimal quantitative results in the
homogenization theory for a large class of partial differential equations in
various settings, arising in applications. The proposed research focuses on
several challenging problems in the area and will develop new approaches and
techniques. The results will provide theoretical foundation and guidance for
numerical simulations in strongly inhomogeneous materials.

The Principal Investigator proposes to continue his ongoing research program on
quantitative homogenization of partial differential equations. The main focus of
this project will be on large-scale geometric and regularity properties and
convergence rates for second-order elliptic and parabolic equations. More
specifically, the problems to be investigated include (1) large-scale geometric
properties of elliptic equations with periodic coefficients; (2) quantitative
homogenization of parabolic systems with time-dependent periodic coefficients;
(3) quantitative homogenization of quasi-linear elliptic equations; (4)
homogenization of boundary value problems in non-smooth domains; and (5) large-
scale regularity estimates in perforated domains. The proposed research lies at
the interface of harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. Existing
and new techniques from harmonic analysis are expected to play a significant
role in the development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
