
* 1900943
* Long Time Dynamics in Combustion, Mixing, and Fluids Models
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2019,07/05/2019
* Andrej Zlatos,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 210,940.00

The aim of this project is a better understanding of mathematical models of
several important real world phenomena, including propagation of reactive
processes, turbulent motion of fluids, and mixing of substances by such motion.
Reactive processes (e.g., forest fires) frequently occur in a patchwork of
different environments (trees, brush, grass), through which the process
propagates at different rates. The theory of homogenization aims to better
understand how the dynamics of the process over large scales (long distances and
times) depends on smaller scale variations in the environment. The main goal of
this part of the project is to demonstrate that thanks to averaging over large
regions, the long term behavior of the process can be predicted with a large
degree of confidence without the need for overly detailed information about the
composition of the environment. Mixing via fluid motion is crucial in the
production of materials such as alloys, as well as in enhancement of processes
such as chemical reactions. Quantifying mixing efficiency of flows and
identifying those that stand out in this respect is therefore of great
importance. The PI recently constructed universal mixers, flows that are
particularly efficient in mixing. These have a relatively simple structure but
may be too irregular for practical applications. The main goal of this part of
the project is to identify more regular universal mixers, as well as to study
how such fast mixing affects diffusive processes (e.g., heat transport). Even
without considering its effects on mixing of substances, our understanding of
the motion of fluids is still far from satisfactory. The study of onset of
turbulence and the associated creation of small scale structures in fluids is
important in mathematics as well as in physics and engineering, and while it has
seen great progress in recent years, many fundamental questions remain
unresolved. In this part of the project, the PI proposes to study how fast the
development of turbulent structures in fluids can be and how severe this
turbulence can become, both in the bulk of the fluid and in the vicinity of
regular as well as irregular boundaries (walls of the fluid container).

Physical processes such as combustion, mixing, and fluid turbulence, whose study
motivates this project, are modeled by linear and nonlinear partial differential
equations, including reaction-diffusion equations, transport equations, drift-
diffusion equations, and equations of fluid dynamics. The primary focus of this
project, which consists of three parts, is the study of long term dynamics of
the solutions of these equations as well as their possible formation of
singularities in finite time. The aim of the first part of the project is the
understanding of large scale behavior of reactive processes spreading through
heterogeneous media, including obtaining a satisfactory homogenization theory
for these models in multi-dimensional random media. The aim of the second part
of the project is the study of mixing efficiency of flows and the search for
sufficiently regular universal mixers, flows that are highly efficient in mixing
of substances advected by them regardless of the initial configuration of the
latter. Enhancement of diffusion in drift-diffusion equations via flow-induced
mixing will also be studied. The aim of the third part of the project is the
study of turbulence in two-dimensional Euler and related equations of fluid
dynamics, including rapid growth of gradients of solutions in the bulk of the
fluid and possible formation of finite time singularities in more singular
models. The question of well-posedness of Euler equations in planar domains with
irregular boundaries will also be addressed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
