
* 1900025
* Non-Archimedean Methods in Complex Analysis, Dynamics, and Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,05/30/2019
* Mattias Jonsson,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

Analysis, Geometry and Dynamics are areas of Mathematics, which since their
discovery have been used in order to understand the world around us. They are
crucial to other scientific fields, such as engineering, biology and economics.
For example, the mathematical modeling of any phenomenon that undergoes change
over time (such as the population of bacteria in a body, the stock market, etc.)
can be viewed as a dynamical system. Similarly, geometry is the basis for many
current industrial applications such as 3D printing. This research project will
enhance the tools available in the aforementioned branches of mathematics. The
development of geometry goes back to the ancient Greeks, who laid down axioms,
or basic assumptions, from which all other reasonable properties could be
logically deduced. The main focus of this project is a detailed study of certain
phenomena that occur when the Archimedean Axiom, attributed to Archimedes of
Syracuse, is no longer valid. The resulting mathematics turns out to be useful
even when the primary object of study is of the usual, Archimedean, kind.

This mathematics research project will employ methods from non-Archimedean
analysis and geometry in order to study a range of problems in analysis,
dynamics and geometry. The principal investigator will work with Berkovich
spaces, non-Archimedean analogues of real and complex manifolds. Among many
specific projects, one involves a detailed study of the space of metrics on an
ample line bundle on a compact complex manifold. Geodesic rays inside this space
can be studied using non-Archimedean means. The principal investigator will also
continue his work with Boucksom on the Kontsevich-Soibelman conjecture that
originally arose in the study of mirror symmetry. In analysis and dynamics, the
principal investigator will try to use non-Archimedean techniques to construct
invariant currents for quite general two-dimensional complex dynamical systems
and study the growth of arithmetic complexity along orbits of certain arithmetic
dynamical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
