
* 1900083
* Dynamics of Fluid and Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2019,04/19/2021
* Chongchun Zeng,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 302,189.00

Differential equations are used to model problems arising from a broad
background including physics, engineering, biology, finance, etc. Great efforts
are made to understand these mathematical models rigorously for a twofold
reasons. On the one hand, the validity and the relevance of these ideal models
are established through the comparison between the results from theoretical
analysis and the experimental data. On the other hand, once the meaningfulness
of a mathematical model is supported by available experimental observations to
certain degree, the theoretical studies on these ideal models can provide
properties and predictions of the original problems that are hard to be obtained
through experiments. For systems involving the temporal evolution, of particular
interests are those structural and asymptotic properties. These include some
special structures, such as steady states, periodic and quasi-periodic
solutions, chaotic orbits etc, as well as their qualitative properties like
stability etc. In general, on the one hand, only stable states are physically
observable in a system, while the ideal, but unstable, states are hardly
observed due to their extremely sensitive dependence on the parameters. On the
other hand, unstable states are also extremely important, partly due to the fact
that they and some of their associated structures serve as the boundaries
separating different collections of stable states in a system. In this project,
the PI plans to focus on the local dynamics near steady states in several
classical nonlinear partial differential equation systems, which all belong to
the general category of nonlinear waves. The lack of a priori damping and the
complicated nonlinearity pose most of the challenges in their mathematical
analysis.

The PI plans to rigorously investigate the local dynamics of the incompressible
Euler equation as well as a general class of quasi-linear Hamiltonian partial
differential equations. In particular, for the incompressible Euler equation,
which models inviscid incompressible fluids such as water, the proposed problems
include fluids in rigid containers and fluids with free surfaces like ocean
waves. Even though there have been extensive studies on these systems and great
progresses have been made in recent year, due to their very complex nature, many
issues including some very fundamental ones are still not well understood after
years of efforts. The PI plans to focus on their local dynamic structures near
equilibria, including stability/instability, local invariant manifolds, special
solutions, bifurcations, and singular perturbations. While these aspects are
standard notions in the theory of smooth dynamical systems, due to the highly
nonlinear nature of these partial differential equations, their solution maps
often do not have sufficient smoothness in the infinite dimensional phase spaces
for the classical theory to apply directly. In contrast to ordinary differential
equations, the relationship between the qualitative structures and the
regularity analysis of these nonlinear partial differential equations is an
essential analytical aspect of nonlinear partial differential equation dynamics.
Understanding and solving these problems, expected to be largely based on their
specific mechanical and geometric structures, would result in substantial
theoretical advances in these areas and possibly lead to the discovery of new
physical and mathematical phenomena in the underlying systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
