
* 1900251
* Long-time Behavior of Some Dispersive and Fluid Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,07/26/2019
* Yu Deng,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project is devoted to the study of several partial differential equations
that arise in mathematical physics and fluid dynamics. We attempt to make
progress on these problems by combining different ideas from different subjects
of mathematics. The first problem concerns the motion of the free water surface
in the presence of a curved bottom topography. As a first step towards
understanding the complex dynamics of waves in the ocean, we will consider small
perturbations to the flat water surface and analyze how such perturbations
propagate over long time periods. The second problem is about the long-time
phenomenon associated with the Schrodinger?s equation in a periodic box. We
intend to demonstrate how the fine number theoretic properties of the shape and
the size of the box will affect the long-time behavior of Schrodinger waves. The
third problem involves the magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) equations, which describes
many important plasma systems such as the sun. In particular, in the presence of
a strong background magnetic field, we will study the formation of Alfven waves
in the vanishing viscosity limit. The fourth and last problem is related to the
phenomenon of inviscid damping in fluid dynamics, which is unstable and requires
some subtle conditions on the fluid. We extend our previous work on this topic,
and intend to study when and how inviscid damping may fail, provided that these
conditions are violated.

There are specific difficulties in each of the four problems that require a
novel approach. In the first problem, the equation involved is a nonlinear
dispersive equation with variable coefficients, so the existing methods which
have been successful in treating constant coefficient dispersive equations are
no longer applicable. Nevertheless, we plan to combine this method, which is
based on Fourier space analysis, with appropriate physical space methods to
study this problem. In the second problem we are considering Schrodinger?s
equation on non-rectangular tori that lack tensor product structure. For this
reason we will bring in more advanced techniques from number theory and harmonic
analysis, such as the decoupling methods, and counting formulas for solutions to
Diophantine systems. The third problem involves a weakly dissipative system
which in the vanishing viscosity limit becomes dispersive, and thus we will need
to extend the methods that are suitable for dispersive equations to the
dissipative context, which on the Fourier side amounts to combining dissipation
decay with stationary phase. In the fourth problem, the main challenge is
extending the linear analysis in our previous work to infinite time, which
requires a combination of Fourier space and physical space techniques (for
example, energy estimates with exponential weights both in Fourier and in
physical space).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
