
* 1900288
* Singularities and Black Holes in General Relativity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,02/14/2023
* Yakov Shlapentokh-Rothman,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 190,174.00

One of the most shocking predictions of general relativity is the existence of
black holes; regions of spacetime so dense that nothing, not even light, can
escape. In addition to possessing fascinating physical properties, black holes
play an essential role in our modern understanding of astrophysics. For example,
it is expected that any object undergoing gravitational collapse eventually
settles down to a black hole, and also, it is thought that black holes serve to
shield us from potentially dangerous gravitational singularities. However, both
of these expectations, so fundamental to our view of the universe, lack a
definitive mathematical understanding. This project aims to advance our
understanding of both the problems of black hole stability and the potential
existence of "naked singularities", singular solutions which are not hidden away
behind a black hole.

In the last decade there has been a tremendous progress in establishing
stability results for model equations on general black hole backgrounds. At the
same time, there has been much progress in understanding the true stability
problem for the special class of non-rotating black holes. One part of our
research plan is to combine these two research directions and to eventually
establish a definitive stability theory for rotating black holes. Another part
of our research plan is to show that there do in fact exist singular spacetimes
which are not hidden behind black holes; however, we will also show that upon a
slight perturbation, these particular spacetimes become unstable and develop a
black hole.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
