
* 1900386
* Ergodic Theory of Non-Amenable Group Actions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2019,05/20/2019
* Lewis Bowen,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2022
* USD 329,726.00

Classical dynamics studies how systems change in time. Ergodic theory focuses on
the statistical behavior of dynamical systems. Applications of ergodic theory
are widespread: from traffic modeling to aerospace engineering and population
dynamics. It is natural and of practical importance to generalize the role of
time in a dynamical system to more complicated groups of symmetries. This
generalized notion of dynamics leads to applications in statistical physics,
number theory and geometry. However, new tools are needed especially in the
particular case when the group of symmetries is non-amenable which means that
boundary phenomena are too significant to be safely ignored. Non-amenable groups
naturally arise in many parts of mathematics such as geometry and number theory.
This project is concerned with developing the tools needed to analyze the
statistical behavior of non-amenable group actions by generalizing ergodic
theory to this context.

The research goals of this project are: 1) Continue developing sofic entropy
theory, which is a vast generalization of Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy to actions of
sofic groups, a class of groups that contains all amenable groups and residually
finite groups. One ambitious goal is to classify the mixing Markov chains over
free groups using asymptotic geometric invariants of associated model spaces. 2)
Classify sofic approximations of low-dimensional groups (using geometric
techniques), with an eye towards using the results to construct the first known
non-sofic groups from amalgams of low-dimensional groups. 3) Explore the limits
of pointwise ergodic theorems for geometrically defined groups (e.g. Lie groups,
CAT(0) cubulated groups, relatively hyperbolic groups) via the measured-
equivalence techniques developed by the principal investigator and Nevo and the
ideas behind the recent L^1-counterexample of Tao. Also develop new
multiplicative ergodic theorems for cocycles taking values in tracial von
Neumann algebras. 4) Import tools from geometric group theory into the study of
measured equivalence relations (MERs) through the use of metric bundles in place
of actions, graphings in place of Cayley graphs and so on. More specific goals
include proving analogs of the Tits alternative for MERs and classifying the
normal sub-equivalence relations of low-dimensional MERs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
