
* 1900599
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,07/01/2021
* Panagiotis Souganidis,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 471,299.00

Many applications in Physical and Social Sciences and Engineering, like porous
media, composite material, turbulence and combustion, traffic models, spread of
crime, climate modeling and prediction, agent models and others, involve
heterogeneous media described by partial differential equations, which,
typically, depend on many parameters and vary randomly on a small scale. In
addition, often the available information, as, for example, in weather
prediction, is not exact (deterministic) but statistical (random) with large
fluctuations. On macroscopic scales that are much larger than the ones of the
heterogeneities, the models often show an effective deterministic behavior,
which is much simpler than the original one. The process of the averaging is
known as homogenization. Mathematically, this means that the original random and
inhomogeneous problem is replaced by a deterministic and homogeneous one. When
this averaging is not possible, which is typically the case when the
fluctuations are too strong (wild), it is necessary to deal with stochastic
media (stochastic partial differential equations), which have rather singular
behavior in space and time. The mathematical study of both the stochastic
averaging and the stochastic partial differential equations requires original
ideas and the development of new methodologies, since both topics fall outside
the traditional theories of averaging and partial differential equations.
Another burgeoning area of research is the theory of mean field games.
Applications that have been so far looked at range from complex socio-economical
topics, regulatory financial issues, crowd movement, meaningful big data and
advertising to engineering contexts involving "decentralized intelligence'" and
machine learning. Mean field games are the ideal mathematical structures to
study the quintessential problems in the social-economical sciences, which
differ from physical settings because of the forward looking behavior on the
part of individual agents. Concrete examples of applications in this direction
include the modeling of the macroeconomy and conflicts in the modern era. In
both cases, a large number of agents interact strategically in a stochastically
evolving environment, all responding to partly common and partly idiosyncratic
incentives, and all trying to simultaneously forecast the decision of others.
Training of graduate students is an integral part of this research project.

The project is about developing general methodologies to study random
homogenization, nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations and
applications to front propagation, phase transitions, and mean field games.
Random environments are much more general than periodic ones. The latter are
basically fixed translations of a certain equation while the former can be
thought as all the possible equations. This leads to considerable issues of lack
of compactness. It is therefore necessary to develop novel tools that combine
both the differential and random structures of the media. In this setting, the
equation is the random variable and the special dependence signifies the
location in space where the equation is observed. The PI and his collaborators
were the first to consider stochastic homogenization in stationary ergodic
environments. A large part of the project is about the further development of
the theory. Stochastic partial differential equations have coefficients with
very singular (Brownian) behavior. In the linear context, this can be typically
handled by known methods like the classical martingale approach. The latter is
based on the linear character of the higher order part of the equation and thus
cannot be used for nonlinear problems, where it is necessary to find appropriate
notions of solutions. In the context of first- and second-order nonlinear
equations, these are the stochastic viscosity and pathwise entropy solutions,
introduced by the PI and his collaborators. A part of the project is about the
study of the qualitative behavior/properties of these solutions. In the context
of mean field games, the PI will concentrate on the role of inhomogeneities at
the several level of the game up to the master equation and models with common
noise. This will require the development of novel techniques to understand the
behavior of the problem past singularities and the role of the averaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
