
* 1900603
* Harmonic Analysis and Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Ioan Bejenaru,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

This project focuses on two areas of Mathematics: Harmonic Analysis and Partial
Differential Equations. Both of them have close connections with the physical
world around us. Harmonic Analysis is an area of Mathematics that focuses in
particular on quantitative properties of functions and operators, entities that
are fundamental in almost every mathematical model of a real life phenomena.
Harmonic Analysis has deep implications to many other areas such as signal
processing, photography, computed tomography, etc. Although of a different
flavor, the problems we address here have one common feature: trying to
understand structure and means of measure it. Partial Differential Equations is
a vast area of mathematics that covers almost all mathematical models coming
from Physics, from basic Newtonian mechanics to fluid and atmospheric dynamics
to particle interactions. The Differential Equations we propose to study in this
project are based on such concrete physical models.

Parts of this project focus on the multilinear restriction estimate and
applications. This theory brings together ideas and tools from a mix of fields:
Analysis, Combinatorics, Incidence Geometry, Differential Geometry, Algebraic
Geometry and Algebraic Topology. In turn, the multilinear theory has
applications to fundamental problems in Harmonic Analysis, PDE's, Combinatorics
and Number Theory. Other parts of this project focus on analyzing the long time
dynamics of dispersive Partial Differential Equations (PDE's). The equations
considered in this project have a physical background: the Dirac-Klein-Gordon
system models most of the elementary particles and their interactions, and the
Schroedinger Maps equation is the Heisenberg model in ferro-magnetism. From a
mathematical point of view, the PI is proposing open problems for which finding
solutions is of broad interest in the PDE community. The long time dynamics of
PDE's is a very active field of mathematics, where some major breakthroughs have
been achieved over the past few years, while many fundamental problems have yet
to be addressed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
