
* 1900727
* 53rd Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/15/2019,04/15/2020
* Nikita Selinger,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 02/28/2021
* USD 29,986.00

The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will host the 53rd Annual Spring
Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference (STDC), March 14-16, 2019 in
Birmingham, Alabama. The STDC is one of the longest standing regular conferences
in general topology, having started in 1967 and continuing as an annual
conference. It attracts participants nationally and internationally. The STDC
regularly attracts over 150 participants, and often over 200. There are 7
plenary talks and 12 semi-plenary talks in most areas of topology and its
applications by established researchers. Talks bridging two or more research
areas are encouraged. In a highly technological society like the USA, a high
level science research, and in particular mathematics research, is crucial for
further progress. Conferences are an essential part for developing successful
and competitive research programs in mathematics and for the education of young
researchers. The STDC has played an essential part in the success and education
of many of its participants. The conference will include contributed talks by
PhD students, post-doctoral students, as well as junior mathematicians, and will
encourage diversity among speakers. There are six special sessions in subareas
of topology including a new session in Topology and Graph Theory. More
information and an invitation to participate may be found at the conference
website: http://www.uab.edu/cas/mathematics/mathnews/stdc The 53rd Spring
Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference will run six special sessions:
Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, Geometric Topology, Geometric Group Theory,
Set Theoretic Topology, and Topology and Graph Theory that will include most
topics of contemporary research in topology as well as highlighting connections
between topology and other mathematical subjects. The session on Topology and
Graph Theory is being included for the first time this year. The winner of the
Mary Ellen Rudin Award for a beginning mathematician will be announced at this
meeting, and will be invited to give a plenary address. The conference has
succeeded in strengthening major connections between areas which normally do not
interact. Particularly effective have been interactions between dynamical
systems and continuum theory, between geometric topology and continuum theory,
between geometric topology and geometric group theory, and between set theoretic
topology and continuum theory. The interaction between these areas and graph
theory is being encouraged by particularly inviting speakers who can bridge
between the former areas and graph theory. The STDC encourages these
interactions by providing travel support to students, post-docs, and junior
mathematicians, by encouraging the special session organizers to seek diversity
in those they invite to speak in a special session, and by welcoming unsolicited
submissions for speaking in a special session.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
