
* 1900778
* Measure Theory and Geometric Topology in Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2019,06/11/2019
* Federico Rodriguez Hertz,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 325,000.00

Dynamical Systems theory describes the long run behavior of particles subject to
a law. In order to achieve this, one needs to understand that, in most systems,
the full knowledge of the particle's position and velocity, and even that of the
law are not exact. This uncertainty can be modeled by the introduction of some
randomness. As a particle moves after a unit of time, the new place is only
known up to a random error. In this project this type of systems are studied and
the aim is to show that the long run behavior of particles is governed by some
distribution in the face space, which has nice geometric and even algebraic
properties, thus introducing a purely mathematical and very powerful technology
into the study of an otherwise intricate problem. Another important feature of
this research is the classification problem. Finding invariants for a system
helps its classification and a full set of invariants will give a full
classification of the system. This set of invariants will depend a priori on the
roughness one wants to classify the system. For chaotic systems it is not
uncommon to expect that a set of invariants that is a priori very rough can lead
to a finer classification automatically. This project will take advantage of
this phenomenon and give some rigidity results.

The geometry of invariant measures for systems displaying some hyperbolicity
goes a long way when trying to describe its dynamics. In this project, the PI
intends to deepen the knowledge of dynamical systems through the understanding
of invariant measures with some nice geometric properties, how to make them
appear and when to expect some uniqueness phenomena for them. This uniqueness
comes attached with some uniform properties especially on information of
equidistribution of orbits and nice statistical properties of the system. When
this study gets in connection with the analysis of geometric objects or the
actions by groups of larger rank, one often expects nice rigidity properties to
show up. The principal investigator intends to develop this philosophy in
several different frameworks, but in all cases some hyperbolicity will show up
one way or another, sometimes from an intrinsic dynamical property, sometimes it
will show up from the group acting, or from the randomness in the case of random
dynamics. In all cases the principal investigator attempts to have a description
of the relevant invariant measures and use this description to classify the
dynamical systems or to get information of the geometry/topology of the support
of the measure or to get strong statistical properties of the system. In some
cases all these can be achieved.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
