
* 1901357
* Themes in Holomorphic Low-Dimensional Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2019,07/05/2019
* Mikhail Lyubich,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2023
* USD 310,000.00

Theory of Dynamical systems studies the long-term behavior of trajectories
described by a certain iteration procedure, and the way this phase portrait
depends on the parameters of the system. Very interesting fractal objects may
appear as phase and parameter diagrams for such systems. The principal
investigator focuses on complex low-dimensional dynamical systems described by
simple quadratic equations in this project. Despite simplicity of the
description, these systems are known to display complicated chaotic behavior
serving as a good model for various phenomena that appear in celestial
mechanics, fluid dynamics, biology, and other branches of natural science. The
activity will result in deeper insights into small scale structure of dynamical
systems, in training of highly qualified postdocs and graduate students who will
apply their skills in academia and industry, in broader interactions between
experts in various branches of real and complex dynamics, in publishing a book
that would help a broad student and research community to acquire background in
the area, in promotion of communication in the field by organizing conferences
and scientific programs, giving mini-courses, and maintaining a dynamics web
site: http//www.math.stonybrook/dynamics.

In this research a broad research program on several intertwined geometric
themes of complex low-dimensional dynamics is investigated. The principal
investigator will make a gradual transition from the one-dimensional to the two-
dimensional world. The principal investigator will pursue several one-
dimensional projects unified by the idea of renormalization as a powerful tool
of penetrating into small-scale structure of dynamical objects aimed towards
complete their classification. They include the Pacman Renormalization Theory,
scaling of Mandelbrot limbs, and a priori bounds for infinitely renormalizable
quadratic polynomials. The principal investigator will keep exploring the
structure of the group of quasisymmetris for various classes of Julia sets and
develop a new theory: the dynamics generated by Schwarz reflections in
quadrature domains. In two complex dimensions, the principal investigator plans
to keep working on the dynamics of dissipative complex Henon maps. Specific
themes will include exploring the problem of existence of wandering domains,
search for new examples of hyperbolic Henon maps, and description of their
structure. The principal investigator also plans to finish the first two volumes
of a book "Conformal Geometry and Dynamics of Quadratic Polynomials".

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
