
* 1901427
* Stability of Functional and Geometric Inequalities and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,06/20/2019
* Robin Neumayer,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2021
* USD 83,461.00

The study of functional and geometric inequalities plays a pivotal role in
modern mathematics. An example of a geometric inequality, with a history dating
back to the ancient Greeks, is the isoperimetric inequality, which states that a
ball has the least perimeter among all shapes of a fixed volume. The stability
of such inequalities is a property that describes behavior of almost-equilibrium
states. The topic of stability has generated substantial interest in recent
years, due in large part to its exciting applications to physical models. This
project analyzes the stability properties of certain functional and geometric
inequalities, and applies them as a tool to address problems across various
mathematical fields and with diverse applications in physics and materials
science.

Given an inequality for which all equality cases are characterized, the question
of stability is the following: suppose a function (or set) almost achieves
equality in the inequality. Then is it close, in a suitable sense, to an
equality case? In this project, stability estimates will be employed in varied
contexts, including the study of regularity properties for limit spaces of
Riemannian manifolds with lower bounds on scalar curvature, regularity in
spectral shape optimization problems, and properties of energy minimizers in the
liquid drop model for atomic nuclei. The project brings together ideas across
geometric analysis, partial differential equations and the calculus of
variations, in terms of both techniques and applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
