
* 1901914
* Qualitative Study of the Mean Field Equation and Allen-Cahn Equation
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2019,05/19/2021
* Changfeng Gui,TX,University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 226,786.00

The mean field equation and the Allen-Cahn equation are two important types of
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) which have arisen in the study
of several physical phenomena such as Electroweak theory and Chern-Simons-Higgs
quantum field theories, statistical mechanics of two-dimensional turbulence,
phase separation and phase transition, etc. The mean field equation is also
related to the rigidity of Hawking Mass in the study of general relativity as
well as to self-gravitating strings for a massive W-boson model coupled to
Einstein theory in account of gravitational effects in cosmology. An important
aspect of the Allen-Cahn equation is the display of interfaces separating
different physical regions of interests. Such interfaces often share a
significant feature seen in soap bubbles, or minimal surfaces in mathematical
terminology. The equation has also found applications in many other area of
sciences and engineering such as astrophysics and image processing. These
equations also provide excellent models for training students and junior
researchers in interdisciplinary research involving mathematical methods for
sciences and engineering. The PI proposes to engage in both research and
training aspects of these equations and to involve students at both
undergraduate level and graduate level in interdisciplinary research.
Postdoctoral fellows and junior researchers will also participate and be trained
in the project.

The PI plans to investigate the Sphere Covering Inequality (SCI) recently
discovered by the PI and his collaborator, including its generalizations and
applications, in particular to the mean field equation and its type. The SCI
connects geometry to analysis and has become a powerful tool in the study of two
dimensional problems in nonlinear PDEs. The PI intends to extend it to high
dimensions. For the Allen-Cahn equation, the PI will focus on the existence of
special solutions with prescribed level sets as well as on the level set
structure of solutions of finite Morse index, in particular, on the relation
between the level sets of solutions and minimal surfaces. The PI intends to use
various identities as well as Morse index information to develop new approach
for these non monotone, non minimizing solutions. The long term goal is to
understand completely entire solutions for both scalar and vector-valued Allen-
Cahn equations and the stability and dynamics of triple junctions or quadruple
junctions. The nodal sets or singularities of the solutions of Allen-Cahn
equation will receive special attention in the study since they not only play an
important role in the theoretic analysis of the equation, they also represent in
applications the interfaces or junctions of interfaces of different phases or
grain boundaries in materials such as crystalline alloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
