
* 1916752
* Conference in Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics: Celebrating the Work of Diverse Mathematicians
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,05/13/2021
* AUTUMN KENT,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 40,000.00

The conference is to held at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan
from June 10-June14, 2019 and it will highlight the pioneering works of junior
and senior mathematicians in geometry, topology, and dynamics from diverse
communities. The conference will also seed the development of a community, with
particular emphasis on stimulating the growth of young mathematicians via
networking, professional development opportunities, and exposure to state of the
art scientific content. The scientific program is organized both to foster
communication between mathematicians from a class of underrepresented groups and
to bridge divides between adjacent subjects in and around the areas of geometry,
topology and dynamics. There are strong ties between low-dimensional topology
and both symplectic and hyperbolic geometry. These subjects are in turn tied to
Teichmueller theory, dynamics, and algebra, and differential geometry and
algebraic topology permeate all of these subfields. There are many deep
relationships between these different fields, and the conference aims to explore
these ties and create new connections.

The conference is devoted to new developments and interactions between low-
dimensional topology, geometry, and dynamics. The program spans geometric and
algebraic topology, hyperbolic and symplectic geometry, the geometry and
topology of surfaces, Teichmueller theory, geometric group theory, and dynamics.
Highlights of topics covered include: the relationship between the hyperbolic
structures on 3-manifolds and the algebra of their fundamental groups; the
relationship between 3- and 4-dimensional geometric topology and the algebra of
cobordism and concordance; the influence of combinatorial structures such as the
complex of curves on the geometry of Teichmueller space; the foundations and
geometry of symplectic manifolds; the interaction of algebra, arithmetic, and
analysis in dynamics. The conference web page is
http://www.math.wisc.edu/~kent/LG&TBQ.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
