
* 1936503
* International Conference on Interpolation in Spaces of Analytic Functions at CIRM
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,07/11/2019
* Brett Wick,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to provide participant support for graduate
students, early-career, and/or mathematicians from underrepresented groups
allowing them to attend the international conference on Interpolation in Spaces
of Analytic Functions at the Centre de Rencontres Mathematiques (CIRM) in
Marseille, France during the week of November 18-22, 2019. The 5-day conference
will gather people interested in holomorphic interpolation and related subjects,
including sampling theory, uniqueness problems, and reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces. There will be approximately 20 one-hour talks by prominent international
mathematicians, many of them from the U. S., with interests related to
interpolation and spaces of analytic functions. A problem session and additional
contributed talks will also be part of the conference schedule. The organizers
of the conference are committed to supporting the participation of women,
minorities, and researchers. To facilitate their development as researchers and
educators, it is extremely important to provide opportunities for the
interaction between young mathematicians and established researchers. These
interactions will be facilitated by the breaks and discussion sessions that will
be part of the schedule.

In the Hilbertian situation, interpolation, uniqueness, and sampling translate
to geometric properties of reproducing kernels. After orthonormal sequences,
Riesz sequences of such kernels (which are related to interpolation) represent
the second-best family one can expect in a Hilbert space. Riesz sequences, and
their complete counterpart, Riesz bases, are fundamental elements contributing
not only to a better understanding of the underlying Hilbert spaces, but playing
a central role in operator theory and its applications, such as signal
processing, mathematical physics, and machine learning. We are particularly
interested in the use of Riesz bases in control theory. We also note that in the
last decade spectacular progress was made when several longstanding open
problems were solved (e.g., the Kadison-Singer conjecture and the completeness
problem for biorthogonal exponentials). The conference website can be found at:
https://conferences.cirm-math.fr/2055.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
