
* 1946107
* Decoupling Theory, Time-Frequency Analysis and Related Oscillatory Integrals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2019,08/03/2019
* Shaoming Guo,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 109,039.00

This project involves work in the fields of harmonic analysis and analytic
number theory. Analytic number theory is a branch of number theory which uses
tools from mathematical analysis to solve problems about the integers. Harmonic
analysis has its roots in the work of Fourier, who studied the way general
functions may be represented by sums of simpler trigonometric functions. It has
applications in various areas including mathematical physics, signal processing,
and digital image processing. The project involves a series of problems in
harmonic analysis related to Radon transforms and X-ray transforms. A deeper
understanding of these transforms will produce a number of applications in areas
such as computed tomography (CT) scan, sonar techniques, and radar techniques.
On the other hand, the proposed project will stimulate interactions between
harmonic analysis and analytic number theory. The principal investigator
proposes to study a few famous open problems in analytic number theory, via
tools recently developed in harmonic analysis.

The project involves work in three directions, focusing separately on decoupling
theory, time-frequency analysis, and certain oscillatory integrals that connect
the previous two topics. One problem that is proposed in decoupling theory
concerns Parsell-Vinogradov systems in all dimensions. The goal is to establish
certain sharp decoupling inequalities that would imply sharp upper bounds on the
number of integer solutions of these systems. Progress on this problem will
allow a representation of every polynomial of a given degree by fewer linear
forms. In the direction of time-frequency analysis, the principal investigator
proposes to study an important special case of the famous Zygmund conjecture.
This conjecture states that the maximal operator associated with a planar
Lipschitz vector field is weakly bounded on the space of square-integrable
functions. The principal investigator proposes to study the conjecture by
further assuming the vector field to be constant along each vertical line on the
plane. One problem that is proposed in the area of oscillatory integrals aims at
proving sharp Sobolev regularity estimates for an averaging operator along the
moment curve in every dimension. Sharp decoupling inequalities established by
the principal investigator and collaborator will provide necessary tools from
decoupling theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
