
* 1952939
* Spectral Theory and Microlocal Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,04/21/2020
* Maciej Zworski,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 329,932.00

The PI investigates manifestations of the classical/quantum (particle/wave)
correspondence in mathematics. The quantum states or waves are described as
solutions of partial differential equations and their properties are often
determined by the properties of underlying classical (particle) systems. The
subject has its origins in geometric optics (going back to the 17th century) and
quantum mechanics (going back to the first half of the 20th century) but the
numerical, experimental and mathematical advances provide a new range of
challenges and research opportunities. For instance, quantum resonances, which
in chemistry can describe transitional states in chemical reactions, are now
more accessible experimentally, and mathematically, compared to the time when
they were introduced. Quasinormal modes, which are an analogue of these
resonances in general relativity now have a chance of being observed for the
first time, thanks to the LIGO experiments. At the same time, the methods
originally developed to study differential equations using insights from
classical dynamics, are now successfully used to answer questions about chaotic
systems or geometry of geodesics. The project provides research training
opportunities for graduate students.

Among the specific problems studied by the PI are: (1) distribution of
scattering resonances for classically chaotic systems; (2) understand dynamical
zeta function (generating function for periods of closed orbits in much the same
way as the Riemann zeta function is a generating function of prime numbers); and
(3) spectral problems arising in fluid mechanics, specifically in the formation
of internal waves. The concrete problem about chaotic scattering concerns the
existence of a spectral gap for any (hyperbolic) configuration of convex
obstacles in the plane. Since the late 80s it was proposed in the mathematics
and physics literature that the gap is determined by the "topological pressure"
of the trapped reflected rays. Recent advances on the fractal uncertainty
principle should imply that there always is a spectral gap. For dynamical zeta
functions, one of the goals is to understand the Fried conjecture which proposes
a relation between dynamical (value of the zeta function at 0), spectral and
topological quantities (corresponding torsions) for general manifolds with
chaotic flows. The microlocal tools developed, among others by the PI, are
particularly promising here. Internal waves in fluids, theoretically described
by spectral methods, have only been observed, in a controlled experiment, 25
years ago. The importance of viscosity and nonlinear effects (on both classical
and wave level) is still to be fully understood. The PI and his collaborators
made some advances here but many questions, such as the analysis of the
physically relevant boundary value problems, remain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
