
* 1953987
* Microlocal Analysis and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2020
* Andras Vasy,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 377,731.00

The planned research develops and applies tools of the field of microlocal
analysis. Roughly speaking, this field keeps track of the position and
frequency, or momentum, of waves (or more generally, functions) simultaneously.
The planned applications are to wave propagation and other related phenomena, as
well as inverse problems for determining a function from integrals along curves
(X-ray transform) and related problems for determining the structure of a
material from boundary measurements. Although the proposal concerns their
mathematical theory, these problems are closely connected to the physical world.
Wave propagation is ubiquitous in nature, with electromagnetic waves, such as
light, being one of the most prevalent examples. The theory of general
relativity is another important physical example via (the not long ago detected)
gravitational waves: the PI?s recent work with Hintz showed that in a universe
with a (possibly small, as our universe is currently understood) positive
cosmological constant, perturbations of black holes decay to a slightly
different black hole, emitting gravitational waves in the process. Scattering
theory of quantum particles (such as protons and electrons) is another subject
governed by microlocal analysis: these aspects enter both into the description
of quantum waves at large distances. The inverse problems under study are also
of broad significance: an application of the theory developed here is the
determination of an unknown variable speed of elastic waves in an object via the
measurement of travel times of waves, which for instance is relevant to imaging
to interior of Earth using the travel times of earthquake waves. Many of the
projects are suitable for research by doctoral students, and the PI strives to
contribute to the education of a new generation of mathematicians and
scientists.

Some of the proposed projects describe the long-time or far field behavior of
waves on curved space-times. Physically these arise in general relativity,
including electromagnetic waves on a curved background. The microlocal approach
to analysis on these spaces has made breakthroughs possible in the PI's work on
linear and non-linear (with his former PhD student, P. Hintz) problems on
asymptotically hyperbolic (AH) spaces as well as Kerr-de Sitter (KdS) space
(rotating black holes in a cosmological spacetime), culminating in the proof of
the stability of slowly rotating KdS spaces with Hintz. More recently, with
Hafner and Hintz the PI extended some of these tools to the vanishing
cosmological constant case (Minkowski, Kerr). The projects here aim to extend
these tools to further spaces, such as perturbations of Kerr spacetimes, and
also to study other equations on cosmological spacetimes. Other projects study
basic objects in quantum field theory, in particular the Feynman propagator.
Another main area is inverse problems, where the PI, together with Uhlmann, has
introduced new tools for the spatially localized inversion of the geodesic X-ray
transform, and with Stefanov and Uhlmann extended this to the boundary rigidity
problem. One project here aims to extend this to anisotropic elasticity which
plays an important role in the interior of the Earth. Another project with the
PI's former postdoc Wang studies the light ray transform with potential
applications to imaging by the cosmic background radiation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
