
* 1954251
* Carolina Dynamics Symposium
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2020,04/15/2022
* Sarah Frick,SC,Furman University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2023
* USD 31,000.00

This award will support participants in the Carolina Dynamics Symposium, which
is a conference that has been taking place at a college or university in the
Southeastern region for the past 17 years. The conference in 2020 will take
place at Davidson College, NC, on April 4-5. In 2021 and 2022 it will alternate
between different colleges and universities in the Carolinas and Georgia; the
location is determined at the previous conference. The topics of the conference
are in the modern theory of dynamical systems. This is an area of mathematics
that has had applications in computer science, cryptography, data analysis,
physics, and biology and uses a variety of different branches of mathematics
including analysis, topology, combinatorics, graph theory, and rigorous
computation. This conference is important because it is the basis of much of the
dynamical systems community in the Southeast. Many attendees come each year to
continue ongoing collaborations, begin new projects, and hear from experts in
the field. In addition to the traditional lively interaction among
mathematicians from the Southeast there have been hour talks by invited leaders
in the field from outside the region. The Carolina Dynamics Symposia feature one
participant who will deliver a public lecture on the Friday before the
conference begins, as well as about three hour-long plenary participants giving
lectures during the conference weekend. All meetings will also have twenty-
minute to thirty-minute contributed talks, and invited talks. A significant
number of talks are given by (graduate) students and young researchers. The
conferences have led to successful research projects and publications in the
past. This continues a very successful model with participants of diverse levels
and backgrounds, among those a particularly large number of female participants
and organizers.

Participants of the Carolina Dynamics Symposium include mathematicians at all
levels: senior and junior faculty, postdocs, graduate students, and
undergraduates. The range of topics is broad, including more theoretical areas
such as symbolic, complex, and topological dynamics, ergodic theory, and
geometry, as well as more applied areas such as celestial mechanics,
differential equations, numerical methods, mathematical biology, and rigorous
computation. More specifically, some recent topics include complexity of
subshifts, entropy, odometers in a variety of settings, mixing properties,
substitutions, Bratteli-Vershik systems, cellular automata, and 3 body problems.
As a result of the variety of topics, there is extensive crossover and
discussion among people working in the different fields, ranging from casual
comments to extensive ongoing research projects. Website:
http://www.bagdala2.net/cdynsys/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
