
* 1954600
* Dynamical Systems, C*-Algebra Theory, and K-Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/23/2020
* Huaxin Lin,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,043.00

The study of dynamical systems is the study of the long-term behavior of
evolving systems. The modern theory of dynamical systems originated at the end
of 19th century with fundamental questions concerning the stability and
evolution of the solar system, which rapidly led to developments of applications
to physics, biology, meteorology, economics and other areas. This project is a
mathematical analysis of certain topological dynamical systems via C*-algebra
theory. C*-algebras are infinite dimensional linear algebras. The project is an
attempt to use a few computable data to determine the structure of certain
C*-algebras arising from the dynamical systems. The project also studies closely
related C*-algebra theory which will be used in the computation of data
generated by dynamical systems. The success of the project would reveal the deep
internal relationship between the theory of dynamical systems and theory of
C*-algebras and pave the way for further applications of these theories.

The project may also be described as a study of theoretical applications of the
classification of simple amenable C*-algebras to the study of topological
dynamical systems. The central goal of the project is to use K-theory related
data to analyze the structure of minimal dynamical systems and to develop new
general methods to compute K-theory related groups for separable amenable
C*-algebras. Let G be a group acting on a compact metric space X. The algebra of
continuous functions on X together with the group action generate a crossed
product C*-algebra. One specific problem that the project will study is to
determine when two such actions are asymptotically conjugate. Closely related
problems include the study of automorphisms on C*-algebras. It is proposed to
use K-theory and KK-theory as well as tracial information to characterize the
group actions. Methods developed in the theory of classification of simple
amenable C*-algebras will be further enriched. Moreover new bridges between
dynamical systems and C*-algebra theory will be built. The project will also
study irreducible representations of certain simple C*-algebras. It is the
proposer's long term goal to provide, from this project and related research as
well as via related studies by other researchers, some deeper theoretical
understandings and wider applications of C*-algebra theory and its interplay
with the study of dynamical systems to various other related research areas,
such as ergodic theory, non-commutative homotopy theory, abstract harmonic
analysis, as well as physics and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
