
* 1954709
* Noncommutative Rational Functions in Free Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,12/09/2022
* Jurij Volcic,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 113,864.00

Our world is essentially noncommutative in the sense that the order of actions
often matters; for example, heating and cracking an egg can result in either a
boiled egg or a fried egg, depending on the order of the operations. This is the
reason why matrices, which encode noncommutativity in mathematics, are
omnipresent in science. In many areas, such as control theory, quantum
information theory and random matrix theory, the emerging questions about
matrices and their ensembles are phrased so as to be independent of the matrix
size. For example, a control system is designed as a black box, and its
stability preferably does not depend on size of the input data (matrices) but
only on the design and the structure of the system (a function of matrices). The
common framework for such problems is provided by free analysis ("free" as in
size-free), which studies functions in matrix variables. When such a function is
built using only variables and arithmetic operations, it is called a
noncommutative rational function. This project focuses on analytic, algebraic
and geometric aspects of noncommutative rational functions and their evaluations
on matrices. The goal is to apply novel synergistic techniques to answer
fundamental open questions about noncommutative rational functions, apply their
resolutions to semidefinite optimization and control theory, and accompany these
theoretical results with efficient algorithms.

The aim of this project is twofold. On one hand, it considers questions about
noncommutative rational functions that arise from free analysis and real
algebraic geometry. Their common thread is the following: given a geometric
feature of matrix evaluations of a noncommutative rational function, what can be
deduced about its structure? This research focuses on positivity and singularity
sets of noncommutative rational functions, their symmetries and existence of
rational maps between them, with a view towards transforming non-convex (hard)
problems in control theory and optimization into convex (easy) ones.
Furthermore, this part of the project addresses natural extensions of
noncommutative rational functions, such as noncommutative meromorphic functions
and rational functions on operators acting on infinite dimensional spaces. On
the other hand, noncommutative rational functions form a free skew field and are
therefore related to several fundamental purely algebraic topics, such as the
automorphism group of the free skew field, the free Lüroth problem, and the
characteristic-free Freiheitssatz in a free algebra. The second part of this
project proposes to apply ideas and techniques from free analysis to overcome
these challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
