
* 1954547
* 54th Spring Topology and Dynamics Systems Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/15/2020,01/13/2020
* John Porter,KY,Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 35,000.00

Murray State University will host the 54th Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems
Conference (STDC) from March 18-21, 2020, in Murray, Kentucky. The STDC is one
of the largest regular conferences in topology which was first held at Arizona
State University in 1967. The organizers expect the conference to attract over
150 participants from the United States and abroad. The STDC conference series
has played an essential part in the success and education of many of its
participants. The conference involves researchers at all career stages, from
many areas in topology to interact and share ideas. The conference will include
contributed talks by both established and young researchers, including graduate
students, and will encourage diversity among speakers.

The 54th Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference will run five special
sessions: Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, Geometric Topology, Geometric
Group Theory, Set Theoretic Topology. The conference has seven plenary and ten
semi-plenary talks. One of the plenary talks is reserved for the winner of the
Mary Ellen Rudin Young Researcher Award. This year's meeting will also feature a
two-day workshop and a plenary talk on Topological Data Analysis. These talks
serve to highlight the major advances in the field for the year. The Spring
Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference seeks the active participation of
graduate students, young researchers, women and under-represented groups. The
grant provides funds to support travel for invited speakers, graduate students
and researchers without external support. The conference web site can be found
at http://campus.murraystate.edu/stdc2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
