
* 1955265
* Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/30/2020
* Alexander Its,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,299.00

The term "Integrable Systems" usually refers to mathematical objects, most often
differential equations, with special symmetry properties which allow to study
them in a very detailed way and sometimes even to solve them in a closed form.
The class of integrable systems includes several fundamental equations of
nature, and the mathematical foundations of integrable systems go back to
classical works of Liouville, Gauss, and Poincare. In our days, the theory of
integrable systems has become an expanding area which plays an increasingly
important role as one of the principal sources of new analytical and algebraic
ideas for many branches of modern mathematics and theoretical physics.
Simultaneously, it provides an efficient analytical tool for the study of some
of the fundamental mathematical models arising in modern nonlinear science and
technology. In addition to the traditional domain of differential equations,
integrable techniques are becoming common in such diverse fields as orthogonal
polynomials, string theory, enumerative topology, statistical mechanics, random
processes, quantum informatics, and number theory. Many of the problems
considered in this project have direct connections with these disciplines. The
project also includes several educational activities such as training of Ph.D.
students at IUPUI and co-organizing of the international research/educational
program on universality and integrability in random matrix theory which will be
held in the Fall of 2021 at MSRI, Berkeley.

This project continuous the PI?s long term research efforts in the theory of
integrable systems. The principal goal of this research program is to address
various new analytical questions of the theory of integrable systems which have
emerged from recent developments in random matrix theory and in the theory of
exactly solvable quantum models. In this project, the PI will concentrate on
three directions of research: (a) The general beta-ensembles and the Calogero-
Painleve system; (b) The study of the isomonodromic tau functions, their
asymptotics, Fredholm determinant representations and their relations to
conformal field theory; and (c) The asymptotic analysis of Toeplitz + Hankel
determinants emerging from random matrix theory and statistical mechanics. Each
of these directions is represented by a collection of concrete problems, and
they will be investigated within the same analytical framework, viz., the
Riemann-Hilbert method. Success in part (a) of the project would have a notable
impact in the development of the general concept of universality and
integrability in both the random matrix theory and in the theory of interacting
particles as well as in the modern nonlinear science at large. The part (b) of
the project will further enhance the "nonlinear special function" status of
Painleve transcendences, which are also sometimes called "the Special Functions
of 21st century". Success in part (c) would significantly contribute to the
development of the general theory of Toeplitz and Hankel determinants which, for
many decades, have been playing a central role in the study of some of the
fundamental models of statistical and quantum mechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
