
* 1955304
* The 2020 & 2021 Great Lakes Mathematical Physics Meetings
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2020,02/27/2020
* Ilya Kachkovskiy,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 10/31/2023
* USD 22,000.00

The Great Lakes Mathematical Physics (GLaMP) meetings are annual three-day
research conferences promoting scientific progress and exchange among
researchers working in mathematical physics. This award supports participation
in GLaMP 2020 to be held June 24-26, 2020 at Oberlin College and GLaMP 2021 to
be held June 25-27, 2021 (dates tentative) at Michigan State University.
Mathematical physics is one of the oldest scientific disciplines and is very
active worldwide, with researchers working in both mathematics and physics
departments. Although there are many mathematical physicists working in the
United States, there are few regular conferences representing the field in this
country. The GLaMP conferences meet the need for a regular annual meeting in
mathematical physics in the US, specifically in the greater Midwest. The main
goals of the meetings are: (1) to provide a forum for young researchers in
mathematical physics in the US to present their research, as well as to foster
their professional development; (2) to maintain communication and collaboration
among scientists working in the field of mathematical physics throughout the
United States; (3) to encourage participation by women and under-represented
groups in the field of mathematical physics; and (4) to raise the research
profile of mathematical physics within the mathematical and scientific community
of the United States. Besides its location, the distinguishing feature of the
GLaMP meeting is its emphasis on promoting and showcasing the scientific work of
young researchers (graduate and advanced undergraduate students, post-doctoral
researchers, and early-career faculty) in the field.

The GLaMP 2020 and 2021 conferences each consist of a three-lecture mini-course
(one lecture each day) on a topic of current high-profile interest, five invited
50-minute plenary talks from leading researchers in their respective fields, and
sessions of short 20-minute contributed talks given primarily by young
researchers. To increase the visibility and participation by women and under-
represented groups in mathematics, the organizers strive to have at least half
of the invited plenary talks (including the mini course) be given by researchers
from these under-represented groups. As in the past, the organizers will hold
the meetings in cooperation with the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM).
To further highlight the focus of the meeting on the support of young
researchers in their professional development, each GLaMP conference features a
roundtable discussion on early-career development. The panel of the round table
consists of researchers representing both careers in different types of academic
institutions (for instance, private and public research universities, four-year
liberal arts colleges), as well as in industry.

Details about the meetings will be posted on the conference websites:
https://sites.google.com/msu.edu/glamp2020 (for GLaMP 2020) and
https://sites.google.com/msu.edu/glamp2021 (for GLaMP 2021).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
