
* 1955812
* Ergodic Embeddings, Bimodule Decomposition, and the Structure of Type II1 Factors
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/27/2020
* Sorin Popa,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 403,401.00

Rigidity in mathematics occurs when certain geometric objects, such as a group
of transformations, can be recognized by merely knowing some partial
information, such as their factors. Introduced by von Neumann in the 1930s to
study quantum mechanics, factors are irreducible algebras of infinite matrices,
where the product of two elements, A times B, is in general different from the
product in reverse order, B times A. This project aims to combine tools
including deformation-rigidity theory, ergodic embeddings, approximation and
simulation techniques, and reconstruction methods to study rigidity in factors
and to tackle several longstanding questions in this area. Rigidity results can
be relevant to many areas of mathematics and its applications, including
computer science, complexity theory, quantum information theory, the design of
computer networks, and the theory of error-correcting codes. This project
contributes to workforce development through the training of graduate students
in topics related to the project research.

A striking feature of the II1 factor framework is its ability to host both
rigidity and randomness phenomena. Earlier work exploiting the tension between
these opposing paradigms led to striking discoveries and to fruitful interaction
between study of II1 factors and other areas, such as C*-algebras, free
probability, ergodic theory, group theory (measured, geometric, arithmetic,
etc.), quantum groups, random matrices, and descriptive set theory. This work
developed several important techniques to study II1 factors: finite dimensional
approximation and reconstruction methods in subfactor theory, deformation
rigidity theory, intertwining by bimodules, and incremental patching. This
project aims to employ the technique of iterative ergodic embeddings with
control of bimodule structure in combination with previous techniques to tackle
several important questions: (1) the non-isomorphism of the free group factors
and their "coarseness," a deep structural property that generalizes many prior
results and conjectures about these factors; (2) Connes' embedding conjecture
(notably for groups) and the sofic group problem; and (3) Connes' bicentralizer
conjecture for III1 factors. The project aims to broaden the scope of the
techniques under development and to deepen the interaction of operator algebra
with other areas of mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
