
* 1956360
* Trends in Operator Theory Workshop
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2020,02/28/2020
* Fernanda Botelho,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This award will support U.S. participants in the ?Trends in Operator Theory
Workshop? to be held June 22-26, 2020, at the Lorentz Center in the Netherlands.
The meeting will focus on topics in operator theory. The study of operators is a
classical area of mathematics that provides powerful tools useful in the
development of many areas of science; for example quantum theory, physics, and
mechanics. The award will support travel expenses of mathematicians and graduate
students from institutions in the United States to participate in the workshop
and also in working group sessions. The Lorentz Center will host and assist with
the coordination of this mathematical event. The Center provides an excellent
environment to learn and discuss mathematics. The conference will have
significant impact on the education of graduate students and early career
mathematicians by promoting ample interactions among participants. The
organizers will make a concerted effort to include women and other groups
underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. To extend the impact of this
workshop beyond immediate participants, the organizers will disseminate widely
the workshop products to the broader mathematical community.

The workshop consists of a series of six lectures, follow-up seminars, and also
intensive group sessions, all to take place at the Lorentz Center. This
conference will focus attention on topics from Operator Theory and applications.
Topics to be addressed include: The study of particular weighted composition
operators and their connection with renowned open questions in Complex Analysis
and Functional Analysis, like the Brennan Conjecture or the Invariant Subspace
Problem; the shift operator on H2 on the unit disk and its invariant subspaces;
the theory for H2 on the bi-disk and its connection to the formulation of many
questions about the numerical range; inverse eigenvalue problems on an infinite
dimensional setting; the study of complex symmetric operators on a Hilbert
space; multiplication operators and structural projections on JB*-triples; and
semigroup methods and operator theoretic methods applied to evolution equations.
Participants will have the opportunity to hear lectures by prominent operator
theorists, and then discuss ideas to explore solutions of problems in small
groups. A conference webpage is at: https://www.memphis.edu/msci/totw2020/ and
also at the Lorentz Center website:
https://www.lorentzcenter.nl/lc/web/2020/1238/info.php3?wsid=1238venue=Oort











1

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
