
* 2000288
* Singularities in Harmonic Analysis and the Calculus of Variations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Max Engelstein,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 178,483.00

Harmonic analysis and the calculus of variations are two of the oldest branches
of mathematical analysis. Harmonic analysis is the study of the scale invariant
properties of functions such as the oscillation of violin strings; it underpins
much of modern image and signal processing. The calculus of variations is the
study of energy minimizers; for example, a soap film hanging off a wire forms a
shape which minimizes the surface tension. The purpose of this project is
twofold: first to use harmonic analysis to study the behavior of energy
minimizers under perturbations (like a soap film in a mild wind). Second, to use
techniques from the calculus of variations to study a central problem in
harmonic analysis, namely how does diffusion (i.e. heat spreading through a
room) detect geometry. This synergy should not only lead to mathematical
breakthroughs but also refine our ability to use these mathematical ideas to
predict physical phenomena. The project provides research training opportunities
for graduate students.

The investigator is interested in singularities of minimizers (places where the
minimizer fails to be smooth, like the corners soap bubbles form when they touch
each other). In particular, the investigator wants to develop tools to study
these singularities which are persistent under perturbations (either of the
energy or the initial conditions). To develop these tools, new ideas from
harmonic analysis and geometric measure theory are necessary. The investigator
is also interested in the problem of how solutions to elliptic differential
equations (which model diffusion) detect the geometry of domains in Euclidean
space. Recently, there have been major breakthroughs showing that homogeneous
diffusion can detect some geometric features. The investigator believes that
ideas from the calculus of variations can extend this breakthrough to understand
what finer geometric details inhomogeneous diffusion can detect.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
