
* 2000041
* Non-Linear Diffusion Modeling: From Geometry, to Materials, to Social Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,04/27/2020
* Luis Caffarelli,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 280,377.00

The principal investigator (PI) will investigate a series of problems in
mathematics with applications to diverse areas of Science. A good number of the
issues the PI plans to address are a natural continuation of problems he has
explored recently that keep progressing and diffusing through a wider
mathematical community. The questions to be studied have a certain universality
in the sense that the same paradigm reappears from geometry and analysis, to
fluid dynamics and material sciences, to financial mathematics and, more
recently, biology and stochastic geometry. The project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.

The first project concerns compressible flow (for instance, a gas) in porous
media, in particular when the flow has a "history" that clogs with time the
porous media (the Caputo diffusion model). Some important aspects of the Caputo
diffusion model are being studied by the PI and an advanced graduate student, in
particular when it occurs through two media with different porosity
(transmission condition). Related mathematical phenomena concern the saline flow
through semipermeable membranes (where the salt can flow only in one direction
through the membrane). Another case where the flow is induced by global
considerations concerns the quasi-geostrophic equation: this equation describes
the evolution of the temperature on the surface of the ocean, and here
temperature is influenced at a distance though the atmosphere. In collaboration
with a graduate student the PI is working on the time evolution of this process
in the land-sea interphase. Another interesting problem considered is concerned
with "overlapping" interactions. An example is the structure of pricing for
buying vs selling of goods. There is an area of "values" of the underlying good
where the two prices diverge, and one where they come together. Mathematically,
these are very interesting problems concerned with the stability of the
configuration, in particular for the edge dividing one behavior from the other
in a nonlinear way. In a different area, the PI is studying issues of
segregation and predator-prey models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
