
* 2000037
* Modern Aspects of Multivariable Operator Theory and Matrix Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,05/06/2020
* Hugo Woerdeman,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 249,000.00

Operator theory and matrix analysis are both fundamental areas of mathematics.
In large part, they were originally developed to provide a theoretical basis for
quantum mechanics and other physical phenomena. An increasing number of
application areas have emerged as a result of breakthroughs in operator theory
and matrix analysis, which testify to their underlying importance to science and
engineering. The areas of application closest to the research in this project
are control systems engineering, electrical engineering, signal processing,
image processing, and quantum computation. The principal investigator will build
on his past work to further develop the interplay between the subdisciplines of
free function theory, operator completions, statistical signal processing,
matrix inequalities, and optimization. To accomplish this goal the principal
investigator will continue existing collaborations as well as develop new ones,
and engage actively with both graduate students and undergraduate students in
the emerging research. The principal investigator will continue to maintain an
intellectual environment fostering student involvement and development,
providing the students with the skills, experience, and confidence to
successfully pursue a career in the mathematical sciences. Thus, the project
will yield both new, impactful mathematical results, as well as highly trained
mathematicians prepared to join the scientific and educational workforce crucial
to this nation. Many questions in system and control theory, filter design,
signal and image processing come down to function theoretic questions. The case
of several variables is a highly active research area where the techniques of
multivariable operator theory are highly effective. The specific themes of the
current project include (i) Matrix completions, (ii) Moment problems, (iii) Free
function theory, (iv) Realizations, (v) Determinantal representations, (vi)
Numerical range and radius, and their generalizations, (vii) Hypergeometric
functions, and (viii) Inverse eigenvalue problems. This combination of areas
will lead to new avenues of research that are of interest to different research
groups. All projects also have a computational component, allowing for the
implementation of the results and the potential to be used by researchers in all
areas of science and engineering. The principal investigator will continue
running an Analysis Seminar at Drexel University featuring local and
international researchers, as well as Drexel students. The principal
investigator and his students will disseminate the results via conference
presentations and publications in a variety of leading mathematical journals and
preprint servers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
