
* 2000096
* Uniformization of Metric Spaces and Quasiconformal Removability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/26/2020
* Dimitrios Ntalampekos,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 95,460.00

The goal of this project is to develop methods and geometric tools for
understanding the geometry of fractal spaces. Fractal spaces appear in
description of many natural phenomena such as in lightning bolts, growth models
of plants and crystals, snowflakes, coastlines, and river networks. The
questions that the project plans to study have applications whenever storage of
three-dimensional information (landscapes, faces, human brain surface) in a two-
dimensional image is desired without loss of information. While in the case of
"smooth" objects (objects that are not modeled using fractals) the corresponding
mathematical theory is well understood, this is not the case for fractal
objects, which require the development of new techniques. This project aims to
develop mathematical theory for such fractal spaces. Another focus of this
project is the study of removable fractal sets. Fractal sets appear sometimes as
boundaries of otherwise "smooth" objects, and for many problems it is useful to
know that these fractals are removable, in the sense that their presence can be
ignored for some purposes. Removability of fractal sets has applications in
mathematical problems that require "gluing" together two functions, or two
dynamical systems, or two surfaces, and could result in the better understanding
of dynamical systems in physics.

This project consists of three parts, concerning the uniformization of
Sierpinski carpets, the uniformization of two-dimensional metric surfaces, and
the problem of removability of fractal sets for conformal maps. Continuing
earlier work, the PI will study problems related to the uniformization of
Sierpinski carpets by square Sierpinski carpets and the PI will study the
regularity of the uniformizing map, which is already known to be quasisymmetric
or discrete quasiconformal. The PI will also work in questions related to
Hausdorff dimension distortion under the uniformizing map and in generalizations
of this planar uniformization theory to abstract Sierpinski carpets. Another
focus is the problem of uniformization of two-dimensional metric surfaces. In
this direction, the PI will investigate possible generalizations of
uniformization theorems for two-dimensional surfaces by Euclidean space and
concentrate efforts on weakening the existing geometric assumptions. Finally,
the PI will work on extending earlier results on the removability of fractal
sets, by finding topological criteria for fractal sets (resembling the
Sierpinski gasket or carpet) to be non-removable, studying the equivalence of
Sobolev removability and conformal removability, and exploring the connections
of removability to the problem of rigidity of circle domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
