
* 2000191
* Analysis of Properties of Effective Hamiltonians with Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,03/30/2020
* Yifeng Yu,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 302,742.00

Many physical systems (e.g. composite materials and turbulent combustion) in
practical applications involve small structures. It is important to ?average?
those small scales through suitable mathematical models (called
?homogenization?) and investigate resulting macroscopic structures (?effective
quantities?) that are approximations of original systems. A particularly
interesting and physically relevant question is to understand how those
effective quantities depend on original physical systems. Effective Hamiltonian
arises from homogenizing Hamilton-Jacobi equations, which are partial
differential equations (PDE) that play fundamental roles in control theory and
the modeling of things like crystal growth, flame propagations, etc. For
example, effective Hamiltonian serves as an important approach to model
turbulent flame speed, one of the most important quantities in turbulent
combustion (e.g., the spread of wild fire fanned by strong wind, the burning
inside an engine), via the popular G-equation model. One goal of this project is
to understand how the turbulent flame speed depends on the strength of the flow
(e.g., wind velocity) and other important physical quantities like curvature
effects, which could provide theoretical justifications for phenomena observed
in experiments. The curvature effect is a phenomenological way to capture
variance of burning temperature along the flame front. The project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students.

The first part of the project aims to identify optimal convergence rate in
periodic homogenization of Hamilton-Jacobi equations. As the principal
investigator and his collaborators have revealed in previous works, the optimal
convergence rate is closely related to the shape of corresponding effective
Hamiltonian. The second and third part of the project focus on studying
important properties of effective Hamiltonian from perspectives of both the
mathematical interest and practical applications in turbulent combustion.
Although the existence of effect Hamiltonian has been established in many
situations since the fundamental work of Lions-Papanicolaou-Varadhan (1987),
understanding finer properties of effective Hamiltonian remains a major open
problem in homogenization theory due to limitations of standard methods in PDEs.
There are deep connections between properties of effective Hamiltonian and
dynamical systems. In particular, the principal investigator needs to employ
substantial tools/methods from ergodic theory, Aubry-Mather theory/weak KAM
theory. In addition, dynamics associated with two-person zero-sum differential
games is also important in dealing with non-convex Hamiltonian and the presence
of curvature term (curvature effect).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
