
* 2000331
* Quantized Symmetries in Operator Algebras and Quantum Information
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,06/21/2022
* Michael Brannan,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2023
* USD 243,828.00

For over a century it has been known that our physical universe is governed by
quantum mechanics. A fundamental feature of quantum mechanics is that if you
perform a measurement on a physical system, it has the effect of permanently
altering the state of the system. This means that the order in which one
performs measurements on certain physical systems matters. In this context, we
say that measurement is "non-commutative". The inherent non-commutativity of
quantum mechanics is described by the theory of operator algebras, which is the
branch of mathematics that investigates how to efficiently manipulate and encode
arbitrarily large matrices of numerical data. Today, operator algebras and
quantum theory are both well-established and independent branches of the
mathematical sciences. However, in recent years, with the advent of quantum
computation and quantum information science, there has been a resurgence of
fruitful interactions between the more mathematical theory of operator algebras
and the more physical theory of quantum mechanics. The primary goal of this
project is to explore and deepen the emerging connections between operator
algebra theory and quantum information theory (QIT). The central objects of
study in this project are quantized symmetries in operator algebras and QIT.
Understanding the symmetries of systems has long been a powerful tool in
mathematical and physical problems, and the highly non-commutative nature of
both operator algebras and QIT naturally leads to the discovery of more flexible
notions of symmetries, called quantum symmetries. In this project, we will use
various mathematical incarnations of quantum symmetries to provide a link
between operator algebra theory and QIT, and we will use this link to provide
new insights into both of these important fields. This project will contribute
to the development of the US workforce through the training of graduate and
undergraduate students.

This research project breaks up into two main directions. The first direction
concerns the structural theory of some new and interesting classes of operator
algebras arising from quantum isomorphism spaces. Quantum isomorphism spaces
appear naturally in the study of quantum teleportation and super-dense coding
schemes in QIT, and also in the representation theory of quantum permutation
groups. The study of these algebras leads us to propose a quantum analogue of
Lueck?s determinant conjecture from geometric group theory and investigate its
potential applications to constructing new examples of strongly 1-bounded and
strongly solid von Neumann algebras. The second direction of this project
relates to the Principal Investigator's pioneering work on the interactions
between quantum symmetries and QIT. Here, geometric and representation-theoretic
tools will be used to find applications of non-local games arising in QIT to the
construction of new examples of hyperlinear discrete quantum groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
