
* 2000304
* Harmonic Analysis in Convex Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,05/21/2020
* Artem Zvavitch,OH,Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 296,100.00

The problems addressed in this project concern the properties of shapes in an
ambient space (like a human heart in the body) that can be inferred from the
information about their shadows or slices (as in medical imaging). The beauty of
the problems is that the formulations of many of them are "intuitively clear"
not only to graduate students, but also to undergraduates, and in some cases,
even to high-school pupils. On the other hand, the answers are very often
counter-intuitive, requiring the use of the most advanced and sophisticated
tools belonging to the different branches of modern mathematics. Many problems
take their origin not in pure mathematics, but in medical imaging and tomography
and the solutions might find very interesting biomedical applications. This
project will contribute to US workforce development through the training of
graduate students.

The current project is a continuation of the long-time collaboration between the
principal investigators. The PI and co-PI will continue to use and develop the
methods of harmonic analysis to solve the problems arising in convex and
discrete geometry. These problems include a new set of Bezout inequalities for
mixed volumes, originating from classical Algebraic Geometry. The inequalities
involve the size of projections of convex bodies and lead to very unexpected
results in Information Theory and Probability. The principal investigators also
plan to continue their work on the set of problems in Geometric Tomography
proposed by Busemann and Petty in 1956. Only the first problem in the list has
been solved so far. The PI and co-PI have made progress on a number of problems
related to this list using the idea of the iteration of intersection and
projection body operators. They will also continue to work on the questions
related to the unique determination of convex bodies given the information on
the size (or some other properties) of projections and sections.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
