
* 2000510
* Singular Integrals with Modulation or Rotational Symmetry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,03/11/2022
* Francesco DiPlinio,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 131,614.00

Harmonic Analysis is the branch of Mathematics concerned with the representation
and reconstruction of signals (functions) as a superposition of basic harmonics
--signals of well-specified duration, intensity and frequency--as well as the
study of how suitable operations (filtering, denoising, compression, etc.)
affect the reconstructed signal. Concrete versions of this
decomposition/filtering/reconstruction process, sometimes referred to as the
"time-frequency" method, are performed in a broad range of real-world
applications, such as audio or image compression, image pattern or facial
recognition, data assimilation, compressed sensing and many others. A similar
procedure is employed in tomographic imaging, where the shape of a solid body is
reconstructed by means of sampling the body's density along penetrating waves,
which can be mathematically described as lines in three dimensional space. The
first main component of this mathematics research project deals with toy
mathematical models of sampling three and higher dimensional objects (for
instance, solid bodies) along lower dimensional sets such as lines or planes.
The second, deeply related component of this project is concerned with extending
the time-frequency decomposition method to suitable vector-valued signals.
Integral components of the project are the training of graduate and
undergraduate students within the active research group in Harmonic Analysis and
Partial Differential Equation at University of Virginia, as well as the
mentoring and research start-up of undergraduates, graduate students and
researchers coming from underrepresented groups in the profession.

This Harmonic Analysis research project deals with singular integral operators
exhibiting further invariance properties, such as modulation or rotational
symmetries, in addition to those (translation and dilation invariance)
characterizing Calderon-Zygmund operators: a fundamental example is the Carleson
maximal operator dictating pointwise convergence of the Fourier series of
square-integrable functions.The first part of this research project deals with
rotation invariant singular integrals: in particular, with the Hilbert transform
along Lipschitz vector fields. The PI will work on a novel characterization of
those vector fields giving rise to a bounded directional Hilbert transform, in
terms of boundedness of the related directional maximal function. The PI also
proposes an array of model problems, of independent interest, obtained by
constraining the range of the vector field. A novelty is that questions set up
in higher dimensional ambient spaces are considered. The intrinsic multi-
parameter nature of directional operators leads naturally to connected
outstanding questions on the theory of double Fourier series: the parabolic and
the polygonal summation problems. The second, related circle of problems
investigated in this project concerns linear and multilinear singular integrals
acting on Banach space valued functions: among other questions, the PI will
investigate T(1)-type operator valued theorems in the multilinear setting, and
fully noncommutative analogues of Carleson's theorem. The strength and relevance
of operator-valued type theorems are that they self-improve to their multi-
parameter analogues, which are of interest for applications and are often not
attainable with direct techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
