
* 2000205
* Coulomb Gases and Vortex Systems: Two-Dimensional Physics and Beyond
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2020
* Sylvia Serfaty,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 339,156.00

The Coulomb electrostatic interaction is one of the fundamental forces in
nature, governing how elementary charged particles interact. For example, stars
are essentially plasmas - that is gases of positively charged ions and
negatively charged electrons attracting and repelling one another according to
the Coulomb force. The formation of crystals, which are periodic arrangements of
atoms, can be roughly explained via repulsive electrostatic (Coulomb) forces
coupled with a binding force. In Physics, a "two-component plasma" is a large
collection of positively charged particles and as many negatively charged
particles; a "one-component plasma" is a large collection of positively charged
particles with the negative particles replaced by a uniform neutralizing
background. Such systems are also called "Coulomb gases," and they are quite
important in theoretical physics. Physicists predicted that in two-dimensional
Coulomb gases, a new intermediate state of matter - formed of dipoles of
oppositely charged particles - should exist between the totally ordered (solid)
and disordered (liquid) state, once a certain critical temperature is reached.
This was a new type of phase transition in statistical physics. It is specific
to dimension 2 and an important example of two-dimensional physics. This project
is particularly concerned with the analysis of large Coulomb gases in dimension
2 and higher, both one-component and two-component, in the framework of
statistical mechanics (that is, with temperature), and using the techniques of
mathematical analysis and probability theory. Also motivating such questions are
the study of energy levels of large atoms (spectrum of large random matrices),
vortices in superconductors and Bose-Einstein condensates, the fractional
quantum Hall effect, and more loosely questions in biology or hydrodynamics. The
project also contains a component on the mathematical analysis of vortices in
superconductors in the context of the famous Ginzburg-Landau model, another and
related instance of two-dimensional physics, with the investigation of this
phenomenon in dimension 3. This project provides research training opportunities
for graduate students. This project is about the mathematical analysis of large
systems of points, or lines, with Coulomb interactions. Such systems are
ubiquitous in physics models, ranging from quantum mechanics, statistical
mechanics to plasma physics and condensed matter physics, but also in random
matrix theory and approximation theory. The main part of the proposal concerns
the statistical mechanics of classical Coulomb gases. In a first part it deals
with positively charged points. The main questions are to investigate the effect
of temperature on the local structure of the point configurations, in broad
temperature regimes, as well as to understand their possibly universal features.
While a lot has been understood in dimension 2, much remains to be done to
understand which properties persist in higher dimension, in particular to
understand the order of the charge fluctuations and their possibly Gaussian
nature, as well as the long-range correlations of the system and free energy
expansion. The proposal also aims at understanding how much of the features are
specific to the Coulomb interaction by investigating the same questions for
Riesz gases. A second part concerns the two-dimensional Coulomb gas with
opposite charges (or two-component plasma). This is a very important model,
related to the XY model in which a similar transition happens, itself an
approximation for two-dimensional systems in condensed matter physics including
Josephson junction arrays and thin disordered superconducting granular films.
This BKT transition is charcterized by the emergence of dipoles and the
transition from exponentially decaying to algebraically decaying correlations. A
lot of this behavior is awaiting further mathematical proofs and this is what
the project will try to address in the context of the two-component Coulomb gas.
Finally the last part of the proposal concerns lines with Coulomb interactions,
which arise as vortices in three-dimensional models from superconductivity and
superfluidity. The geometry of the lines makes the analysis much more delicate
than for points. While many mathematical tools originating in geometric measure
theory have been developed for dealing with that aspect, the Coulomb interaction
of the lines, the characterization of the onset of vortex lines under an applied
magnetic field, and their collective behavior still need to be further
investigated. The project's goal is to study all these questions with rigorous
mathematical proofs and tools that will mix analysis, PDE, calculus of
variations, and probability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
