
* 2054282
* Analysis and Geometry of Free Boundaries
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2021,08/02/2021
* Mariana Smit Vega Garcia,WA,Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2024
* USD 190,337.00

Partial Differential Equations (PDE) are the language of physics. In fact, the
first partial differential equations naturally arose in physics when trying to
describe the propagation of heat, the propagation of waves as well as
electromagnetism. Many problems in engineering also rely on the theory of PDEs,
as well as the ability to approximate their solutions. The scientific part of
this project is concerned with the study of specific families of PDEs that model
various physical phenomena. These include the melting of ice, combustion,
chemical diffusions, liquid crystals, and image processing. One of the main
scientific goals of the project is to develop new mathematical tools that can be
used to better understand the physical phenomena being modeled. This will create
new avenues to analyze them and enhance their comprehension. The investigator
will also organize a week-long workshop focused on first-generation
undergraduate students who are interested in mathematics. The students will
participate in minicourses, attend research talks, and have informal
conversations with mathematicians who work in different sectors. The workshop
will contribute to the development of a mathematically well-versed and diverse
workforce. This project is driven by questions arising in free boundary problems
and geometric measure theory. In the applied sciences one often encounters free
boundaries, which arise when the solution to a problem consists of a function
(often satisfying a partial differential equation) and a set where this function
has a specific behavior. The investigator will study a variety of problems that
are motivated by the study of the regularity of the function and the geometry of
the associated set. These are central questions that are ubiquitous in both
theoretical and applied mathematics and can be directly used to model various
physical phenomena. The project?s main goal is to contribute to a better
understanding of problems involving nonlocal equations, almost minimizers with
free boundaries, and minimizers for anisotropic energies. The first class of
problems to be investigated involves PDE of fundamental importance for
mathematical modeling. In particular, numerous applied phenomena give rise to
nonlocal equations, such as nonlocal image processing and liquid crystals. The
study of almost minimizers with free boundaries has an outstanding potential to
treat a new group of physically motivated problems, as the almost minimizing
property can be understood as a minimizing problem with noise. Finally,
minimizers for anisotropic energies lead to non-uniformly elliptic PDE,
generating new, challenging questions in geometric PDE. The investigator will
develop new tools which will address related questions at the interface of free
boundary problems and geometric measure theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
