
* 2054725
* Noncommutative Geometry and Analysis on Homogeneous Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Pierre Clare,VA,College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/28/2023
* USD 39,680.00

The conference Noncommutative Geometry and Analysis on Homogeneous Spaces, to
take place at the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, VA has been planned
for May 24 - 28, 2021, with COVID contingency plans for January, 2022. Harmonic
Analysis is a central area in today's Mathematics, with far-reaching connections
to other fields of Science, from Number Theory to Physics. The meeting will
focus on new developments in Harmonic Analysis that bring together the methods
and perspectives of Noncommutative Geometry with those of Representation Theory.
Both have seen spectacular advances over the past decades, leading them to
become vast and vibrant areas of research, yet they remain mostly separated. The
meeting will bring together experts in both fields to foster exchanges and
incorporate new connections in the training of a new generation of researchers
in Harmonic Analysis. In order to acquaint researchers in the two areas,
especially early career researchers, with the perspectives from both sides, it
will feature two mini-courses specifically aimed at graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers and delivered by prominent mathematicians. Other
activities will include research talks, discussion sessions and a poster
session, giving participants many opportunities for meaningful interactions.
Early career researchers will have the possibility to interact with established
experts in a context particularly conducive to the formation of long-lasting
mentoring relations. The organizers will strive to encourage participation of a
diverse audience, including women and individuals from groups, organizations,
and geographic regions that are underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.

At the foundation of Harmonic Analysis are the well-known principles that a
geometric space may be studied through its space of functions, and that the
analysis of these functions is simplified by taking into account the symmetries
of the space. The decomposition of periodic functions into Fourier series is an
elementary manifestation of this idea, which has been at the core of the
pioneering work of Gelfand, Mackey, Dixmier and many others since the 1940s. In
that regard, the Representation Theory and Noncommutative Geometry are both
deeply rooted in Harmonic Analysis. Indeed, the study of tempered
representations generated an immense amount of activity in the second half of
the twentieth century, culminating in Harish-Chandra's Plancherel theorem, the
realization of the discrete series and the classification of tempered
irreducible representations by Knapp and Zuckerman. More recently, further
efforts following Vogan's algebraic approach have led to a nearly complete
computer-assisted description of all unitary representations of real algebraic
groups. Now that classification questions have been given nearly complete
answers, problems of different natures are receiving more attention. The
analysis of functions on homogeneous spaces in terms of unitary representations
leads to fundamental questions for which new conceptual tools are necessary. At
the same time, recent results in Noncommutative Geometry clearly indicate that
current investigations related to Index Theory and the topological approach to
the tempered dual via the Connes-Kasparov isomorphism and the Mackey-Higson
bijection provide original insight and new organizing principles in
Representation Theory. The meeting will focus on extending the current methods
beyond the group case to that of homogeneous spaces through joint effort of
specialists from the two communities. Further information about the conference
may be found at: https://sites.google.com/view/ncgahs20.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
