
* 2054841
* Spectral Theory and Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Wilhelm Schlag,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,237.00

This project is devoted to the study of wave propagation in both structured and
disordered media. Modern society relies extensively on engineering applications
involving transmission of waves. Cell phone communications, satellite data
transmissions and information on the internet - all sent along thousands of
miles of glass fiber cables - are controlled by mathematics describing the
motion of waves. A striking feature of the wave propagation, and the topic of
this project, is its universality. In fact, waves propagating on astronomical
scales such as the gravitational waves detected by LIGO, as well as waves on a
microscopic scale such as those emitted by atoms in the form of electromagnetic
radiation in a laser, are governed by exactly the same mathematical theories. It
is therefore of the utmost strategic importance for the well-being and safety of
the society at large to train young specialists in the PI?s area of research;
this is also one of the goals of this project. Experience shows that this
broader impact can only be achieved by scientists who are actively working at
the frontier of knowledge.

The PI recently completed a perturbative analysis of equivariant critical wave
maps into the 2-sphere, without any symmetry assumptions on the perturbations.
This nonlinear analysis is based on the semi-classical representations of wave
functions for Bessel-type potentials which the PI developed more than a decade
ago in the context of the Price law in general relativity. Application of this
new technique is planned to other nonlinear evolution equations, which admit
separation of variables and a reduction to an infinite system of coupled semi-
classical wave equations. The role of the semi-classical parameter h is
typically played by the reciprocal of the angular momentum. Another area in
which spectral theory is now coming to the fore is the rapidly developing field
of asymptotic stability of topological solitons, specifically of kink solutions
for one-dimensional scalar fields. Jointly with others, the PI recently
demonstrated how to treat Klein-Gordon equations with a nongeneric potential and
long-range nonlinearities. The basic scalar field equations each exhibit a
nongeneric potential with a threshold resonance and are therefore of the type to
be considered in this project. The PI's work on quasi-periodic localization and
its ramifications will be continued. A particularly challenging novel
perspective will be offered by nonuniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems, where
there are strong indications that it is possible to bring Anderson localization
techniques to bear.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
