
* 2054477
* Model Theory, Quantum Complexity, and Embedding Problems in Operator Algebras
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,06/08/2021
* Isaac Goldbring,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 389,764.00

This project lies at the intersection of three seemingly unrelated areas: von
Neumann algebras, quantum complexity theory, and model theory. Von Neumann
algebras were introduced by John von Neumann in his mathematical account of
quantum mechanics and consist of infinite-sized matrices closed under various
natural operations. Quantum complexity theory considers the difficulty of
solving or verifying solutions to decision problems using the quantum model of
computation, that is to say, computers that run according to the laws of quantum
physics as opposed to classical physics. Recently, a landmark result in quantum
complexity theory showed that classically unsolvable decision problems could be
reliably verified by a quantum computer. This quantum complexity result
established a negative solution to a famous problem in operator algebras, the
so-called Connes Embedding Problem, posed in 1976, which asks whether or not
every von Neumann algebra can be approximated by a simple von Neumann algebra
known as the hyperfinite II_1 factor. Using techniques from model theory, a
branch of mathematical logic that studies classes of structures by examining
what is expressible about them using first-order logic, the PI and a
collaborator greatly simplified and elucidated the connection between the
quantum complexity result and the solution to the Connes Embedding Problem. This
project plans to deepen the connection between these three areas by isolating
the exact model-theoretic content behind the quantum complexity result and
deducing further von Neumann algebraic consequences.

More specifically, the PI plans on extending the model-theoretic analysis of the
quantum complexity result to understand the complexity of the full first-order
theory of the hyperfinite II_1 factor; the PI's work with Hart established this
connection for the one-quantifier theory. In addition, the PI plans to pursue
proofs of the failure of the Connes Embedding Problem which avoid the use of the
quantum complexity result by using the model-theoretic notions of existentially
closed models and Robinson forcing; due to the difficulty in proving the quantum
complexity result, a new proof along these lines would serve as a great
simplification of the resolution of the Connes Embedding Problem. The project
will also study other uses of model theory in von Neumann algebra theory,
including furthering progress on Popa's embedding problem, which asks about the
existence of certain kinds of ergodic embeddings of II_1 factors into
ultrapowers. The PI also plans on making progress on the C*-algebra version of
the Connes Embedding Problem known as the Kirchberg Embedding Problem, which
asks if every C*-algebra is approximated by the Cuntz algebra, an algebra of
extreme importance in the classification program for nuclear C*-algebras.
Finally, while the majority of the model-theoretic study of von Neumann algebras
has focused on so-called finite algebras, the PI plans on studying the model-
theoretic properties of arbitrary von Neumann algebras through the lens of
W*-probability spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
