
* 2054602
* Geometric Harmonic Analysis: Affine and Frobenius-Hörmander Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Philip Gressman,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 264,476.00

The mathematics of geometric averages, also known as Radon-like operators, is of
fundamental importance in a host of technological applications related to
imaging: CT, SPECT, and NMR, as well as RADAR and SONAR applications, all depend
on a deep understanding of the Radon transform, and related ideas appear in
optical-acoustic tomography, scattering theory, and even some motion-detection
algorithms. There are many basic theoretical open questions in this area of
mathematics which remain unsolved despite the many incredible successes the
field has already achieved. In this project a family of questions will be
studied in the area of geometric averages. These correspond to quantifying the
relationship between small changes in the imaged objects and the expected
changes in measured data (which in practice is processed computationally to
recover an approximate picture of the original object). The main goals of this
project will advance a number of related areas of mathematics and may influence
future imaging technologies. Graduate students are involved in the project.

PI will focus on several topics in mathematical analysis related to the
development of new geometric methods for a family of questions relating to the
mapping properties of Radon-like operators, oscillatory integrals, and Fourier
restriction operators. The specific classes of operators to be studied include
multilinear Radon-like averaging operators as well as related nonsingular
oscillatory questions of the sort first studied by other researchers. Major
special cases deserving mention include multiparameter sublevel set estimates,
maximal curvature for Radon-like transforms of intermediate dimension,
degenerate Radon transforms in low codimension, Fourier restriction and related
generalized determinant functionals, Phong-Stein operator van der Corput
methods, and multilinear oscillatory integrals of convolution and related types.
PI will use a geometric and combinatorial approach as the main toolkit, which
includes a variety of new tools developed within the last 5 years incorporating
techniques from geometric invariant theory, geometric measure theory, decoupling
theory, and other areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
