
* 2054910
* Dispersive and Wave Equations in the Presence of Background Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Jason Metcalfe,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 280,270.00

This project seeks to further the understanding of solutions to the wave
equation on geometric backgrounds. To achieve the requisite accuracy, GPS, for
example, relies on general relativity, which in turn postulates that gravity is
the result of a curved space-time on which waves travel rather than an external
force. And in many applications involving nonlinear equations, the governing
systems have geometry that depends on the solution but the solution in turn
depends on the geometry. Einstein?s equations, which are at the heart of general
relativity and determine the evolution of a universe from a given starting
state, can be realized as such a system of wave equations in certain coordinate
systems. On background geometries, waves flow along special curves called
geodesics rather than rays as is more familiar. A phenomenon called trapping
occurs when some of these geodesics remain in a bounded set for all time. This
occurs, for example, on known black hole space-times where there are indeed
regions where light orbits the black hole rather than tending toward infinity.
Trapping is a known obstruction to typical measures of dispersion, and a major
focus of this project is to precisely quantify its effect in numerous scenarios.
The project provides research training opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students.

The problems to be examined largely focus on integrated local energy estimates,
which are generalizations of the original estimates of Morawetz, and their
application to nonlinear equations. Major initiatives include improving our
understanding of such estimates in the presence of trapping and on non-
stationary backgrounds. The construction of space-times with degenerate trapping
provided the first examples where an algebraic loss of regularity is both
necessary and sufficient for recovering local energy estimates. Numerous
questions related to these examples remain unexplored, including the discovery
of space-times with degenerate trapping outside of the highly symmetric warped
product setting. Local energy estimates can be used to establish long-time
existence for nonlinear equations and have particular benefits in the presence
of background geometry. Planned work related to this include the examination of
wave equations on half-spaces and applications of a related weighted estimate of
Dafermos and Rodnianski to critically damped equations related to the Strauss
conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
