
* 2054975
* Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Daniel Tataru,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 372,139.00

The main objective of this project is to improve our understanding of the
solutions for a broad array of partial differential equations that can be all
described as Nonlinear Waves. These equations arise as models for physical
phenomena, which play important roles in our world and sometimes even in our
daily lives. Key examples range from the water waves at the surface of our
oceans, the quantum mechanical interaction of multiparticle systems, to the
surface dynamics of gaseous stars. The common feature in all of these phenomena
is the interplay between linear waves and nonlinear interactions, whose balance
affects both short and long range dynamics. Different parts of the project aim
to study both short time phenomena, such as singularity formation, as well as
their long time behavior, such as scattering. The project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students. The proposed research spans a
broad array of research topics in nonlinear partial differential equations. The
problems to be investigated are all associated with the field of nonlinear
dispersive equations, but also carry strong connections to related areas such as
geometry, harmonic analysis, complex analysis and microlocal analysis. For the
most part, these problems are strongly nonlinear, and also fundamentally based
on physical models from areas such as fluid dynamics, electromagnetism, and
general relativity. In a nutshell, one can view the objective of this work to be
the understanding of nonlinear wave interactions, beginning with short time
scales, continuing with long time scales, all the way to scattering and blow-up
phenomena. One of the main research areas targeted by this project is in fluid
dynamics, more precisely water waves, as well as a broader class of free
boundary problems. This has been an area of intense interest in recent years,
not in the least because of its great potential for applications, ranging from
oceanography to medical science and to stellar dynamics. But the most
interesting problems are still unresolved, and their study is bringing forth an
array of extremely difficult questions. Another goal is the study of completely
integrable systems, which often arise as models for more difficult nonlinear
problems in fluid dynamics in general, and water waves in particular. The main
objective is to gain a sufficiently accurate understanding of the long time
dynamics, which combine solitons, dispersive shocks and nonlinear scattering in
a complex pattern. The study of geometric nonlinear wave equations is a third
objective of this project. After the recent proof of the Threshold Conjecture
for Wave Maps and Yang-Mills systems, the current work is directed toward a full
classification of blow-up solutions and of non-scattering solutions, as
predicted by the Soliton Resolution Conjecture. Finally, quasilinear wave and
Schrodinger evolutions bring forth some of the most challenging problems in
nonlinear partial differential equations, and understanding both their short and
long time dynamics is another major goal of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
