
* 2054606
* Optimal Measures and Point Configurations: A Harmonic Analysis Approach
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,06/29/2021
* Dmitriy Bilyk,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 265,899.00

Optimal point configurations and distributions arise in numerous areas in
science applications including sampling of data, signal processing, equilibria
of particles and charges, crystal formation, population distribution,
discretization of surfaces, and coding theory. They are also extremely useful in
numerical analysis and in fields that call for numerical computation of high
dimensional integrals such as finance, often yielding better results than Monte
Carlo methods. Studied within the framework of this project will be optimal
point configurations and measures through the prism of harmonic analysis. The
project will also study fundamental questions regarding uniform distribution of
energy minimizers; determination of optimal distributions; discrete clustering
phenomena; the interplay between geometry and uniform distribution; connections
between discrepancy and energy minimization. In addition, the project will study
related questions in applied harmonic analysis, compressed sensing, and frame
theory. The results and topics of this project will be disseminated through
publications and presentations, and young mathematicians will actively be
mentored.

The quality of a point distribution may be expressed or measured in a variety of
different ways depending on the problem at hand. Examples include lattices,
cubature formulas, codes, packings, and random point processes. This project is
focused on two central inter-connected concepts, both of which quantify the
uniformity of distributions: discrepancy and energy minimization. The former
compares a given distribution with the uniform measure by looking at the errors
on a certain class of test sets or test functions. The latter interprets points
as ?particles?, which interact according to a certain potential. While progress
in these subjects often relies on methods and ideas of harmonic analysis, many
of these connections have only been discovered recently. This leads to natural
cross-fertilization: analysis provides the necessary tools, and at the same time
it is enriched with new questions. The project will study several grand topics
related to discrepancy and energy optimization including clustering of
minimizers, attractive-repulsive energies and their relations to signal
processing and applied harmonic analysis (tight frames, SIC-POVMs, mutually
unbiased bases), discrete and metric geometry (equiangular lines, distance
integrals), tessellations of spheres and their relation to discrepancy, one-bit
compressed sensing, and embedding of metric spaces, direct interplay between
energy and discrepancy and its applications to various questions and
conjectures, the long standing open question of the exact asymptotics of
discrepancy with respect to axis-parallel rectangles, as well as sibling
questions in harmonic analysis, approximation and probability theory. Ubiquitous
connections between the subjects bring together a variety of questions into an
integral project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
