
* 2054726
* Mathematical Questions in Kinetic Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,06/22/2021
* Toan Nguyen,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will address fundamental problems concerning solutions to
partial differential equations that are used to model the dynamics of plasmas
and fluids in physics. The focus will be on studying the fundamental law of
physics to predict mixing and relaxation of macroscopic quantities in the large
time. The project will contribute new mathematical techniques to the theory of
partial differential equations and the field of mathematical physics, dynamical
systems, and applied mathematics. In addition, it will advance our understanding
of turbulence in plasma physics and fluid dynamics. The project provides
training opportunities for graduate students and other early-career researchers.
The project seeks to advance beyond the study of mixing and relaxation, or
Landau damping, in plasma physics and fluid dynamics, and to address fundamental
stability problems concerning the behavior of solutions with limited regularity.
The fundamental equations to be studied include the classical Vlasov models in
plasma physics and the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations in fluid dynamics. The
goal is to provide new insights into Landau damping and mixing in plasmas and
fluids. The main approaches will involve mathematical techniques from spectral
theory, resolvent analysis, Fourier analysis, dispersive PDEs, probability, and
statistical physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
