
* 2055604
* Geometry of Graphs and Banach Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Florent Baudier,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,460.00

The world one lives in is geometric in nature where numerous everyday-life
issues, as well as fundamental scientific mysteries, can be expressed in
geometric terms. For instance, the study of physical laws has led to the
development of a refined mathematical framework where elaborate geometric
structures are able to depict and model the interactions of elementary particles
and the symmetries underlying quantum physics. Another example comes from
networks, which are ubiquitous in modern society. From the World Wide Web and
its powerful search engines to social networks, from telecommunication networks
to economic systems, networks represent a wide range of real world systems. A
network can naturally be seen as a geometric object by considering the number of
edges of the shortest path connecting two nodes in the network as a quantity
measuring their proximity. The shortest path distance on a graph is a
fundamental example of an abstract mathematical object called "metric". The
notion of a metric space is an overarching concept that is pivotal in
mathematical models of optimization problems in networks, and in a vast range of
application areas, including computer vision, computational biology, machine
learning, statistics, and mathematical psychology, to name a few. This extremely
useful abstract concept generalizes the classical notion of a Euclidean space,
where the distance from point A to point B is computed as the length of a
straight line connecting them. In numerous practical problems, the heart of the
matter boils down to understanding whether we can find a representation of a
given metric space, in particular a graph equipped with its shortest path
distance, inside some other geometric object that we understand much better and
that carries additional structure. Our ability to perform such a task in a
quantitatively efficient way has tremendous applications. The project will
provide opportunities for undergraduate students to develop a global mindset and
superior communication skills, and graduate students to acquire the algorithmic
and programming skills that are crucially needed in the modern workplace.

In this project, the PI proposes to implement in several instances the geometric
approach, which is a strategy that consists in understanding and solving
problems of seemingly non-geometric nature via the uncovering of a hidden metric
structure that allows the application of a wealth of powerful metric techniques.
Due to its versatility, the geometric approach has permeated virtually all
fields of mathematics. Creating datasets with billions of entries has become a
routine and ubiquitous task. Optimization, search, and data mining problems on
these huge datasets are computationally extremely hard to solve. Graphs are
natural mathematical models for many datasets, and a central computer science
task is the design of efficient and fast approximation algorithms for
optimization and search problems on various graphs. A graph is a combinatorial
object of seemingly non-geometric nature. However, once equipped with a shortest
path metric a graph becomes a metric space and the collection of all metrics
supported on the graph carries geometric information that can be used to
understand and study the combinatorial structure of the graph. After its rise in
the mid-90's, there are by now numerous situations where availing to geometric
embeddings of graphs, most notably embeddings into tree- metrics or into the
classical Lebesgue sequence spaces, provides elegant, very often optimal, and on
some occasions the only approximation algorithms for computationally intractable
problems. The first goal of this proposal is to advance significantly our
understanding of the general problem of embeddability of finite metrics. In
particular, we will investigate the connection between lamplighter metrics and
Wasserstein metrics from an algorithmic perspective, and the geometry of thin
Laakso structures in relation to the Metric Kadec-Pelczynski Problem. The second
goal, which is motivated by the geometric approach to the Novikov conjecture in
topology and to Gromov's positive scalar curvature conjecture in Riemannian
geometry, is to advance significantly our understanding of the coarse geometry
of Banach spaces and the asymptotic behavior of Banach spaces, most notably the
relationship between concentration inequalities on non-locally finite graphs and
the Szlenk index.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
