
* 2055070
* RUI: Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Dynamics for Systems of Physical Origin
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2021,06/09/2021
* Mark Demers,CT,Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 214,088.00

In dynamical systems, systems that change with time such as planetary motion,
much of the research is focused on closed systems in which the dynamics are
self-contained. In many modeling situations, however, such a global view is not
possible and it becomes necessary to study systems that are influenced by other
unknown systems, possibly on different scales. This project will investigate
properties of chaotic dynamical systems that are out of equilibrium, either due
to the application of external forces or because mass or energy is allowed to
escape. Systems to be studied during the course of this project include systems
in which mass or energy may enter or exit through deterministic or random
mechanisms, and large-scale systems of smaller interacting components that
exchange mass or energy. These problems are strongly motivated by connections
with statistical mechanics and seek to advance our understanding of fundamental
questions related to energy transport and diffusion. This project will also
support the involvement of undergraduate students in mathematics research. The
highly visual nature and physical motivation of the problems outlined above will
enable the principal investigator to recruit undergraduate students to
participate in related research projects during the course of the project.
Special emphasis will be given to recruiting students from underrepresented
groups in research mathematics. Students will disseminate results of their
research via poster sessions, conference presentations and publications in peer-
reviewed journals. By stimulating interest in research careers in mathematics
and creating a peer community supportive of that interest, the grant will
contribute to the important goal of integrating research and education.

Motivated by the problems outlined above, this project is organized around three
specific projects: The first project investigates the statistical and
thermodynamic properties of both classical and non-equilibrium particle systems
with collision interactions, an important class of models from statistical
mechanics; the second concerns open systems, which relate on the one hand to
physical systems in which mass or energy is allowed to escape, and on the other
to the study of metastable states; the third project generalizes open systems to
include linked and extended dynamical systems comprised of two or more
components that exchange mass or energy through deterministic or random
mechanisms. Important examples include the aperiodic Lorentz gas and mechanical
models of heat conduction. The investigator will bring to bear several
analytical techniques that he has been instrumental in developing for these
classes of systems, including his recent work concerning the spectral
decomposition of transfer operators for dispersing particle systems,
contractions in projective cones due to Birkhoff, and the construction of
adapted Markov extensions (a generalization of Markov partitions). None of these
techniques require Markovian assumptions on the dynamics, making them widely
applicable to a wide variety of nonuniformly hyperbolic and physically important
systems. The application of these techniques to central models from equilibrium
and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics will represent significant advances in
the study of such systems. Efforts to understand these tools in one context
strengthens them and aids in their application to other areas of mathematics.
Their intellectual interest is enhanced by the application of these ideas to
resolve problems posed and approached formally in the physics literature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
