
* 2055155
* Quantifying Rigidity in von Neumann Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2021,04/28/2021
* Thomas Sinclair,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The theory of von Neumann algebras was initiated in the 1930s and 40s by F.J.
Murray and John von Neumann as a mathematical framework for quantum mechanics.
With recent breakthroughs in quantum computing, the study of von Neumann
algebras is poised to yield insights into deep problems in the theory of quantum
computation which must be overcome to make quantum computing and quantum
cryptography practical, efficient technologies. One goal of this project is to
use tools from von Neumann algebras to provide insights into so-called ?quantum
expanders? which have applications to quantum error correction and quantum
cryptography. This is part of the broader goal of the project to investigate
quantitative aspects of von Neumann algebras. Other potential applications lie
in the theory of random matrices, which are used in diverse applications in many
fields from quantum physics to biology and big data. This project will
contribute to workforce development by providing research training and mentoring
opportunities at the undergraduate and graduate level. The project aims to make
progress in several directions around quantifying and developing new invariants
for exploring the phenomenon of rigidity in von Neumann algebras. One objective
is to further develop the theory and use of cohomological rigidity techniques in
Popa?s deformation/rigidity theory based on techniques developed by the PI
jointly with collaborators on the existence and uniqueness of maximal rigid
subalgebras of deformations. This could lead to progress towards settling two
outstanding conjectures in the field, the Peterson-Thom conjecture and absence
of Cartan subalgebras for von Neumann algebras of groups having nontrivial first
cohomology with coefficients in the left-regular representation. Techniques from
continuous model theory will also be explored as potential avenues to these
conjectures by attempting to find noncommutative analogs to Anderson and
Keisler?s model theoretic approach to stochastic differential equations. A
second objective is to develop experimental and quantitative approaches to
property Gamma, in part based on the PI?s discovery of malnormal matrices in his
work with Mulcahy. The PI will approach these problems using a mix of techniques
from ergodic theory, random matrix theory, computability theory, and von Neumann
algebras. Results in this direction could lead to new insights at the interface
of von Neumann algebras and quantum computing. A third objective is to explore
the applications of uniform 2-norms to the classification theory of nuclear
C*-algebras based on the PI?s work with Goldbring and Hart on the continuous
model theory of correspondences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
