
* 2055122
* Finitary Analysis in Homogeneous Dynamics and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Amir Mohammadi,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,440.00

Dynamical systems study rules which predict the long-term behavior of a point in
a space. The origin of dynamical systems may be traced back to Newtonian
mechanics. Examples of mathematical models of dynamical systems include the
study of fluid dynamics, airflow dynamics, and many others. Consider, for
instance, gas particles moving in a space according to a certain rule. One is
interested in understanding various states of the system over long-time
intervals. A curious phenomenon is the following: if one assumes that initially
all gas particles are in one half of the space, then infinitely often in the
future, the gas molecules will collect in the initial portion of the space. This
conclusion, which is predicted by mathematical aspects of the system, seems
paradoxical. However, the mystery may be revealed if one observes that the
number of the degree of freedom in this system is very large, thus in order to
return to the original state, one needs to observe the system for very long
(practically impossible) time intervals. This proposal aims at the study of
finitary aspects of dynamical systems where one is interested in approximating
various states of the system within an error. This project also include the
training of a graduate student.

The Principal Investigator seeks extensions and strengthening of certain
rigidity results in dynamics and their applications in number theory and
geometry. Special attention will be given to finitary and effective aspects of
the analysis. The following will be the main objectives: (i) Dynamical systems
have become a major player in modern mathematics. However, arguments relying on
techniques from ergodic theory and dynamics are often non-quantitative.
Providing finitary versions of these arguments are challenging and much sought
after, especially in view of various applications. The principal investigator
seeks results in this direction with two main goals in mind: provide finitary
arguments which yield polynomial rates for strong rigidity results in
homogeneous dynamics in some specific examples with interesting applications to
number theory and geometry; provide finitary versions of these celebrated
results in great generality, even though one may not obtain a polynomial rate in
general. (ii) Geodesic planes in hyperbolic 3-manifolds have been studied from
different angles. These investigations have made it clear that the behavior of
geodesic planes is intimately related to the geometric, topological, and
arithmetic properties of the ambient manifold. This proposal seeks to refine and
strengthen results in this direction using tools from homogeneous dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
