
* 2100367
* Applications of Descriptive Set Theory in Ergodic Theory and Smooth Dynamical Systems
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2021,07/19/2021
* Matthew Foreman,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 259,974.00

Models of physical phenomena are often formulated as dynamical systems, rules
that specify how quantities evolve in time. There are many different types of
dynamical systems, and one important mathematical question is to classify the
statistical or qualitative behavior of these systems. This project uses
descriptive set theory to show what kinds of classification are possible and to
establish the mathematical limitations of general classifications. The project
involves graduate students.

Classification of dynamical systems can be approached by classifying the
statistical and qualitative behavior of diffeomorphisms of compact manifolds and
establishing criteria for deciding when time forwards is isomorphic to time
backwards (in the appropriate category). These questions are closely related to
which abstract measure-preserving transformations are isomorphic to volume-
preserving diffeomorphisms of compact manifolds. This project studies when
classifications are possible with inherently countable methods and explores
methods for realizing abstract transformations as diffeomorphisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
