
* 2123224
* Geometric Properties of Second Order Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2021,02/19/2021
* Stefan Steinerberger,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2023
* USD 108,885.00

Many physical processes, for example the way heat spreads from a lit candle or a
radiator throughout the room or the way two waves in a pond interact with each
other, are rather well understood and we have several equations that describe
the processes. There are usually three main questions that are being asked: (1)
Is the equation correctly describing nature? (2) Does the equation actually have
a solution? (3) Can the solution be computed, either by hand or on a computer?
The purpose of this project is to investigate a question that is not asked quite
as often: (4) what does the solution actually look like? If we are heating a
room with, say, four candles and a radiator, which spot is going to be the
coldest? These simple questions lead to both interesting and beautiful
mathematics as well as surprising applications in practice (the Google Search
Algorithm is essentially based on these types of structures, "cold" webpages are
lower ranked than "hot" webpages).

This project is dedicated to the study of (uniformly) elliptic second order
partial differential equations, the main focus being on geometric properties of
the solution and how those interact with the geometry of the underlying domain.
Three explicit problems that will be studied are the (1) the location of extrema
and critical points, (2) the geometry of level sets and (3) the geometry of
eigenfunctions of an elliptic operator. The main types of applications will be
(4) the analysis of spectral methods on graphs and (5) localization phenomena in
mathematical physics. The main tools will be basic facts from geometry analysis
to reinterpret analytic estimates geometrically and vice versa, the
interpretation of elliptic equations as fixed points in time of an associated
parabolic equation (as well as associated techniques from parabolic equations)
and various aspects of spectral theory. Tools from the discrete world may be
useful when reducing estimates to toy models in the graph setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
