
* 2143989
* CAREER: Oscillatory Integrals and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,02/01/2022
* Ruixiang Zhang,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 08/31/2027
* USD 146,113.00

This research project aims to understand oscillatory integrals. These objects
lie at the heart of modern harmonic analysis and are ubiquitous in mathematics,
physics, and neighboring areas. The Fourier transform, perhaps the best-known
oscillatory integral operator, plays a fundamental role not only in mathematics
and physics but also in applications such as image processing and data analysis.
Such integrals can also be used to understand integer solutions of equations,
and to express solutions to differential equations such as the wave and
Schrödinger equations. Central to this area is a good understanding of the size
and decay properties of oscillatory integrals. The project seeks to develop new
tools in the field that will be used to investigate more challenging questions.
These tools will come not only from the subject of analysis, but also from other
mathematical areas such as real algebraic geometry, differential geometry,
theory of finite fields, geometric measure theory, and model theory. On the
educational side, the project involves the organization of research workshops
for junior researchers, as well as work with the Berkeley Math Circle, providing
new opportunities for elementary, middle, and high school students to get to
know about modern mathematics.

This project concerns boundedness properties of important oscillatory integral
operators. Topics to be considered include Fourier restriction for the
paraboloid, Fourier restriction for Parsell-Vinogradov manifolds, and the
Bochner-Riesz multiplier. Applications of oscillatory integrals will also be
investigated; new applications in areas such as number theory and geometric
measure theory (Falconer's distance conjecture, Kakeya sets) are anticipated.
The mathematical toolbox involves analysis (induction on scales and decoupling),
algebraic geometry (the polynomial method, real algebraic geometry, and
o-minimal geometry), differential geometry, combinatorics (multilinear Kakeya,
finite field tools, and sum-product theory), and geometric measure theory
(radial projection). The educational components of the project include workshops
on oscillatory integrals for junior researchers and contributions to the
organization and development of the Berkeley Math Circle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
