
* 2153069
* Maximal Subellipticity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,06/28/2022
* Brian Street,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 344,673.00

Elliptic partial differential equations (PDE) play a central role in many areas
of mathematics and science. A canonical example of an elliptic PDE is Laplace?s
equation, which governs steady-state temperature distributions. One reason that
elliptic equations are so useful is that precise results are known for very
general elliptic PDE, even in the notoriously difficult setting of fully
nonlinear equations. Outside of the elliptic setting, current techniques usually
require the use of special properties of the equation under consideration, and
abstract general results are rare. The theory of maximally subelliptic
equations, a far-reaching generalization of elliptic equations, originated in
the 1960s and 1970s. In the intervening years, many mathematicians have adapted
results from the elliptic theory to various special cases of linear maximally
subelliptic equations. This project will develop the regularity theory of linear
maximally subelliptic PDE in full generality, and moreover will address the
general situation of fully nonlinear maximally subelliptic PDE. This will
provide a toolbox, more general than the usual one from the elliptic theory, for
mathematicians and scientists who encounter such partial differential equations
in their work. The project will provide research opportunities for graduate
students.

This project will develop the theory of maximally subelliptic partial
differential equations in three main steps. The first is a study of general
linear maximally subelliptic partial differential operators with smooth
coefficients. Special cases have previously been considered, but this will be
the first such theory of these operators in full generality. A key tool which
will be used is the underlying Carnot-Caratheodory geometry along with
associated scaling maps. The next stage of the project will be a development of
the theory of Besov and Triebel-Lizorkin function spaces adapted to maximally
subelliptic operators. An important property of elliptic operators is that,
modulo smooth functions, they are left invertible on many classical function
spaces. The aforementioned Besov and Triebel-Lizorkin spaces will generalize
this fact to the maximally subelliptic setting. Special cases of these function
spaces include both Sobolev and Zygmund-Holder spaces adapted to a maximally
subelliptic operator. The third stage of the project will involve a study of
fully nonlinear partial differential equations. The theory of function spaces
and linear operators as described above will be used to understand the interior
regularity of fully nonlinear maximally subelliptic equations. Outside of the
elliptic setting, fully nonlinear equations are often difficult to study. The
results of this project will provide a framework for future study of fully
nonlinear equations in the maximally subelliptic setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
