
* 2153907
* New Frontiers in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,04/19/2022
* Debraj Chakrabarti,MI,Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 223,754.00

The theory of calculus, which makes possible a precise understanding of
continuously varying magnitudes, forms the mathematical underpinning of much of
modern-day science and technology. The complex numbers are a system of
generalized numbers providing greater flexibility with algebraic operations,
such as allowing for the extraction of square roots of negative quantities. In
this project, the investigator will apply the tools of calculus to smoothly
varying complex outputs which depend on one or more complex inputs. Such objects
are known in the mathematical literature as holomorphic functions. The study of
holomorphic functions has applications to phenomena as diverse as the flow of
liquids, heat conduction, the distribution of prime numbers, and the speed of
computer programs. The project will employ two methods to construct holomorphic
functions. The first is via a system of equations called the inhomogeneous
Cauchy-Riemann equations. The second, the method of projections, interprets the
collection of holomorphic functions geometrically as a sub-collection inside a
larger collection of functions, and uses this geometric insight to construct
holomorphic functions with specified properties. The deeper understanding of
holomorphic functions to be gained in this project will be useful for
applications both within and outside mathematics. The project will also involve
undergraduate participants, who will work on both the computational and
theoretical aspects of the problems. Such participation will expose students to
challenging mathematical problems and will contribute to the training of future
mathematicians and scientists.

Holomorphic functions of one or several complex variables constitute a natural
and important class of functions in analysis and have important applications
throughout science and engineering. This project investigates two classical
techniques for constructing such functions: the inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann
equations and projection operators. For the Cauchy-Riemann equations, the main
thrust is to study the solution of these equations in annuli, where an annulus
in complex Euclidean space is a domain obtained from a larger domain (the
envelope) by removing a compact subset (the hole). Since annuli are not domains
of holomorphy, new phenomena appear in this situation which are not found in the
well-understood and classical setting of pseudoconvex domains. The analogy
between complex analysis on annuli and Alexander duality (a circle of ideas in
topology) is expected to forge novel methods of attack on these questions.
Coupled with classical approaches based on a priori estimates for partial
differential operators, these new methods will be employed to yield important
new information on function theory of new classes of non-pseudoconvex domains.
With regards to the geometric construction via projection operators, a primary
focus of investigation will be a class of questions concerning the regularity of
the Bergman projection, and other associated projection operators, in Lebesgue
spaces on non-smooth domains. Such regularity depends on the geometry of the
domain in ways that are not completely understood. Among the domains to be
studied are quotients of balls by finite groups, and Reinhardt domains whose
boundary contains the origin.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
