
* 2153822
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2022,04/01/2022
* Panagiotis Souganidis,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2025
* USD 292,823.00

Fluctuations are ubiquitous both in real world contexts and in key technological
challenges like, among others, thermal fluctuations in physical systems,
algorithmic stochasticity in machine learning and modeling of weather patterns
in climate dynamics. At the same time, such complex systems are subject to an
abundance of influences, and depend on a large variety of parameters and
interactions. In addition, for many complex phenomena most of the available
information is very often "statistical" (random) and not "exact"
(deterministic). A systematic understanding of the interplay of stochasticity
and complex dynamical behavior aims at unveiling universal properties,
irrespectively of the many details of the concrete systems at hand. Its
development relies on the derivation and analysis of universal concepts for
their scaling limits, capturing not only their average behavior, but also their
fluctuations. Stochastic partial differential equations are the natural
mathematical object to study and understand the role of fluctuations. Another
very current and important issue arising in science and technology is the
analysis, both theoretically and computationally, of problems that involve
several disparate length-scales at once. For example, understanding, modeling
and accurately predicting the behavior of materials at the macroscopic scale
necessitates to consider their microscopic structure. Instead of considering
materials in one scale and neglecting the finer scales, modern materials science
increasingly explicitly and concurrently deals with models of a given material
at many different scales. Homogenization and multiscale approaches are the two,
respectively theoretical and computational, facets of the mathematical theory to
study such problems. As a matter of fact, it is necessary to consider
homogenization in random environments since periodicity is rather restrictive
for the modeling of real materials. Growth models are natural mathematical
models used in probability and mathematical physics to study stochastic partial
differential equations exhibiting a universal scaling limit. Mean-field games
are the ideal mathematical structures to study the quintessential problems in
the social-economic sciences, which differ from physical settings because of the
forward looking behavior on the part of individual agents. In this context, an
agent aims to optimize certain criteria which, together with her/his dynamics,
depend on the other agents and their actions. Agents react, anticipate and
strategize instead of simply reacting instantaneously. Examples of applications
include the modeling of the macro-economy and conflicts in the modern era. In
both cases, a large number of agents interact strategically in a stochastically
evolving environment, all responding to partly common and partly idiosyncratic
incentives, and all trying to simultaneously forecast the dynamic decisions of
others. Some mean-field games models in, for example, telecommunications are
naturally set on networks (graphs). This raises the need of the development of
the mathematical tools to study equations on graphs and to understand their
behavior across nodes. The project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.

The project is a continuation of the PI's program to develop novel methodologies
and techniques for the qualitative and quantitative study of nonlinear first-
and second-order deterministic and stochastic partial differential equations
(PDEs and SPDEs, respectively) arising in natural and social sciences and
engineering. The emphasis is on (i) PDEs with multiplicative ``rough'' path
dependence; (ii) homogenization in random media; (iii) well-posedness in domains
with singularities; (iv) mean-field games; and (v) convergence of growth models.
Nonlinear, first- and second-order partial differential equations with rough
and, in particular, stochastic time dependence arise naturally in the study of
fluctuations. The further development of the theory of pathwise solutions is
important, for it allows to study of new classes of nonlinear SPDEs, and is
expected to play a crucial role in applied areas by providing the tools to
analyze previously intractable models. Studying qualitatively and quantitatively
stochastic homogenization problems requires the development of novel arguments
and methodologies to address the loss of compactness when going from periodic to
stationary ergodic media. The analysis of the behavior of scaled growth models
gives rise to new equations. Their well-posedness requires the refinement of
some of the by now classical tools from the theory of viscosity solutions. It is
by now well understood that a very important element of the mean-field game
theory is the so-called master equation, an infinite-dimensional partial
differential equation which subsumes in a single equation both the individual
and collective behaviors of agents. In spite of considerable progress in the
study of the properties of the smooth solution of the master equation in the
presence of both idiosyncratic and common noises, less is known in the absence
of the former in which case smooth solutions do not exist in general. Another
important question in this context is the development of a notion of weak
solution in the relevant for application nonmonotone setting. Two of the most
important questions in the study of equations of graphs is the well-posedness
across vertices and the identification of the correct coupling condition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
