
* 2153992
* Mathematical Analysis of Fluid Free Boundary Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2022,06/15/2022
* Sijue Wu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 405,373.00

The project is concerned with modeling the motion of water waves and other
related fluid free-boundary problems. The focus of the research is on the
development of mathematical tools to understand the long-time behavior of water
waves in two and three dimensions, with and without surface tension. The long-
time behavior of solutions of the free-boundary problem of a self-gravitating
incompressible fluid will also be investigated. Another research topic is
devoted to the interaction of water waves with a fixed rigid boundary, such as
the ocean's waves with the coast. This work will lead to better modeling and
more efficient numerical simulations of the phenomena. An integral part of the
project is the involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, which
is crucially important for the preparation of the next generation workforce. The
project will study the quartic integrability of the water wave equations and the
long-time behaviors of water waves in two and three dimensions, with and without
surface tension. It will also investigate the quartic and higher order
integrability and long-time behaviors of solutions of the free boundary problem
of a self-gravitating incompressible fluid. The goals are to unearth hidden
structures of the equations, to yield novel information on the behavior of
solutions, and to solve open questions such as the long-time existence and
regularity of solutions under certain smallness conditions, and the long-time
existence and regularity of solutions with initial interfaces of arbitrary large
steepness. The project will also investigate the interaction of water waves with
an arbitrary fixed rigid boundary. This project is an integral part of the PI's
long-term goal of understanding behaviors of water waves and other related fluid
motions, including the singularity formations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
