
* 2154680
* Ergodic Theory Beyond Amenability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/2022,04/06/2022
* Lewis Bowen,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2025
* USD 425,512.00

Classical dynamics studies how systems change in time. Ergodic theory focusses
on the statistical behavior of dynamical systems. Applications of ergodic theory
are widespread: from traffic modeling to aerospace engineering and population
dynamics. It is natural and of practical importance to generalize the role of
time in a dynamical system to more complicated groups of symmetries. This
generalized notion of dynamics leads to applications in statistical physics,
number theory and geometry. However, new tools are needed especially in the
particular case when the group of symmetries is non-amenable, which means that
boundary phenomena are too significant to be safely ignored. Non-amenable groups
naturally arise in many parts of mathematics such as geometry and number theory.
This project is concerned with developing the tools needed to analyze the
statistical behavior of non-amenable group actions by generalizing ergodic
theory to this context. The project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.

The research goals of this projects are: (1) Measured equivalence relations
(MERs) arise from actions of groups. MERs are both a tool and a source of
interesting examples for extending classical ergodic theory to non-amenable
group actions. This project aims to develop the structure of MERs by classifying
the normal subequivalence relations of low-dimensional MERs and finding MER-
analogs of objects from geometric group theory. (2) Sofic entropy theory is a
generalization of classical entropy to actions of sofic groups, a class of
groups including amenable and residually finite groups. It is relatively new.
Specific goals include: determine conditions under which entropy is invariant
under orbit-equivalence, develop a locally compact version of sofic entropy
theory, classify mixing Markov chains over free groups and determine how sofic
entropy depends on the choice of sofic approximation. (3) A major tool for
extending ergodic theory to non-amenable groups is sofic approximation, in which
the action of the group on itself is approximated locally on average by a
sequence of partial actions on finite sets. There are no known cases when this
tool cannot be used. A major goal of this project is to find non-sofic groups
and actions of low-dimensional groups by modifying recent techniques used to
solve Connes? Embedding Conjecture. (4) Sofic approximation fits into the
broader framework of Benjamini-Schramm (BS) convergence, in which one considers
sequence of finite graphs or compact measured metric spaces and the limit object
is a random pointed graph or space. Naturally occurring sequences include random
translation surfaces, quadratic differentials and measured laminations. This
project will determine the BS-limit of these sequences and relate them to known
objects such as the Curien-Werner Markovian triangulation and Gaussian Analytic
Functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
