
* 2154389
* Quantum Symmetries: Subfactors, Topological Phases, and Higher Categories
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,04/01/2022
* David Penneys,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2025
* USD 402,735.00

Symmetry arises in many places in mathematics and the physical sciences.
Typically, symmetries of a system are described by the mathematical notion of a
group, which is a set with a unit and multiplication, where every operation has
an inverse. Groups act on objects by structure-preserving maps. In recent
decades, we have seen the emergence of quantum mathematical objects, like von
Neumann algebras and topological phases of matter, which naturally live in
"higher categories," and so their symmetries are better described by tensor
categories. This project aims to study the higher categories arising in the
study of von Neumann algebras and topological phases of matter to better
understand these quantum systems and their higher quantum symmetries. The
project provides research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.

This project has three main focuses. First, it continues the investigation of
small index subfactors and unitary fusion categories to search for new examples
of exotic quantum symmetries. Second, it investigates a nets of operator
algebras approach to (2+1)D topological phases of matter, analogous to the
conformal net description of conformal field theory. Third, it investigate
unitarity for higher categories and its relationship to boundaries and phase
transitions for (2+1)D topological phases of matter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
