
* 2154378
* Hyperbolicity with Singularities and Coexistence via Smoothing
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Vaughn Climenhaga,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2025
* USD 297,450.00

When we flip a coin, the outcome is random and unpredictable. Similarly, we
cannot make a detailed weather forecast for six months in the future and expect
it to be accurate. And yet we believe these events to be governed by laws of
physics that are deterministic: the same input always leads to the same output.
These two opposing ideas ? unpredictability in practice versus predictability in
theory ? can be reconciled using the mathematical theory of hyperbolic dynamical
systems, which leads to ideas that are popularly known as chaos theory. When we
study some system and use a model to make predictions, it is vital to understand
the way that predictability evolves into unpredictability so that we know when a
forecast predicting one specific outcome ("it will rain tomorrow") must be
replaced by a more probabilistic statement ("in the long run, the coin will come
up tails half the time"). The basic mechanism for this process is "sensitive
dependence on initial conditions" ? a small error in our initial measurement of
the system can grow quickly as time passes. The resulting theory is well-
understood when this phenomenon occurs for all initial conditions and when the
system does not have any "singularities," where the rules governing the system
change suddenly. However, these assumptions are quite restrictive, and it is
more realistic to drop one or both, allowing study of a much broader class of
systems. For this broader class, the theory is not as complete, and this leads
to the goal of the present project: to develop a better understanding of systems
displaying hyperbolic behavior in the presence of singularities, or for which
there is coexistence of hyperbolic and non-hyperbolic behavior. This will
involve both a study of the properties of systems with such behavior, as well as
the development of tools to verify rigorously that this behavior does in fact
occur. The project will also provide research training and mentoring of
students.

More concretely, one part of the project involves thermodynamic formalism for
systems with singularities, especially billiards, including both dispersing
(Sinai billiard) and non-uniformly hyperbolic (Bunimovich stadium). For
uniformly hyperbolic systems without singularities, the theory of thermodynamic
formalism provides insights into the statistical behavior of the system,
including existence and uniqueness of equilibrium measures, stochastic
properties, and Margulis asymptotics for periodic orbits. The presence of
singularities for billiard systems makes the corresponding theory more difficult
to develop beyond the smooth Liouville measure (which is well understood). The
investigator and collaborators previously studied thermodynamic formalism for
non-uniformly hyperbolic systems without singularities using specification and
leaf measure techniques; part of this project aims to extend these to systems
with singularities. Another part of the project will focus on the problem of
verifying non-uniform hyperbolicity and coexistence of regular and stochastic
behavior. There are many systems where this is suggested by numerical evidence
but not proved. The project will investigate a new technique for proving non-
uniform hyperbolicity and coexistence in smooth systems that approximate
singular ones, by using the invariant cone family for the singular system and
borrowing ideas from one-dimensional dynamics to deal with the failure of cone-
invariance for the smooth system. One expected application of this theory will
be the construction of a positively curved surface whose geodesic flow has
positive Liouville entropy (and thus non-uniform hyperbolicity) coexisting with
vanishing Lyapunov exponents on a set of positive Liouville measure; existence
of such a surface remains an important open problem at the interface of
dynamical systems and geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
