
* 2154494
* Free Analysis: Exploring the Interactions between Operator Theory and Noncommutative Function Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,04/05/2022
* Michael Jury,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2025
* USD 362,398.00

This project belongs to the branches of mathematical analysis known as Operator
Theory and Functional Analysis. These subjects were developed initially in the
early part of the 20th century as part of the development of the mathematical
foundations of quantum mechanics. These ideas have subsequently evolved in many
unexpected directions, far from their original source, with applications not
only in physics (such as the currently very active areas of quantum computing
and quantum information theory), but also in electrical and mechanical
engineering (where these ideas are applied in the design of automatic control
systems, in signal and image processing), and even artificial intelligence and
machine learning. A particularly new and exciting branch of this field is known
as ?noncommutative function theory? which has its origins in the study of
certain kinds of optimization questions in engineering, but has grown to take on
a life of its own. The adjacent area of ?multivariable operator theory? is
multi-faceted but is closely connected with many questions arising in these
applications (such as the study of quantum channels, and the theory of ?linear
matrix inequalities? in optimization). The project is aimed at expanding the
array of mathematical tools available for the study of these questions, and at
deepening our understanding of the interplay between these diverse mathematical
ideas. The project further will integrate research and education, and
professional development of junior researchers. A ?Math Circle? program at a
local school is to be carried out.

The project will employ a blend of techniques from operator theory (especially
in several variables), functional analysis, and complex analysis to study the
interrelation between operator theory and the rapidly developing field of "free
analysis" or "noncommutative" function theory. These recent, rapid developments
have made new tools available to the study of some basic questions in
mathematical analysis and have already found applications to diverse areas of
mathematics, including optimization theory, convex analysis, and quantum
information theory. The goal of joint work with graduate students is to apply
these new methods to questions at the intersection of functional analysis and
complex function theory, particularly the study of function-theoretic operator
theory in "noncommutative" domains, including questions about factorizations,
zero sets, and realization theory for noncommutative rational functions. The
project will draw on techniques from several currently active areas of
mathematical analysis, with the aim of broadening and deepening our
understanding of the interplay between function theory, operator theory, and
complex analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
