
* 2154340
* Variational Questions in Mathematics and Physics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,06/21/2022
* Michael Loss,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2025
* USD 236,238.00

In an overwhelming number of questions in mathematics, physics, engineering and
economics and other disciplines one seeks solutions that satisfy certain demands
or constraints and importantly, one looks for an optimal one. The mathematical
theory that addresses these questions is the calculus of variations. Variational
questions are deeply rooted in nature in the sense that systems tend to settle
in a state that has energy as low as possible. An example is an excited atom
that falls to its lowest energy state while emitting light. Likewise, a hot
liquid tends to an equilibrium with the environment by cooling down. The aim of
research in this area is always twofold: describe the state to which a system
tends and explain how the system reaches that state. In the case of the atom
this means finding the lowest energy state and describing how it decays to that
state; in the case for the liquid this means describing how heat flows from hot
to cold. The research will pursue such questions in relation to new and relevant
examples. There has been considerable progress in understanding how systems such
as gases of colliding particles tend to their equilibrium. In research the
investigator will extend these ideas to quantum mechanical systems and to
analyze how they tend to their equilibrium. In quantum mechanics these questions
are to a large extent open and their answers will shed some light on various
issues in quantum information theory. Another question to be pursued concerns
magnetic fields that keep electrons confined to a region. The challenge will be
to find fields that are optimal in some precise sense and to describe how the
electrons are distributed. It is expected that the fields? lines have
interesting patterns that resemble the ones created in fusion research where one
uses magnetic fields to confine hot plasma. Graduate students will be exposed to
and contribute to several questions in research level mathematics. The principal
investigator is expected to significantly impact the community, as evidenced by
their role as secretary of the International Association for Mathematical
Physics.

The project addresses various questions in the calculus of variations. One
question is to study zero modes of the three-dimensional Dirac equation. Zero
modes are important in quantum field theory and in the question of proving the
stability of matter. It is well known that if the ?3/2 norm? of the magnetic
field is small then the magnetic field cannot support a zero mode. A similar
result holds for the ?3 norm? of the vector potential. The aim is to find sharp
necessary conditions on these quantities zero modes exists. It is conjectured
that the optimal fields have field lines that look like the Hopf fibration. In
this connection investigations will be pursued concerning possible blow up of
solutions of the coupled Maxwell-Pauli equations where the magnetic moment is
larger than 2. A different research direction will be to understand the approach
to equilibrium in certain quantum mechanical systems. Such systems can be
described by Lindblad equations. In general, not much can be said about the rate
of approach to equilibrium but there are interesting Quantum Markov Operators
that are analogs of the classical Kac master equation. In these cases,
quantitative determination is expected of the rate of approach to equilibrium.
One possibility is to do this by computing the gap of the generator. Another
attempt is to prove approach to equilibrium in entropy. This will be achieved by
establishing analogs of classical entropy inequalities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
