
* 2154022
* Integrable Partial Differential Equations as Pathfinders in Mathematical Physics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2022,04/01/2022
* Rowan Killip,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 311,024.00

Integrable systems have long served as pathfinders in science. Newton
transformed our understanding of gravity because he was able to solve the two-
body problem (a completely integrable system) and so verify that his inverse-
square law of gravity matched empirical observations. That the three-body
problem is not solvable in the same sense does not undermine this; indeed, it is
precisely what makes the basic two-body paradigm so essential to our
understanding! Likewise, the shell model of the atom is born of a completely
integrable approximation. The integrable systems at the center of this project
are significantly more complicated, but likewise serve as oracles for the full-
complexity systems at the forefront of science and engineering. Indeed, all the
concrete models studied as part of this project arose initially as effective
models of real physical systems (such as water waves, optics, and
magnetohydrodynamics), stripped down to reveal the central mechanisms behind the
observed phenomena. To fulfill the role just articulated, we must study these
integrable systems in large-data non-perturbative regimes - regimes where still
simpler models cannot reproduce the observed phenomenology. This is a hallmark
of this research project and indeed, of the methods developed in the PI's recent
work, more broadly. The project provides significant research training
opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, who are
integrated into every major activity of the project.

The primary goal of the project is to advance the low-regularity theory of
certain completely integrable dispersive partial differential equations, both as
an end onto itself and as a tool for understanding the statistical mechanics of
these systems. As a means to this end, the project further develops the
commuting flows paradigm and seeks out new and diverse applications for several
technical tools developed in support of this approach. Well-posedness problems
will be studied, including that of the derivative nonlinear Schrodinger
equation. Microscopic conservation laws will be deployed to further elaborate
the spacetime structural properties of solutions constructed via commuting
flows. The synthesis of renormalization and commuting flows technologies will be
investigated, with a view to well-posedness, to the construction of Gibbs
states, and to the dynamical properties thereof. Likewise, the continuum limit
of discrete integrable models will be investigated both for deterministic
initial data and as a means of gaining insight into Gibbs-state dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
