
* 2154273
* Pluripotential Theory and Random Geometry on Compact Complex Manifolds
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,06/27/2022
* Dan Coman,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 237,054.00

This project lies in the mathematical fields of complex analysis, complex
geometry, and potential theory. Complex analysis studies functions depending on
variables that are complex numbers. Complex analysis and potential theory
provide powerful tools for solving important problems from other fields of pure
and applied mathematics (e.g., image and signal processing) and physics (e.g.,
quantum mechanics and statistical physics). The project will focus on a diverse
collection of questions advancing knowledge and understanding in these fields.
New techniques from complex analysis and potential theory will be applied to
questions originating in fields as diverse as complex and algebraic geometry,
mathematical physics, and number theory. For example, the project will
investigate sections of holomorphic line bundles and the asymptotics of the
related Bergman kernel functions. These topics are related, for instance, to the
quantum mechanics of particles in magnetic fields. The project will impact the
development of human resources by effectively integrating research and
education, and will include the supervision of doctoral theses. The project will
also contribute to the organization of conferences in several complex variables.
These events will bring together established mathematicians, early-career
researchers, and graduate students to discuss mathematics research and student
mentoring. This project will address questions originating in the fields of
pluripotential theory and random complex geometry, in the setting of compact
complex manifolds. Some of these questions have important applications to
complex and algebraic geometry, mathematical physics, or number theory. A
unifying theme is a focus on plurisubharmonic functions and positive closed
currents as objects of investigation or as tools to be employed. The first
direction of research involves quantization problems on compact complex spaces.
Such questions have applications to both statistical physics (via quantum chaos)
and number theory (via quantum unique ergodicity for modular forms). Associated
to a sequence of singular Hermitian holomorphic line bundles over a compact
complex space, there are natural Bergman spaces of square-integrable holomorphic
sections. Suitable positivity assumptions on curvature will be considered in
connection with the growth of the dimension of these spaces, the convergence of
the Fubini-Study currents, and the asymptotics of the associated Bergman kernel
functions. Another topic to be considered is the asymptotic distribution of
common zeros of random sequences of m-tuples of sections in the Bergman spaces,
where special attention will be paid to estimates for the speed of convergence.
In connection with holomorphic sections that vanish to high order along an
analytic subset, the asymptotics of the corresponding partial Bergman kernels
will be studied. Another direction of research deals with pluripotential theory
on compact Kaehler manifolds. Here interesting new phenomena arise, distinct
from the local setting. The investigator will study the largest domain of
quasiplurisubharmonic functions on which the complex Monge-Ampere operator is
well defined, and singularities of the corresponding quasiplurisubharmonic Green
functions. Extension and regularization of quasiplurisubharmonic functions
defined on analytic subvarieties will play a role. Finally, the project will
explore geometric properties of upper-level sets of Lelong numbers of positive
closed currents of arbitrary bidimension on projective manifolds, and will
elucidate connections to cohomology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
