
* 2154031
* Research in Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2022,04/05/2022
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 07/31/2025
* USD 428,169.00

The project concerns research in harmonic analysis, and in the analysis of
partial differential equations (PDE). Harmonic analysis has played major roles
in pure and applied sciences since Fourier's work on the theory of heat
diffusion, continuing with the success of Schrödinger?s equation in quantum
mechanics. It underlies a diverse array of tools widely used in sciences and
engineering and offers the promise of further applications in the future. The
research is to deal with foundational issues, which may help to underpin future
applications. In PDE, the focus will be to study long-time dynamical properties,
such as decay and smoothing of dispersive PDE including several fundamental
equations describing diverse physical phenomena. In particular, the Dirac
equation is a model for graphene, which has important applications in science
and engineering. The fourth order Schrödinger equation was introduced to model
the propagation of intense laser beams in a bulk medium with Kerr nonlinearity;
in addition it is useful in the study of interaction of water waves. In harmonic
analysis, the focus lies on questions in Euclidean spaces centered around
Lebesgue norm inequalities. One subject of on-going research is the Fourier
restriction phenomenon and its applications on questions in PDE and geometric
measure theory. The project will involve undergraduate students in research
activities through numerical projects in Illinois Geometry Lab and the mentoring
of graduate students. More specifically, the research is to encompass dispersive
decay and smoothing estimates and the boundedness of wave operators for
dispersive PDE such as higher order Schrödinger?s equations and Dirac equations,
and to study applications to the regularity properties and long-time dynamics of
the nonlinear counterparts. The methods involved will include the spectral
theory of self-adjoint operators and oscillatory integral estimates in Fourier
analysis. Another area of research is on the fractal dimension of solution
graphs of dispersive PDE, or the Talbot effect. Previously, these questions were
studied in the case of periodic boundary conditions using exponential sum
estimates and smoothing estimates for nonlinear equations; as part of this
project, more general geometries such as the sphere and tori in higher
dimensions will be investigated. In harmonic analysis the project will entail
weighted restriction estimates partly relying on recent developments in
decoupling theory, as well as the applications of weighted restriction estimates
on questions in geometric measure theory and in dispersive PDE such as the
Schrödinger?s equation with a fractal measure as potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
