
* 2154219
* Regularity Versus Singularity Formation in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2022,07/14/2022
* Yannick Sire,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 320,648.00

This project is concerned with various aspects of the theory of partial
differential equations related to the dichotomy between regularity and
singularity formation, from both a qualitative and a quantitative point of view.
The topics to be studied as part of the project are universal in the field of
mathematics in the sense that the same paradigm appears, for instance, in
geometry, mathematical physics, or dynamical systems. The fundamental issue the
project aims to understand is the interplay, for a given system of partial
differential equations, between the existence and regularity of solutions versus
the appearance of singularities. This type of question is of major importance
for both time-dependent and time-independent equations. The project provides
research training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.

The project lies at the interface of several areas of mathematics, such as
Partial Differential Equations, Geometric Measure Theory, Geometric Analysis,
and Harmonic Analysis, with many problems under consideration being motivated by
relevant applications to liquid crystals, fluid dynamics, statistical physics,
and various areas of differential geometry. The Principal Investigator (PI)
plans to pursue research in the regularity theory and geometric properties for
partial differential equations arising in the theory of minimal surfaces and
harmonic maps with free boundaries, by investigating thoroughly a new model
where the boundary effects are prevalent. The theory of nonlocal equations makes
it possible to study problems which seem to be local at first sight but are
intrinsically nonlocal, such as connected sums on the boundary of manifolds or
the construction of blow-up solutions of the harmonic map flow with free
boundary. The PI plans to continue this fruitful line of research. Related to
the latter, the theory of a particularly important class of degenerate/singular
partial differential equations connected to the fractional Laplacian has seen
some recent developments. Building on recent results, the PI plans to study
degenerate/singular equations in fluid dynamics involving variable coefficients.
Several models in compressible fluids are a major output of this line of
investigation. A possible way to understand the singularities and degeneracies
in a system is via geometric microlocal analysis. A useful tool developed over
the years by the PI and collaborators, called parabolic gluing, offers a very
versatile method to construct new objects, possibly singular, in parabolic
equations and geometric flows. As part of this project, the PI plans to continue
to develop this method to investigate bubbling phenomena in several parabolic
equations coming from physics (fluid dynamics, in particular) and geometry
(curvature flows and complex flows, for example).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
