
* 2154796
* Rigid Structures and Statistical Properties of Smooth Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2022,04/01/2022
* Anne Wilkinson,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2025
* USD 375,740.00

The aim of this project is to discover new phenomena in the area of dynamical
systems. Dynamical systems ("dynamics," for short) is the study of motion, and
in particular motion that is dictated by an unchanging set of rules, such as the
forces controlling planetary motion. Well-known experimental phenomena in
dynamics such as chaotic trajectories combined with stable motion have been
observed experimentally but are far from being fully understood from a
theoretical perspective. The project will address several themes. The first is
the stability of dynamical systems - that is, how small perturbations in initial
conditions and even in the rules themselves affect the outcome of the evolution.
Understanding robust mechanisms for stability is a fundamental pursuit, and the
investigator has already discovered several novel such mechanisms. The second
theme is genericity, or loosely to understand what dynamical features are
present in a typical system. The third theme is rigidity, the study of
symmetries of dynamical systems and those systems with optimal symmetries, the
so-called ideal crystals of dynamics. An important aspect of the project is to
further interaction between mathematical and adjacent scientific communities,
such as physics. The PI has already collaborated on questions surrounding the
design of particle accelerators and is currently collaborating with a physicist
on studying the quantum dynamics behind the emergence of black holes.
Furthermore, the PI has given several public lectures on dynamics and has
written in the popular press about the work of mathematicians. The PI will
expand these activities in the coming years. The project provides research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

This project considers questions in smooth dynamical systems all the way from a
general perspective, in particular those about genericity of certain foliation
dynamics, to a local one, focused on the rigidity of specific families of group
actions. These questions are motivated by well-known conjectures, but also by
the desire to discover and explore new dynamical phenomena. The first circle of
questions centers around Boltzmann?s original ergodic hypothesis as well as the
modern and related conjectures of Pugh and Shub about stable ergodicity. The
basic question they address is when one might expect a dynamical system to be
ergodic. An important question that remains open is the symplectic version of
the C1 Pugh-Shub conjecture, which the investigator will attack. The strategy to
prove this conjecture involves interesting and timely aspects of the study of
hyperbolic and partially hyperbolic dynamics and expanding foliations. A second
project investigates the topological and statistical properties of the unstable
foliations of partially hyperbolic systems, and in particular Anosov
diffeomorphisms with a partially hyperbolic splitting. A third project concerns
the rigidity properties of partially hyperbolic abelian actions. Here the action
of the su-holonomy group plays an important role: in the actions considered, the
joint action of the ambient, partially hyperbolic dynamics and the su-holonomy
group are constrained by certain solvable groups for which known rigidity
results described above hold.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
