
* 2154356
* Multilinear Harmonic Analysis and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,04/04/2022
* Polona Durcik,CA,Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2025
* USD 110,798.00

Harmonic analysis is concerned with decomposing signals or functions into
elementary waves, analyzing the pieces individually, and then synthesizing this
local information into information about the original object. This approach has
wide applications in physics and engineering, but also within mathematics
itself. A special focus of harmonic analysis is to obtain good quantitative
information on the objects in question, which can often be applied to yield
strong quantitative results in the fields of ergodic theory and combinatorics.
Ergodic theory investigates behavior of dynamical systems that evolve for a long
time, while one focus of combinatorics is to study existence of structures in
large but otherwise arbitrary sets. These structures can be geometric patterns
such as arithmetic progressions, vertices of a square, their translates,
rotates, or dilates. The project will focus on the study of integral
transformations that naturally occur within harmonic analysis and build a set of
tools that further expands the reach of harmonic analysis into the nearby fields
of ergodic theory and combinatorics. As these are very foundational subjects,
the results and techniques from these areas are applicable in a wider scientific
context. Examples include applications in stochastic analysis, partial
differential equations, signal processing, and medical imaging. The project?s
fundamental mathematical research will address the community?s currently
relevant scientific questions in its continued pursuit in understanding open
mathematical questions. The project will further entail working with a postdoc
and mentoring undergraduate students, organization of seminars and workshops
that promote cross-collaboration and exchange of ideas.

The first part of this project will deal with a fundamental family of
multilinear singular integral forms with a hypergraph structure. The main goal
will be to address boundedness of these forms on Lebesgue spaces. These
questions will be approached by extending the techniques previously developed by
the PI and collaborators. The work is partially inspired by a major open
question in harmonic analysis, boundedness of the simplex Hilbert transforms.
Further, this project will address multilinear oscillatory integral forms and
their connections with variants of multilinear singular integrals and maximal
functions with curvature. Estimates on multilinear singular and oscillatory
integrals will then be applied to ergodic theory. In this context, the main goal
will be to investigate convergence of various types of ergodic averages along
the orbits of commuting measure-preserving transformations by establishing
qualitative convergence statements via stronger quantitative variational
estimates. The latter will be translated to questions in Euclidean spaces and
addressed with harmonic analysis techniques developed throughout this project.
These methods will also be applied to questions in Euclidean Ramsey theory,
where existence of linear and non-linear point configurations in large subsets
of the Euclidean space will be investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
