
* 2155033
* Noncommutative Functions, Algebra and Operator Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Meric Augat,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 07/31/2025
* USD 110,448.00

Noncommutativity is the idea that the order of operations matters; socks before
shoes is very different than shoes before socks. Noncommutativity played a
fundamental role in the foundation of quantum mechanics, leading to the
development of the branch of mathematics known as functional analysis. From its
origins in physics, functional analysis has gained a life of its own and has
found exciting applications in areas such as quantum information theory and
quantum computing as well as control and systems theory. More recently,
questions (about semi-definite programming and linear matrix inequalities)
arising in the engineering literature have led to the development of a new
subfield of functional analysis known as noncommutative function theory. This
exciting new subfield sits at the intersection of noncommutative algebra,
functional analysis, and operator theory, and it enjoys a wide variety of
applications. Rather than deal with completely abstract mathematical objects,
noncommutative function theory employs the use of concrete structures known as
matrices, which are one of the fundamental noncommutative objects used in
science, engineering and industry. This project aims to deepen the understanding
of noncommutative function theory and consequently augment its connections to
related mathematical fields. It will assist in the professional development of
early researches and provide an up-to-date list of both solved and unsolved
problems in the field of noncommutative function theory.               One of
the main goals of this project is to increase the interplay between
noncommutative function theory, noncommutative algebra, and operator theory.
Recently, theorems and advances have been made in noncommutative algebra through
techniques in noncommutative function theory, complex analysis, and operator
theory. Objects of interest will be noncommutative rational functions and how
their evaluations on matrices and operators reveals algebraic information about
the functions and the skew field they generate; there is a strong connection
between the injectivity domains of noncommutative rational mappings, the
invertibility sets of their Jacobian matrices, and whether the noncommutative
rational mapping induces an automorphism of the free skew field. On the other
hand, results from noncommutative algebra (such as the realization of a
noncommutative rational function) will be used to deepen the understanding of
topics in mathematical analysis. Employment of novel ideas from noncommutative
algebra and noncommutative function theory will provide new insights into the
study of optimal polynomial approximants and related areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
