
* 2236491
* CAREER: Elliptic and Parabolic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2023,01/26/2023
* Blair Davey,MT,Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2028
* USD 209,505.00

Partial differential equations (PDE) are mathematical tools that are used to
model natural phenomena like electromagnetism, astronomy, and fluid dynamics,
for example. This project is concerned with understanding how the solutions to
such equations behave. The Laplace equation is the prototypical elliptic PDE,
and it is used to model steady-state homogeneous systems. This equation is
studied in the fields of PDE, complex analysis, harmonic analysis, geometry, and
engineering; and therefore, the behavior of its solutions (known as harmonic
functions) is very well-understood. However, many questions remain regarding the
behavior of solutions to more complicated equations like those that model
quantum behavior, systems with microscopic structure, and systems that are
changing in time. The investigator?s knowledge of harmonic functions will be
used to answer these questions, thereby advancing knowledge in the areas of
elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations. Motivated by the goal of
increasing participation from underrepresented groups, as well as addressing
common issues with retention in academia, this project integrates an inclusive
workshop in PDE and harmonic analysis. The target workshop audience will include
junior mathematicians who are at difficult transitional stages in their careers,
especially those from historically underrepresented groups. Speakers will be
chosen to reflect the demographics of the student participants and the potential
for greater diversity in our discipline.

The Laplace equation is a PDE that models steady-state phenomena in a truly
uniform environment. Since the world that we live in is not an isotropic vacuum,
the mathematical equations that govern many natural phenomena are often more
complicated than Laplace?s equation. For example, the Schrodinger equation
describes the behavior of quantum-mechanical waves, while its generalizations
describe even more complex settings. As such, there is a need to understand the
properties of solutions to general elliptic PDEs. One component of this research
project revolves around using known properties of harmonic functions to gain a
better understanding of solutions to elliptic equations. Specifically, the
investigator will explore how the presence of variable coefficients and lower-
order terms affects the behavior of solutions to elliptic equations. This line
of inquiry will be addressed through the perspectives of unique continuation and
homogenization theory. Given that parabolic equations like the heat equation
model the evolution of systems that are changing in time, it is also important
to understand how the solutions to such PDE behave. Therefore, in another
direction, the investigator will use elliptic theory to tackle problems related
to parabolic PDE. More specifically, the investigator will construct a framework
for using elliptic theory in high-dimensional settings to understand the
properties of solutions to parabolic equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
