
* 2242871
* Translational Tilings and Orthogonal Systems of Exponentials
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,09/13/2022
* Rachel Greenfeld,NJ,Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2025
* USD 117,056.00

This project concerns the structure of two important and closely related
mathematical objects: translational tilings and orthogonal systems. A
translational tiling is a covering of a space using translated copies of certain
building blocks, called the ?tiles?, without overlaps. The focus of this project
is on the major question in the area: which are the possible ways that a space
can be tiled. The structure of tilings has been extensively studied over the
years by many mathematicians; among the most famous and significant contributors
are the mathematical physicist Roger Penrose and the amateur mathematicians
Robert Ammann and Maurits Cornelis Escher. This mathematical study has found
many important applications to other sciences. In particular, it led to one of
the most significant breakthroughs in physical science: the discovery of natural
quasicrystals, physical solids whose atoms? arrangement is not periodic. Since
aperiodic tilings (i.e., pavings of space which cannot be ?determined? by how
they look in an arbitrarily large but bounded part of the space) serve as the
mathematical models of quasicrystals, the discovery of those aperiodic forms in
nature by Dan Shechtman (for which he won the Nobel prize), was based on the
mathematical discovery of aperiodic tilings. Orthogonal systems are of
importance to several branches of mathematics, including number theory,
algebraic geometry and analysis. One of their advantageous properties is that
they can facilitate an amenable decomposition of a function (e.g., describing
light or sound waves) into more manageable pieces with a high level of mutual
independence. Studying these pieces separately can yield insight into the
physical properties of a system such as dominant frequencies. The research
carried out (in conjunction with collaborators) consists of revealing
connections to a range of different areas of mathematics and building on past
results in those areas, as well as developing novel methods and techniques.

The first part of this project will be devoted to the study of the structure of
translational tilings. The main goal is solving the well-known periodic tiling
conjecture, which asserts that any bounded measurable tile of the Euclidean
space must admit at least one periodic tiling. This conjecture is known to hold
for tilings of the real line, and there are some partial results towards it in
higher dimensions. However, the periodic tiling conjecture has not been settled
yet in dimensions two and higher. Over time it has become apparent that in many
respects translational tiles ?behave like? domains whose Hilbert space (i.e.,
the space of quadratically integrable functions that are supported on the
domain) admits an orthogonal basis of exponential functions. Thus, a second area
of focus is on the structure of frequency sets of orthogonal systems of
exponentials in two different settings: in time-frequency spaces (Gabor bases)
and in Hilbert spaces of certain domains. This part of the project aims to find
new approaches to the latter mentioned studies of orthogonal systems, building
new bridges between number theory, algebraic geometry and Fourier analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
