
* 2243205
* CAREER: Singularities in fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,09/14/2022
* Tristan Buckmaster,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2027
* USD 157,597.00

Innumerable hydrodynamical phenomena are described in terms of singularities, of
which perhaps the most well-known is the formation of shock waves resulting from
a disturbance in a medium such as air or water moving faster than the local
speed of sound. The goal of this project is to create a broad program for both
research and pedagogical activities centered around the study of singularities
in fluids. The award will provide research opportunities and training for
postdoctoral scholars and will leverage its research elements to design projects
suitable for undergraduate students. The project will also aim at producing a
foundational graduate textbook on shock waves in compressible fluids.

The research component is split into three projects: formation and development
of shock waves, radial implosions from smooth initial data, and self-similar
blow-up via neural networks. Building on previous work of the PI and his
collaborators, the aim of the first project will be to provide the first full
description of shock wave formation and development for the multi-dimensional
compressible Euler equations. The second project involves further developing
prior work on self-similar imploding solutions for isentropic compressible flows
to investigate the possibility of new types of singularities. The third project
involves utilizing physically informed neural networks to search for new forms
of singularities in fluid, whose existence will be made rigorous through the aid
of computer assisted proofs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
