
* 9302513
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations in Complex Analysis
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1993,02/15/1995
* Steven Bell,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/1996
* USD 174,000.00

This project focuses on the interaction between studies of partial differential
equations and the theory of several complex variables. The history of these
interactions has been long and fruitful, with each subject providing valuable
information to the other. The present work builds on a recent formulation of a
unique continuation property for the inhomogeneous Cauchy-Riemann equations in
several variables that will yield information about boundary behavior of
holomorphic mappings between domains in complex space. Efforts will be made to
verify the property in the most important categories of domains. Work will also
be done using recent results about the regularity of the Cauchy-Riemann
equations combined with geometric arguments to prove regularity theorems for the
Bergman projection. Such results also have applications to mappings problems in
several complex variables. A program to express the classical solutions to the
Dirichlet and Neumann problems for the laplace operator on domains in the plane
in terms of the Szego projection and kernel has just been completed. These
results give rise to new and practical methods for numerically computing
solutions to classical problems in partial differential equations and conformal
mapping which are of interest in the applied sciences. Work will continue
exploring applications of the Szego projection to related problems. Students on
the project will be used to test the efficiency of the resulting numerical
methods. The theory of several complex variables plays a central role in the
analysis of linear partial differential equations. It provides an excellent
environment in which tools from geometry, analysis and functional analysis can
be brought to bear on equations which relate to modeling of the physical world.
