
* 9305852
* Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Groups, Quasiconformal Mappings, and Function Theoretic Properties
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1993,02/15/1995
* Frederick Gehring,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 189,123.00

9305852 Gehring This project is concerned with mathematical research on
geometric problems associated with classical complex analysis and its more
modern derivatives of quasiconformal mapping and Mobius groups in two and higher
dimensions. The work on groups focuses on questions related to the geometry of
discrete two generator groups with an elliptic generator. It is possible to
study the groups through triples of complex numbers derived from the traces of
the generators. But not all triples come from two-generator groups and efforts
to determine description of the sets which determine discrete groups or the sets
arising from elliptic generators of order greater than three will be undertaken.
Applications of this work are made to the study of three- dimensional complete
hyperbolic orbifolds. In particular substantial improvements in known lower
bounds for the volume of these orbifolds has been found. The primary goal of
this project is to show that the volume of every hyperbolic orbifold is the same
as those for which the corresponding group contains an elliptic element of order
greater than three. This value is approximately .03905... Work in quasiconformal
mapping continues on the basic issue of determining when a domain in dimension
greater than two is quaiconformally equivalent to the unit ball of the same
dimension. Sufficient conditions are known through Schoenflies type theorems. If
necessary conditions are found, they will probably have to be formulated in
certain types of k- connectivity of the domains. Finally, students supported by
this award will consider how classical function theory relations discovered by
Hardy and Littlewood carry over to bounded quasidisks. Studies in geometric
function theory focus on how domains are mapped into one another by smooth
functions on which various distortion restrictions are placed. Questions of
which domains can be transformed into one another arise naturally and this point
of view automati cally leads to group theoretic questions of fundamental
consequence. ***
