
* 9307655
* Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Frame Decompositions
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1993,04/03/1995
* John Gilbert,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1996
* USD 69,000.00

9307655 Gilbert This project will develop adaptive tools for decomposing
function spaces that extend methods from Fourier analysis and wavelet theory.
Specific functions are to be analyzed through the selection of a particular
wavelet well-adapted to the function. Criteria for choosing the matched wavelet
come from the specific application which creates the function. Families of
analyzing wavelets will be designed having specific smoothness and decay
properties needed for establishing such optimization criteria. Frame
decompositions will also be studied in vector-valued settings in relation to
extensions of the affine group and corresponding representation theory. This
work will draw on a theory, developed recently which relates the generalized
Cauchy- Riemann systems to unitarizable representations of groups containing the
affine group. A particularly relevant example, previously studied by Torresani,
is the semidirect product of the affine group with the Heisenberg group.
Corresponding frame decompositions will incorporate aspects of both the short-
time Fourier transform and wavelet expansions. Mathematical research focusing on
wavelets and frame decompositions has its roots in classical harmonic analysis
but derives its recent impetus from studies in signal processing. Here, the
wavelet concept has proved remarkably effective in analyzing signals composed of
both stationary and transient features. Traditional Fourier methods have not
been effective tools in these studies. Applications to research on acoustics,
data compression and partial differential equations has already proven the worth
of the newly developing ideas. ***
