
* 9311692
* Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1993,02/12/1996
* Robert Fefferman,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1996
* USD 123,808.00

Fefferman 9311692 This project will focus on several ongoing research themes in
harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. In particular work will
continue on the extension of the theory of singular integrals on product spaces.
Here the objective is to analyze the properties of operators which commute with
various groups of dilations of Euclidean space. So far, a complete theory is
available only for the classical dilations and product dilations. The theory
evolving is quite different from the Calderon-Zygmund theory. Work will also
continue on problems from elliptic equations with non-smooth coefficients. In
particular, the solvability of the Dirichlet problem with Lp coefficients will
be treated. An important goal in this research is to determine the extent that
one can perturb coefficients of the equation and still guarantee that the
solutions still remain in the same Lebesgue space. In the same spirit, elliptic
operators in nondivergence form with coefficients which are only assumed to be
measurable will be studied. The approach used will be that of approximating
solutions by solutions to equations with smooth coefficients and determine
whether or not the process leads to unique limits regardless of the smoothing of
the original operator. *** Partial differential operators form a basis for
studying the generic forms of partial differential equations. The analysis of
these operators through deep abstract methods leads to surprisingly complete
information about related classes of equations. Present research concentrates on
operators in which smoothness assumptions are limited to the bare essentials. In
this way, results reflect a more realistic picture of the physical world which
the differential equations seek to represent.
