
* 9401398
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Complex Analysis and Complex Dynamics
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1994,03/19/1996
* Eric Bedford,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 109,250.00

9401398 Bedford This award supports mathematical research on problems arising in
the theory of several complex variables. The work will be carried out in three
directions. In the first, work will be done on applications of the methods of
complex analysis to the dynamics of polynomial mappings for two complex
variables. The mappings are assumed to be univalent. Central to this study will
be the use of pluri-potential theory analogous to the impressive use of
potential theory in the study of one-dimensional dynamics. In the second
direction, work will continue on the classification of domains with noncompact
automorphism groups. Since it is trivial to construct nonsmooth domains with
such automorphism groups, attention will be restricted to domains with smooth
boundaries. The first two domains addressed will be those which are convex and
those with real analytic boundaries. In the third direction, the use of Levi
flat surfaces will be studied in connection with the corona theorem for bounded
analytic functions. A central goal of the work is the generalization of Wolff's
d-bar approach to the corona problem on simply connected domains to multiply
connected domains and Riemann surfaces. Several complex variables arose at the
beginning of the century as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of one
complex variable. It became clear early on that the theory differed widely from
it predecessor. The underlying geometry was far more difficult to grasp and the
function theory had far more affinity with partial differential operators of
first order. It thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep characteristics of
differential geometry and differential equations. Many of the fundamental
structures were defined in the last three decades. Current studies still
concentrate on understanding these basic mathematical forms. ***
