
* 9404379
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Applied Mathematics and the Degenerate Evolution Equations
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1994,02/14/1996
* Emmanuele DiBenedetto,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 132,000.00

9404379 DiBenedetto This award supports applied mathematics research on problems
modeled by certain degenerate and singular evolution equations. In particular,
intrinsic Harnack-type estimates, Holder continuity and asymptotic behavior of
solutions in the time and space variables will be developed. For systems of
equations, work will be done analyzing the boundary behavior of solutions. The
new techniques generated by these studies permit the mathematical treatment of a
class of applied and industrial problems. These include understanding film
rupture in the coating of metals (existence of solutions, rupture and behavior
for large values of the variables), identification of cracks in three-
dimensional bodies (stability estimates for elliptic ill-posed problems) the
thermistor problem and problems in the flow of immiscible fluids in a porous
material as the degeneracies approach the saturation point. Further work will
concentrate on problems of conduction/convection with change of phase for fluids
obeying either the Navier-Stokes system or Darcy's law. These involve an
estimation of the Hausdorff dimension of the possible singularities of the
temperature. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical
modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much
to create the equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative
information about the solutions. This may include answers to questions about
uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods
for approximation of solutions and estimates onthe accuracy of these
approximations. ***
