
* 9404437
* Mathematical Sciences: Ergodic Phenomena in Differential Dynamics
* DMS,MODERN ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1994,03/22/1996
* Yakov Sinai,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1997
* USD 133,320.00

9404437 Sinai The proposed research will concern three different topics. The
first is the study of ergodic like properties of standard-like maps. The main
difficulty is due to the fact that in these cases, stable and unstable
foliations are never transversal to each other. The new ideas and methods are
taken from the theory of hyperbolic billiards. In the second topic, we shall
study quasi-linear equations with random initial data and random coefficients.
These equations appear in some cosmological problems. The analysis of
statistical properties lead to new very interesting problems in probability
theory. The third topic deals with some mathematical problems in the theory of
quantum chaos. This is a new direction in mathematical physics which can be very
promising. In general, we shall deal with several basic problems in the theory
of chaos. The first one can be considered the most important open problem in
Hamiltonian dynamics and concerns the appearance of chaotic behavior from pure
deterministic laws of motion. The second one deals with equations of continuous
media where the randomness is incorporated through initial data. It has
important applications in cosmology. The last one concerns a new and difficult
topic called quantum chaos and is of big interest for physics and mathematics.
***
