
* 9500532
* Mathematical Sciences: Common Zeros of Polynomials in Several Variables and Cubature Formulae
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/1995,06/07/1995
* Yuan Xu,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9500532 Xu The purpose of this research project is to study the common zeros of
polynomials in several variables in connection with the numerical approximation
to integrals in several variables. Compared to the case of one variable, zeros
of polynomials in several variables and high dimensional quadrature formulae are
much more difficult and the results have been scattered. Recently the a new
approach was used to study the topic and showed that positive high dimensional
quadrature formulae can be characterized through the existence of real common
zeros of certain set of quasi-orthogonal polynomials; necessary and sufficient
conditions for the existence of such zeros were also obtained, which are given
in terms of certain nonlinear matrix equations. The project will involve the
continuation of this study and will use this approach to conduct a systematic
study of this topic. It is very likely that the approach will enable one to
tackle several fundamental questions, such as the connection to moment problems
in several variables which may lead to an analytic characterization of common
zeros, structure of minimal and ``near'' minimal cubature formulae, and
construction of new efficient numerical integration formulae. The goal is to
establish a unified theory for high dimensional numerical integration formulae
based on the common zeros of quasi-orthogonal polynomials. The outcome of the
project will help in understanding the structure of high dimensional numerical
integration formulae and the structure of the common zeros of polynomials. The
information will be very useful in finding new formulae for practical evaluation
of high dimensional integrals, which is one of the essential questions in
numerical analysis and is often taken as a test problem in high speed computing;
it can also be very useful in constructing formulae with special properties, for
example, the equal-weight formulae on spheres, which have applications in coding
theory. The project is also motivated by the potential a pplications of the
outcome in other areas of numerical mathematics, such as orthogonal polynomials
in several variables and interpolation by polynomials which are basic tools for
data fitting and surface reconstruction.
