
* 9500994
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Diffusion Equations and Related Elliptic Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/1995,06/07/1995
* Panagiota Daskalopoulos,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT This project involves the study of certain Nonlinear Diffusion
Equations and related Singular Elliptic and Linear Degenerate Parabolic
problems. More precisely, the proposed work can be divided into the following
projects: 1. Singular Parabolic equations of Fast and Super-Fast diffusion (in
collaboration with M. Del Pino). 2. Semilinear Elliptic equations with Singular
behavior (in collaboration with M. Del Pino). 3. Uniqueness of signed solutions
to the Porous Medium equation - A continuity result for certain Degenerate
Linear Parabolic equations (in collaboration with C. Kenig). The equations
proposed have both physical and theoretical significance. For example, from the
physical point of view, they arise as models for the dynamics of thin liquid
films and also as models for the limiting density distribution in the kinetics
of two gases obeying Boltzmann equation. Also, interest in such equations has
long existed in other fields such as metallurgy and polymer science. From the
mathematical point of view, they exhibit a qualitative behavior that has
remarkable features, different than in previously studied cases. Their
investigation leads to the development of new techniques of mathematical
analysis. Another attractive feature of the proposed problems is their
connection to Differential Geometry, as they arise in the so called Ricci Flow,
which has recently gained remarkable attention.
