
* 9500717
* Mathematical Sciences: Multiple Scales for Interacting Particle Systems: Mesoscopic and Macroscopic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/1995,05/22/1995
* Markos Katsoulakis,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

PARAGRAPH 1 In the context of Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, the
evolution of physical systems is modelled at a microscopic level by Interacting
Particle Systems. Such processes involve a large number of components
(particles) with either deterministic or stochastic dynamics, governed by local
laws of interaction. It appears that large groups of particles, which in
principle evolve in an unorderly manner, tend to organize themselves in a
coherent pattern at some larger space or time scale. In particular, these
rescaled, possibly stochastic, microscopic models are expected to give rise to
deterministic Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations describing the evolution
of macroscopic quantities. One of the problems addressed here, is the rigorous
derivation of nonlinear partial differential equations from interacting particle
systems . Proceeding a step further, one would hope that for finer scales of the
particle systems, the local random fluctuations are preserved in the macroscopic
equation, while microscopic details still remain hidden. In this framework, we
propose to study (i) Interacting Particle Systems with long range interactions
and weakly propagating interfaces, and (ii) Stochastic discrete velocity models
and fluid dynamics systems of equations. We are particularly interested in
understanding the convergence of particle systems to weak solutions of the
macroscopic equations, past the formation of shocks for the fluids equations and
past all possible geometric singularities of the propagating interfaces. The
proposed techniques are drawn from Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, as
well as, Probability Theory and Stochastic Processes. A crucial part in the
analysis of the interacting particle systems, lies in the interplay of the
different space-time rescaling regimes present, each one with its own limiting
deterministic partial differential equation. PARAGRAPH 2 This research project
is concerned with the mathematical analysis of microscopic and macroscopic
models of non-equilibrium phenomena arising in material science, biology and
fluid mechanics. The first part of the proposal is concerned with the derivation
of transport properties for materials undergoing phase transitions (for example
alloys changing crystallographic structure). Similar techniques will hopefully
prove useful in the prediction of nonequilibrium behavior in biological
processes. The mathematical tools employed here, are expected to provide new
detailed quantitative information about our physical systems, going one step
beyond phenomenology. In the second part of the project, we study the
convergence of discrete random models, to gas and fluid dynamics equations. In
addition to the issues proposed in the first part, here we hope that such
discrete models may yield robust algorithms for the numerical computation of gas
dynamics flow, particularly in the presence of shock waves.
