
* 9531526
* Mathematical Sciences: Oscillation Inequalities, Almost Everywhere Convergence, and Related Questions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/1996,05/16/1996
* Roger Jones,IL,DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 42,000.00

ABSTRACT Jones This proposal involves the continued study of square functions
and other measures of the oscillation associated with a sequence of averaging
operators in ergodic theory. Oscillation inequalities have already played a key
role in the theory of a.e. convergence problems arising in connection with the
pointwise ergodic theorem. In particular, oscillation operators give new
information about upcrossing and jump inequalities. We hope to obtain new
results in the case of a single transformation, and to extend several results to
the multi-parameter case. We also continue the search for conditions on
subsequences, both in the single and in the multiparameter case, which will
imply a.e. convergence of the associated averages. The techniques used to study
the questions in the proposal will often be from harmonic analysis, including
Calderon-Zygmund methods and Littlewood-Paley theory. In addition, certain ideas
from probability, especially martingale theory, can be expected to play a key
role. Classical ergodic theory is the study of the long term behavior of
dynamical systems. For example, we might be interested in the distribution of a
pollutant in a water supply, and how the distribution of that pollutant changes
over time. The ergodic theorem can be viewed as a generalization of the strong
law of large numbers. A special case of the strong law of large numbers occurs
if we consider the sequence of heads and tails observed if we toss a fair coin.
In such a case we have independent trials, and we measure the oscillation of the
sequence of averages by looking at the variance. A measure of oscillation is
important because it provides a way of estimating how close a particular average
is to the true (and in experimental situations, unknown) mean. In public opinion
polls this measure of how close we are is usually referred to as the margin of
error. In the more general setting, considered in this proposal, the trials are
not independent. For example, the distribution o f a pollutant at one time will
certainly play a role in determining the distribution a short time later. This
is in contrast to the case of tossing a fair coin, where the fact that we saw
heads on a certain toss gives us no information about whether or not we will see
a head on the next toss. This proposal involves the study of the oscillation of
ergodic averages, and measures of such things as how often the average values
rise above some critical threshold. In experimental situations, because of
equipment failure, or human error, we often find that some of the expected data
is missing. In earlier work it has been shown that in some cases this leads to
very misleading results, and in other cases we can still recover the correct
result. The work in this area is very incomplete. We hope to be able to further
classify the cases in which an experiment can still be salvaged, despite missing
experimental data. In these cases, a measure of the oscillation, or margin of
error, is especially critical.
