
* 9600080
* Mathematical Sciences: Macroscopic Structures in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/1996,04/19/1996
* Robert Jerrard,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/1999
* USD 67,317.00

Abstract Jerrard Jerrard will work on three classes of problems. Two of these
grow out of joint work carried out by Jerrard in collaboration with H.M Soner.
Jerrad and Soner examined the dynamics of topological defects in solutions of
Ginzburg-Landau (GL) systems taking values in the plane. They showed that, under
an appropriate scaling limit and for appropriate initial data, the energy
density of solutions concentrates around codimension 2 manifolds, and they
characterized the evolution of these manifolds. In planar domains, these
singular manifolds are simply singular points which evolve via a system of
ordinary differential equations; in higher dimensional domains, one obtains in
the limit manifolds which evolve via codimension 2 mean curvature flow. Jerrard
now proposes to study a number of questions about dynamics of point defects of
solutions of evolution equations of GL type, related to his earlier work. In
particular, he wants to look at dynamics of point defects in GL Schroedinger
equations and in generalized GL systems in higher dimensions. Secondly, he plans
to look at problems concerning the evolution of line defects or, more generally,
singular manifolds of dimension greater than 1 and codimension at least 2. These
would include questions about evolution of line defects in GL Schroedinger
equations. A third, completely different class of problems has to do with
developing a framework within which one can make sense of level set equations in
which certain standard monotonicity assumptions on the coefficients are
violated. Heuristically, such an equation would specify that every level set
evolves by some geometric rule, but that different level sets evolve by
different rules. Such equations are of mixed parabolic/hyperbolic type. A notion
of weak solution would need to combine viscosity solution techniques with
entropy conditions, and would probably also require some other ingredients. The
problems described above are drawn from two areas: physics of superconductors
and sup erfluids, and image progessing. Ginzburg-Landau systems are a widely-
used mathematical model for certain kinds of superconductors and superfluids,
and they seem to agree quite well with experiment. Some classes of
superconducting materials, including many high temperature superconductors,
exhibit small islands of normal, nonsuperconducting behavior within a larger
superconducting matrix. These islands are known as vortices, and they can have a
negative impact on the performance of superconductors. A major focus of this
propsal is to attempt to understand, from a mathematical viewpoint, the behavior
of these Ginzburg-Landau vortices. Similar vortices are seen in superfluids,
such as liquid helium. Finally, a major problem in image processing is to
eliminate "meaningless" noise, while retaining contrasts that carry some
significant information. Many image processing schemes amount to finding a
solution of some differential equation, which takes a given image as the input
and produces the processed image as a solution. In this framework, it is useful
to try to have a well-developed mathematical theory for equations which have the
effect of smoothing out small irregularities in the given image, while
sharpening major contrasts. This is the other main area in which Jerrard
proposes to work.
