
* 9616920
* Mathematical Sciences: Continuous Complexity and Dynamical Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/1997,08/21/1997
* Michael Shub,NY,IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/2001
* USD 61,000.00

Shub 9616920 The investigator continues studies of the complexity theory of
continuous problems and dynamical systems. The main issues are: 1) the
construction of a theory of computation and complexity which speaks to
scientific computation and numerical analysis, and 2) the extent of validity of
statistical robustness as a property of dynamical systems, especially chaotic
dynamical systems. The research involved is of interest to a large class of
mathematicians and has implications for the relations between abstract
mathematics and computer science on the one hand and abstract mathematics and
physics and engineering on the other. Complexity theory develops bounds on how
much work a method requires to produce the solution to a typical problem in a
class of problems. Common and important examples include methods to find the
solutions of a system of linear or nonlinear equations. Part of the project
indeed at aims at just this issue. Equation solving is at the heart of much of
mathematics and, together with its computational aspects, is a main way that
mathematics is used by engineering, physics, economics, and many other
disciplines. The other part of the project studies questions about much alike
certain kinds of chaotic systems may be. Predicting the specific behavior of a
chaotic system is difficult, because small errors in any measurement of the
system are amplified. But chaotic systems may be relatively nice in a
statistical sense; if so, then sets of samples measurements may provide useful
information about the system's behavior even though any single measurement is
error-prone. The investigator studies these properties in dynamical systems and
particularly in chaotic systems. There are important implications for the
statistical analysis of chaotic systems --- hence practical consequences for
weather and climate studies, agriculture, and engineering.
