
* 9622816
* Special Functions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1996,07/19/1996
* Richard Askey,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 45,904.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS- 9622816 PI: Askey The 3-j and 6-j symbols from angular
momentum theory can be transformed into orthogonal polynomials. When this is
done, new orthogonality conditions arise, with an absolutely continuous measure
replacing the discrete one. The 9-j symbols are equivalent to orthogonal
polynomials in two variables, but so far only the discrete orthogonality
relation is known. It is time to look seriously at these functions, to try to
find a double rather than a triple series representation for them, and then to
find the missing absolutely continuous orthogonality relation. The corresponding
work for q-9-j symbols will also be studied. In addition to this work and other
work on one variable hypergeometric and basic hypergeometric series, some
differential equations with 4 regular singular points will be studied. Lars
Onsager's Ph.D. thesis from 1934 contained some interesting results for
differential equations which are limits of these equations. This thesis will
appear in his "Collected Papers" later this year. There are a number of
interesting problems left open, including some on orthogonal polynomials that
Askey will study. The interaction between mathematics and physics can lead to
new insights in both areas. This has occurred in the quantum theory of angular
momentum and in coding theory. In both fields, certain functions arose which
turned out to be identical. These extended classical functions were studied
extensively in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The most general of
these functions has recently arisen in the study of knots. The physics problems
have been partly extended to several variables, but many open problems have not
yet been solved. In the one variable setting, a very important aspect of these
function was only found when some mathematicians studied them, while other ways
of looking at them were discovered by physicists. Askey will be looking at these
problems as a mathematician, and expects that this point of view wil l yield new
information of use in both mathematics and physics.
