
* 9622911
* Mathematical Sciences: Projects in Operator Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1996,06/03/1998
* Florin Radulescu,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 87,500.00

9622911 Florin Radulescu The aim of this proposal is the investigation of a
range of problems in the structure theory of von Neumann algebras. The important
objects in this research are the harmonic analysis of the von Neumann algebras
arising in connection with discrete groups and in deformation quantization
theory. The main stream is to determine the structure of the von Neumann
algebras that reflect the properties of (quantum) non commutative probability
and to relate this structure with the representation theory of Lie groups and
their discrete subgroups. The recent advances by Voiculescu in noncommutative
probability theory have shown that the asymptotic behavior of random matrices is
best represented by elements in the von Neumann algebras associated with free
groups, whose spectral distribution is the Wigner semicircular law. In this
research an important part is played by the problem of characterizing the
factors of discrete groups by computing the invariants, defined by Murray and
von Neumann, related to the fundamental groups of such an algebra. This is also
based on some analytical aspects of number theory and the von Neumann algebras
of discrete groups. The connection is realized by using a new representation for
the algebra of the modular group and its subgroups. This representation is
obtained by the identification of Toeplitz operators whose symbols are
(arithmetic) automorphic forms with intertwining operators between different
representations of the modular groups (or its congruence subgroups). In this
context, the arithmetic Hecke operators turn out to be completely positive maps
for which the associated subfactors (via Connes's correspondence theory) have
unexpected higher relative commutant invariants. Recently, in the last twenty
five years, the theory of operator algebras and in particular its sub-theory,
concerning the von Neumann algebras, has been proven to appear in almost any
other branch of mathematics. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is
that (as it was certainly first hinted by von Neumann) the operator algebras are
concerned with the (hidden) symmetries of nature and in particular the
symmetries and motion in the space-time as it was first envisaged by quantum
physicists. The von Neumann algebras that are studied in this project have
proven to be intimately related to some models for the atoms that were first
studied by Wigner. One of the ideas in Wigner's approach was that a possible way
to study those models, in view of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, is
realized by the random matrices. A surprising discovery in the last five years
was that this amounts to the study of certain properties of the algebras
described above. The random matrices in themselves have numerous other
applications in other branches of science like prediction theory or atmospheric
science, and there is acknowledged hope that the better our understanding is on
random matrices and the algebras associated with them-the better will be our
understanding on the above natural phenomena.
