
* 9622937
* Asymptotics, Existence, Symmetry and Uniqueness in NonlinearPartial Differental Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1996,08/01/1996
* Henghui Zou,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 62,669.00

Abstract Zou This proposal is concerned with problems of existence, qualitative
properties (e.g., asymptotics, symmetry, etc.) and uniqueness of solutions for
some model nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations as well as systems. More
specifically, efforts will be devoted to investigations of the asymptotic
behavior and symmetry of positive solutions for the Lane - Emden equation and
general nonlinear elliptic equations and systems, the existence and non-
existence for positive solutions of the Lane - Emden system, the scalar field
system and a semilinear Hamiltonian system, the asymptotics of solutions of
Ginzburg-Landau equations, the existence and regularity of solutions to a
thermistor problem and the uniqueness of positive solutions of semilinear
elliptic equations with emphasis on the impact of the geometry of the domain.
Systematic methods and approaches for general problems will be developed by
studying these model equations. Tools for this project include a variational
approach, the moving plane method, the topological fixed point theory and degree
theory, and, asymptotic and a priori estimates are essential. Partial
differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the physical
world. Our model problems in this proposal arise from the study of various
nonlinear phenomena, including pattern formation and population evolution
(mathematical biology), the stellar structure in astrophysics and
superconductivity (physics), the thermistor problem (industrial mathematics) and
the Yamaba problem (differential geometry). It is, in studying classical partial
differential equations, fundamental and essential to provide qualitative and
quantitative information about the solutions, which lies in the core of
mathematical analysis. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness,
smoothness, shape and asymptotic behavior of solutions. The proposed
investigations in this proposal are to provide such studies for our model
problems. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.
