
* 9622795
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1996,01/28/1998
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/1999
* USD 189,231.00

Abstract Sverak 9622795 Sverak's will study a variety of questions from system
of non-linear partial differential equations. These include: (1) The study of
general multiple variational integrals for vector valued functions, their Euler-
Lagrange equations, the closely related Morrey's quasi-convexity condition and
other notions of ellipticity, together with certain natural objects (semi-convex
hulls) associated with these ellipticity conditions. These investigation should
help to understand global properties of solutions of a number of non-linear
systems. (2) The study of Liouville-type theorems for the three-dimensional
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations and their applications to the study of
(potential) singularities of solutions of these equations. The motivation for
the study of variational integrals comes from the very general and extremely
important classical principle that many equations arising in engineering,
physics, and also pure mathematics can be directly linked to minimization of
(suitably defined) energy. For example, the basic equations describing
deformations of materials under stress are very closely related to this
principle. Although our mathematical understanding of minimization is quite good
in many important cases, there are also many situations of considerable
practical importance where our understanding is rather poor. The above mentioned
equations for deformations of materials give a good example of such situation
(except for the case when the stress in the material is relatively small). I
expect that the study of the first circle of problems proposed above will shed
some light on open questions surrounding energy minimization. It turns out that
results related to these questions can also help to elucidate other mathematical
problems which at first do not seem to be directly related to energy
minimization (such as non-linear oscillations). However, a closer analysis shows
that there are some unexpected connections. The understanding of mathematic al
problems surrounding energy minimization is also quite important from the
practical point of view: if we simulate minimization on a computer, then non-
trivial mathematical facts we know can potentially save us a considerable amount
of computations we need to do. In fact, in many cases a good theoretical
analysis can enable one to attack problems which at first seem out of reach of
even the fastest computers. One can put forward similar arguments to explain the
motivation behind the second circle of problems proposed above. In fact, in this
case the need for good mathematical analysis is perhaps even more apparent: it
is well known that in many cases of great practical importance, there is
simplyno known method to reliably calculate fluid flows (describedby the Navier-
Stokes equations), even with the help of the fastest computers. I hope that the
proposed investigations will increase our understanding of the behavior of
solutions of these equations.
