
* 9622991
* Mathematical Sciences: Aegean Conference in Operator Algebras and Application; August 17-27, 1996; Athens, Greece
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1996,03/20/1996
* Paul Muhly,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9622991 MUHLY This is a request for travel support for junior investigators and
graduate students to attend the conference, Aegean Conference in Operator
Algebras and Applications, that is scheduled for the period, August 17, 1996, to
August 27, 1996, at the University of the Aegean. With the advent of the theory
of operator spaces, also known as "quantized functional analysis", general, not-
necessarily-self-adjoint, operator algebras have achieved an ontological status
comparable to that held by the self-adjoint operator algebras. Although the non-
self-adjoint theory is not yet as well developed, from certain perspectives, the
explosion of results that has taken place in the last six years, or so, deserves
to be exposed in a fashion that will allow the uninitiated, particularly younger
scholars, easy access to the basics of the subject from the current perspective.
The objective of the conference is to provide a series of short courses, that
will be published, designed to provide an overview of the theory of non-self-
adjoint operator algebras and its relation to other areas of operator algebra
and modern analysis. The themes to be stressed are: non-self-adjoint operator
algebras, general theory; concrete operator algebras, particularly reflexive
algebras; multivariable operator theory and representations of function
algebras; metric variations on themes from algebra - Hilbert and operator
modules; operator spaces and their applications to Banach space theory and
harmonic analysis; operator algebraic approaches to quantum groups; non-self-
adjoint operator algebras and wavelets. The theory of non-self-adjoint operator
algebras plays a central role in the mathematical underpinnings of a lot of
mathematics applied to areas of national need. For example, in the area of
signal processing, which is used to transmit data and images involved in all
fields of science - from space observatories to tomographs of the brain -
fundamental constructs, such as the so-calle d Toeplitz matrices and wavelet
transforms, obtain their deepest significance and are most clearly revealed when
viewed from the perspective of operator algebra. Operator algebra lays bare
their basic algebraic properties (how they are manipulated in practice) and
metric properties as well (how they are measured). In oil exploration, which
involves wavelets and signal processing in a somewhat different fashion,
operator algebraic methods, known as commutant lifting play a fundamental role.
Also, in control theory, particularly in the design of aircraft and noise
abaters, the mathematics involved is to a large extent operator algebra. The
breakthrough that took place about six years ago, and alluded to above, enables
the practitioner of this field to bring to bare effectively the full power of
modern algebra to tackle the most basic and fundamental structural questions.
The advances in this field have been very exciting and more are to come. But it
is time collect a summary of what is known, including bibliographies, so that
new people can enter this exciting, emerging field of research.
