
* 9622734
* Mathematical Sciences: The Monge Problem and the Calculus of Variations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1996,07/21/1999
* Wilfrid Gangbo,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 89,227.00

Abstract Gangbo 9622734 In 1781 G. Monge formulated a question which occurs
naturally in economics and engineering: Given two equal masses at two locations
X and Y, find the "best strategy" to move the mass from the first location to
second one, where optimality is measured against a cost function. Monge
conjectured that there exists a best strategy, i.e. the problem admits a
minimizer and that there exists a scalar potential function u such that mass is
transported from x in X to y in Y along the direction -Du(x). For about two
hundred years, no rigorous proof of Monge's conjecture was given. Appell
presented a formal proof of the existence of the potential function u, where he
introduced u as a Lagrange multiplier of Monge's problem. Kantorovich made
Appell's proof rigorous by introducing a problem we call the Monge-Kantorovich
problem. The Monge-Kantorovich problem, which is a relaxation of the Monge
problem, is based on a duality argument. In a work in progress with L.C. Evans,
we study the original Monge problem and have great expectation that soon we will
completely solve it. Recently, in a joint work with R. McCann, we proved that
given a general cost function c(x-y) which is either strictly convex or
astrictly concave function of the distance, the Monge-Kantorovich problem admits
a unique optimal solution which is a map, say T from X to Y. Among other things
I would like to study the smoothness properties of the optimal map T for general
cost functions. It is known that when the cost function is the square of the
euclidian distance, the Monge-Kantorovich problem is obtained by discretizing
the Euler equation of an ideal fluid. I expect to give existence results for the
Euler equation in any dimensional space by applying these techniques. To
illustrate the importance of the mass transport problem and the regularity of
its solutions we consider two examples, the first one being related to
environment. Here, the fluid we consider is water in motion in a lake, and we
assume that we know the state of the water at an initial time, say 0. We want to
predict the state of the lake at a later time, say, 10 knowing what evolution
laws govern the water. The later state of the water will depend on factors like
the wind. The water consists of particles which will move from one location to
another and will naturally spend the least energy for this process. We say that
the motion of particles is made in an optimal way. When the motion involving the
least work is hard to determine at the final time 10, one usually discretizes
the problem by studying the state of the water at successive times, 1, 2, etc...
10. This discretization corresponds to the Monge-Kantorovich problem. The
smoothness of the solutions of the discrete problem will guarantee that a slight
error of measurement of the initial state will not affect our prediction much. A
second example we use to illustrate the importance of smothness of optimal
strategies is in economics. Assume that we determine the cheapest way of
transporting materials in a network between suppliers and customers. One of the
issues is to know if by removing one supplier and one customer we will be forced
to make a significant revision in our strategy of tranportation. If the know
that the optimal strategy depends on the data in a smooth way then the revision
needed would be slight.
