
* 9622454
* Mathematical Sciences: Research on Representing Measures and Boundary Behavior in Potential Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/1996,03/09/1998
* Peter Loeb,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 93,330.00

Author: loeb@math.uni-frankfurt.de at NOTE Date: 3/5/96 4:43 AM Priority: Normal
TO: jjenkins at nsf11 Subject: ------------------------------- Message Contents
------------------------------- This e-mail letter is sent by Peter A. Loeb from
Frankfurt, Germany where he is a visitor for the month of March. Abstract of
Peter A. Loeb's project The proposed research will continue Professor Peter
Loeb's work on representing measures and ideal boundaries in potential theory.
In particular, Loeb plans to continue research on a Martin-like boundary which
is regular almost everywhere with respect to harmonic measure. An important tool
in this research is the technique developed with J. Bliedtner that reduces the
production of Radon-Nikodym derivatives as limits to a special case. This
reduction casts new light on the martingale convergence theorem and
significantly simplifies measure differentiation theorems as well as the
treatment of fine limit theorems in probability and potential theory. A major
consequence is the existence of simple boundary approach neighborhood systems
which, after fixing a suitable normalization, are the "best" possible in terms
of producing Radon-Nikodym derivatives as limits at the boundary. The existence
of such "best" systems had not been known even for harmonic functions on the
unit disk. Indeed, previous results in the literature suggested that no such
system could exist. In related, ongoing research, Loeb has improved the
celebrated Besicovitch and Morse covering theorems from geometric measure theory
by strengthening the results and simplifying the proofs, including a
demonstration that for any norm, the best constant (in terms of all known
proofs) for the Besicovitch result is a packing constant. In all of his
research, Professor Loeb will continue to employ nonstandard models. These are
mathematical structures with infinitely large and infinitely small numbers. Even
when the use of such structures is removed from the final proofs of results,
they are extremely helpful in the discovery process. Loeb has recently used
nonstandard models to optimize the coverings of Besicovitch's theorem, and with
Bliedtner he is now using these methods to extend the notion of radial limits to
general potential theoretic settings. The results of this research that have
been obtained to date, and the results that will be established in the proposed
research all lie at the heart of mathematical analysis and probability theory.
These are fundamental areas of mathematics used by scientists and engineers to
form the conceptual models of the phenomena with which they work. The thought
process itself can only be couched in terms of mathematics, and the mathematics
being used in turn yields new insight into the phenomena being studied.
Therefore, the simplification and extension of the basic mathematical tools
achieved by the proposed research will resonate in all of the areas of science
and engineering that use these tools. Of particular importance for future
developments will be the successful employment of mathematical structures with
infinitely large and infinitely small numbers. These structures have a great
deal to offer in all areas of science and engineering because of the simplicity
and power inherent in their use. An important construction associated with these
structures are measure spaces, now called "Loeb spaces" in the literature, which
allow the treatment of infinite probability phenomena using methods appropriate
for finite sets. Researchers including Loeb have obtained new results with these
methods in areas such as the study of partial differential equations,
probability theory, research in economics, and the study in physics of laws
governing the motion of gases.
