
* 9622445
* Mathematical Sciences: Square Summable Power Series
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1996,07/17/1996
* Louis de Branges,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1998
* USD 52,300.00

deBranges 9622445 In 1984 the present investigator obtained a proof of a
conjecture, made in 1916 by Ludwig Bieberbach, estimating the coefficients of
power series which represent injective analytic functions in the unit disk. The
proof was included in a manuscript on square summable power series which
motivated the argument and prepared the way for applications. The verification
on the argument required an extensive visit to the then Soviet Union during
which the proof was separated from its original context. A dim perception of the
proof was conveyed which was insufficient as a guide for further research. The
need for such research was even obscured by the commonly accepted view that an
era had come to a close. The research opportunities generated by the proof were
underestimated. The need of an improved treatment of the theory of square
summable power series became evident. The research required for such a treatment
is the aim of the present project. The significance of mathematics for the
global economy is difficult to assess because it proceeds through intermediaries
in science and engineering. Square summable power series are an aspect of
complex analysis, and also of functional analysis, which is most closely related
to engineering through the theory of linear systems. The interplay is seen in
proofs of the Bieberbach conjecture which appear in engineering journals. An
interplay at a higher level is seen in proofs of the Bieberbach conjecture which
appear in advanced mathematical texts. The technical and scientific community
has in this way expressed its need for information about the proof. But it has
at the same time exposed the inadequacy of existing knowledge of the proof even
among experts. A substantial effort is required from the author of the proof to
surmount these difficulties.
