
* 9623161
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Properties of Solutions of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1996,04/03/1996
* Igor Kukavica,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 61,708.00

Abstract This project concerns certain geometric properties of solutions of
partial differential equations. Of particular interest are a study of the size
of level sets, the maximal order of vanishing, and growth properties of
solutions of various types of partial differential equations. The proposed
method is a use of elliptic regularity theory to find simplifications and
extensions of the results of H. Donnelly, C. Fefferman, and F.-H. Lin concerning
geometric properties of solutions of second order partial differential
equations. The PI's method, based on the theorem on elliptic iterates of Lions
and Magenes, leads to extensions to a wide class of linear and nonlinear
equations of elliptic and parabolic type with analytic coefficients. The PI
proposes to address some questions which still remain unresolved, including, in
particular, sharp bounds on the size of level sets and the maximal order of
vanishing for nonlinear evolution equations and equations with non-analytic
coefficients. Nonlinear evolution equations, such as the Navier-Stokes system,
arise in in connection with numerous problems of mathematical physics. Numerical
and experimental models support the theory that such equations produce chaotic
behavior of solutions, i.e., solutions which exhibit complex temporal and
spatial oscillations. This project addresses this issues and aims to obtain such
intimate information of solutions as their oscillatory behavior and their growth
properties. Information on these issues, which is the main purpose of this
project, would lead to better understanding of oscillatory phenomena arising in
many problems of fluid mechanics and related fields.
