
* 9623082
* Mathematical Sciences: Pointwise Fourier Inversion in Several Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/1996,04/13/1998
* Mark Pinsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 69,606.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9623082 PI: Pinsky Pinsky plans to study pointwise
Fourier inversion in rank-one symmetric spaces of the compact and non-compact
type. At the same time he plans to continue the wave-equation approach to
Fourier inversion, with special emphasis on the connection between focusing
phenomena and the speed of convergence of Fourier transforms in two and three
dimensions. He will also investigate Hermite polynomial expansions, which are
closely related to the Schrodinger equation for the quantum oscillator, in the
same fashion that Fourier transforms are related to the (d'Alembert) wave
equation. The subject of pointwise Fourier inversion has been a central concern
in mathematical analysis for nearly a century. In the case of one variable,
Fourier analysis is essential to understanding filtering and sampling in signal
processing and other time series phenomena in electrical engineering and the
applied sciences. In the case of several variables, Fourier analysis is closely
related to solving the partial differential equations that occur in physics,
geology, and mechanical engineering. A detailed study of Gibbs' phenomenon and
related higher-dimensional examples of divergence and oscillation of Fourier
partial sums will be made by the principal investigator. It will be interesting
to contrast the results of this study with the currently popular "wavelet"
transforms, which have found many applications in recent years.
