
* 9623098
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Complex Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1996,03/18/1998
* Steven Bell,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 112,191.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9623098) PI: Bell The areas of Differential Equations and
Complex Analysis have a long history of fruitful interaction. Professor Bell's
research has two goals. He will work on problems in complex analysis, such as
geometric mapping problems, to which partial differential equations methods are
applicable, and he will apply complex variable techniques to gain information
about the partial differential equations problems and constructions of classical
analysis. The mathematical objects of potential theory and conformal mapping are
ubiquitous in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering. They carry encoded within
them a vast amount of information about geometric properties of regions in the
plane. Although these objects are familiar and well studied, they continue to be
a source of interesting and useful new mathematics. Applied scientists
frequently need to compute them. For example, to create an appropriate grid for
numerical calculations of transonic flow past a wing, it is common to make two
dimensional slices and to use conformal mappings on the slices to generate the
grid. Bell has recently completed a program to express the classical objects of
potential theory in terms of the Szego projection and kernel. He has discovered
formulas that reveal that these objects are all elementary combinations of
finitely many basic functions of one variable. His results give rise to new and
practical methods for numerically computing solutions to classical problems in
differential equations, conformal mapping, and potential theory which will be of
interest to scientists and engineers. Professor Bell will explore applications
of his ideas to other problems of this kind and he will attempt to extend his
results to more complicated constructions in the subject. He and his students
will test the efficacy of the numerical methods stemming from his work. It is
interesting to note that the practical results of Bell's research in the plane
can trace their origins back to s ome of his "curiosity driven" work in higher
dimensions that would appear to be of theoretical, rather than of practical
significance. Bell will continue to work on related questions in higher
dimensional complex analysis.
