
* 9623207
* Mathematical Sciences: Existence and Blow-Up of Solutions to Systems of Nonlinear Wave Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1996,06/20/1996
* Hans Lindblad,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 63,301.00

Abstract Lindblad 9623207 Lindblad's research concerns systems of nonlinear wave
equations. The basic mathematical questions are: (i) Does one have local
existence and uniqueness of solutions in a certain class? (ii) Does one have
blow-up of solutions? (iii) What is the long time behavior of solutions? Some of
the main techniques to be used are (iv) Pseudo-Riemannian or Lorentzian
geometry, (v) Fourier transform methods (vi) Energy-methods. Lindblad proposes
to carry out two projects related to these general questions, combining the
techniques mentioned: (I) To answer certain questions concerning low regularity
solutions and small data. (II) To study regularity of a free-boundary problem,
that occur in nature, for the relativistic Euler equation. Solution to these
questions would contribute to our knowledge of fundamental equations from
physics. On the one hand we are combining the different techniques (iv)-(vi),
and it has usually been the case that interesting and useful mathematics
originates from interaction between different fields of mathematics as well as
between mathematics and other sciences. On the other hand, the study of
Einstein's equations have to a large extent been neglected by mathematicians. It
is e.g. perceivable that one could use gravitational waves as a means of
observing the universe. To solve problem (II) we are developing completely new
techniques, and we believe that it will be useful for studying many other
problems as well, e.g. an interface between two fluids. Such a problem would
have industrial applications. Lindblad is also using computers and numerical
calculations in his research, which makes it more accessible for applied
scientists. The practical motivation for this research is that several of the
important equations in physics can be written as a system of nonlinear wave
equations. There are examples of this in classical field theory and continuum
mechanics as well as in classical physics, e.g. Einstein's equations, the Yang-
Mills equatio n and the equations of nonlinear elasticity. For some equations,
for example Yang-Mills, we expect the solutions to remain regular for all times.
On the other hand, for Einstein's equations and the equations of nonlinear
elasticity, the solutions blow-up for certain data. For Einstein's equation the
blow-up occurs in nature (black holes in general relativity) whereas for the
equation of nonlinear elasticity the blow-up is due to the fact that the
equations no longer describe what is happening in nature accurately. In either
case it is important to understand the mechanism of existence versus blow-up.
