
* 9704422
* Low Dimensional Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1997,07/03/1997
* Michal Misiurewicz,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 46,684.00

The Principal Investigator will perform research in the theory of low-
dimensional dynamical systems, both smooth and continuous. He will concentrate
mainly on smooth interval maps. Old problems of density of Axiom A maps among r
times differentiable ones (for both unimodal and polymodal cases) and monotone
dependence on a parameter for families of unimodal maps are still open. Problems
encountered in the theory of real maps in dimension one have often their
counterparts in the theory of complex maps in dimension one and real maps in
dimension two. These problems will be also studied. The last part of the project
is to study general rotation theories, which deal with properties of the set of
all limits of ergodic averages of a given observable (a function from the phase
space to some linear space), and combinatorial dynamics for tree maps. For
almost every phenomenon from Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Medicine, Economy and
other sciences, one can make a mathematical model that can be regarded as a
dynamical system. Sometimes the study of this system is extremely difficult, but
quite often it can be reduced to the study of a much simpler, low dimensional
one. This project is devoted to the investigation of the properties of this type
of systems from the mathematical point of view. One of its main goals is to show
that typical one-dimensional systems are not chaotic.
