
* 9705095
* Renormalization in Statistical Mechanics and Dynamical Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1997,04/28/1999
* Hans Koch,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 70,434.00

9705095 Koch Professor Koch is investigating continuous-spin models near
criticality, quasiperiodic orbits for classical Hamiltonian flows, and lattice
gases related to aperiodic tilings and quasicrystals. The first two of these
projects involves the use, and further development, of renormalization group
techniques. In a previous renormalization group analysis of ferromagnetic spin
models, some fundamental questions were answered in a simplified hierarchical
setting. Ongoing work now deals with the problem of restoring some of the
ingredients that have been missing. The investigation of quasiperiodic motion
for Hamiltonian flows is based on a new class of renormalization group
transformations that was introduced in a previous project. One of the goals is
to develop these transformations into tools for studying non-perturbative
phenomena, such as the breakup of smooth invariant tori. Other interesting
questions concern the accumulation of closed orbits at invariant tori and the
interplay between renormalization group transformations that correspond to
different frequency vectors. The third project deals with a promising but
largely unknown class of statistical mechanics models: Lattice gases with non-
periodic Gibbs states. The current investigation focuses on a few examples,
based on aperiodic tilings, for which the minimum energy configurations are well
known. The goal is to identify and understand the low temperature properties of
these models and to develop the appropriate methods for analyzing them.
Professor Koch's study of ferromagnetic spin models is part of a long-term
effort toward a mathematical foundation of the modern theory of critical
phenomena in condensed matter physics. One of the striking phenomena is that
there are observable quantities (critical indices) which seem to be independent
of the system considered, within large classes of different systems. Starting
from some basic assumptions, the current theory allows an approximate
computation of these universal quantities. But it is still an open problem to
show that these assumptions hold, within a class of reasonably realistic models.
Ongoing investigations in this area use computer-assisted proofs and involve
further development of these techniques. This includes validated numerics -- a
technique which is of increasing interest also in engineering and modern
industrial design. Another critical phenomenon investigated in this project is
the loss of stability of quasi- periodic orbits in classical Hamiltonian
systems. In certain cases, this loss of stability is believed to be associated
with a significant increase in "chaotic" motion. The process appears to be
universal, in the sense described above, but it is not yet understood. Interest
in this problem stems from celestial mechanics and plasma physics, where
questions of stability play an important role. And of course, the mathematics
involved is interesting in itself. The third project deals with statistical
mechanics models whose minimum energy configurations are non-periodic. Some of
these models are believed to describe quasicrystals, and others may have
features similar to spin glasses. They are unusual by current standards, but not
exceptional. In fact, non-periodicity is a generic property for ground states in
a standard class of statistical mechanics models. So far, almost all
investigations of such models have been limited to studying the zero temperature
state. The goal now is to obtain some useful information about the behavior at
positive temperatures, using a combination of (large scale) numerical
simulations and analytical techniques.
