
* 9706614
* Mathematical Sciences: The Nevanlinna Counting Function, Linear-Fractional Models, and Orbits of Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1997,02/18/1999
* Paul Bourdon,VA,Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 72,537.00

ABSTRACT Bourdon The project entails an investigation of function-theoretic
issues associated with the following question posed by Walter Rudin (in 1988):
when will the set of nonnegative powers of a bounded, holomorphic function on
the open unit disk constitute an orthogonal subset of the classical Hardy-two
space? Previous work by the project's principal investigator suggests that
Rudin's question may be answered through an analysis of properties of the
Nevanlinna counting function and radial subharmonic functions. The project also
involves a continuation of the principal investigator's study of the behavior of
functions and operators under iteration: chief objectives here are to
characterize the cyclic behavior of a certain class of composition operators
acting on the classical Hardy space and to resolve the invariant-subspace
problem for hyponormal operators on Hilbert space. Methods to be employed
include computer studies of the Nevanlinna counting function (carried out by
undergraduates) and an analysis of the extent to which information about orbits
of a linear operator can contribute to the establishment of the existence of a
nontrivial, invariant subspace for that operator. The project focuses on
problems in the areas of function theory and operator theory. The goal of work
in function theory is to provide information and tools that enable scientists to
understand/predict how functions of certain types will behave in various
situations. For example, the study of the behavior of functions under iteration
(which forms a component of the project) connects function theory to the
analysis of dynamical systems, including systems that behave chaotically. The
goal of much current research in operator theory (including the operator-
theoretic component of the project) is to determine when a given linear operator
preserves a small part of the whole space on which it acts. When smaller parts
are preserved, one hopes the whole operator may be understood in terms of its
simpler parts. Linear operations include simple processes such as rotation in
space and complex processes such as the application of Schroedinger's equation
of quantum mechanics to certain function spaces. The project will also
contribute to the development of the nation's human-resources: three
undergraduate students will receive significant training and research
experiences through their participation in the project.
