
* 9706818
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems of Complex Analysis Arising in Complex Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/1997,10/08/1999
* Eric Bedford,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 74,934.00

Abstract Bedford 9706818 The research of this proposal applies to the methods of
complex analysis to several problems of dynamical systems in the complex domain.
The dynamics of polynomial maps of C has been studied in depth and has produced
a theory which is both a beautiful and compelling model for many systems in
nature. The principal emphasis is a two-part investigation of polynomial
diffeomorphisms of C^2. The first part involves mappings for which the Julia set
is connected: to analyze the structure of the dynamical set J and the structure
of parameter space (a higher-dimensional Mandelbrot space). The second part
involves diffeomorphisms of C^2 which are quasi-hyperbolic: these mappings are
not uniformly expanding on the infinitesimal level but have uniform expansion
and bounded geometry at a fixed (finite) level . This work involves several
mathematical techniques from complex analysis: harmonic measure, pluri-potential
theory, and the geometry of currents. Many physical processes are modeled as
dynamical systems: systems which evolve over time as the iteration (repetition)
of a specific rule. An interesting discovery has been that even if the defining
rule is rather simple, the resultant behavior can show surprising complex
behavior over time. One of the most intriguing features of this model has been
the way the behavior of the system depends on parameters (the period-doubling
cascade to chaotic behavior). This is more clearly seen when we pass to the
(seemingly more complicated) complex system. The behavior in the complex leads
to an interplay between dynamic space and parameter space. The resulting
parameter (bifurcation) space is the Mandelbrot set, which has been shown to
have "universal" properties. We consider the dynamics of polynomial mappings of
two complex variables, which are what is obtained when the analogous behavior is
considered in two variables. Our research seeks to identify the analogue of the
Mandelbrot in two complex dimensions and to ident ify its associated dynamical
properties.
