
* 9706557
* Operator Theory and Free Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1997,04/12/1999
* Hari Bercovici,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 85,000.00

Abstract Bercovici Hari Bercovici plans to work in two basic directions. The
first is related with Voiculescu's free probability theory and harmonic
analysis. An important direction here is the sudy of limit laws for the
multiplicative free convolution. Unlike classical harmonic analysis, the study
of multiplicative convolution cannot simply be reduced to the additive case by
taking logarithms. It is already known that there are some unexpected `Poisson
like' probability distributions related with multiplicative free convolution. An
important obstacle is the correct formulation of the classical limit theorems,
even the central limit theorem, in the free multiplicative case. The second line
of Bercovici's research is in operator theory and its interactions with function
theory, control theory, and other areas. Among the specific problems in this
area are the model theories of restrictions and compressions of operators, and
the study of dual algebras generated by commuting families of operators. He also
plans to return to the study of skew Toeplitz operators beyond the fairly well
understood scalar case. In order to give some motivation for the research in
this proposal I would like to recall that in the current description of
subatomic processes one has to deal with probabilistic processes. Thus, for
instance, the location of a particle is not known with precision at any given
moment. One has instead the probability that that particle appears in a given
region of space. Some versions of noncommutative probability theory deal with
some of the aspects of quantum chemistry for instance. Free probability theory
is likely to occur at some point in the quantum description of nature. Besides,
it is an interesting object of study because it provides, in some sense, the
`only' alternative probability theory. The operator theoretical part of this
project stems to a great extent from problems raised by the control theory of
large structures. Some earlier results in this theory were proposed a s the main
control mechanism of the NASP. While Bercovici's expertise in the practical side
of this theory is limited, control theorists can formulate their problems in
theoretical terms, thus making the application of operator theoretical methods
possible.
