
* 9706817
* Mathematical Sciences: K-Theory, C*-Algebras & Index Theory of Elliptic Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1997,05/02/1997
* Jerome Kaminker,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 84,000.00

Abstract Kaminker Several problems involving geometric applications of operator
algebras and index theory will be worked on. The major role that Ruelle algebras
play in the connection between hyperbolic dynamics and operator algebras will be
developed. A multiplicative index theory will be studied and its connections
with the Hirzebruch proportionality principle and the Selberg trace formula will
be pursued. Also, a general index theory for eroupoids will be worked out and
applied to problems of quantization. This project deals with using mathematical
methods to study situations that occur when describing the physical world. In
general, when modeling phenomena using mathematics, slight changes in
measurements can radically change the predictions of the theory. This is one
aspect of the notion of ``chaos''. The classification of the kinds of ``chaos''
which can occur is one of the goals of the present work. The methods used arose
first in the early stages of quantum mechanics and have become a well developed
part of mathematics. They take advantage of the simple idea that the order in
which one does two operations effects the outcome. Developing that notion
mathematically leads to the study of matrices, or ``generalized numbers''. This,
in turn, lead to associating these ``generalized numbers'' to chaotic systems.
Moreover, they are computable and go a long way to providing a complete list of
the possibilities. It is interesting that these mathematical ideas originally
would not have been expected to be useful in this setting, and it was only after
their intensive development from a purely mathematical point of view that the
idea of applying them in this way occurred. This work introduces the use of
``wavelets'', which had been developed for practical work in sending televised
images in the most cost effective way. It is very surprising that they can also
be used in the study of ``chaos'' and we expect that this relation will lead to
progress in the general theory of wa velets.
