
* 9706108
* Applications of Functional Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1997,07/30/1997
* Peter Casazza,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 49,999.00

9706108 Casazza The research project will use techniques from Functional
Analysis to developed a local theory for wavelets and frames. The idea is to
find the least number of elements from one of these sets to give a good
approximation to problems in these areas. This will allow finite dimensional
techniques to be used on infinite dimensional problems as well as giving quick
approximations to solutions which are more accessible to the computer. We use,
and extend, deep results from the local theory of Banach spaces to stronger
results in Hilbert spaces to carry out the goals of the project. The project
also involves work on the L(1)-Problem: Is every complemented subspace of L(1)
isomorphic to L(1) or l(1)? A new approach to the problem relies on shifting the
problem to an equivalent problem on a more computable space than L(1). This
setting may allow a solution to the problem. The main goal is to reduce
calculations of wavelets and frames to the least number of vectors possible.
First, this will allow infinite dimensional calculations to be reduced to the
finite dimensional setting. Second, in the finite dimensional setting, it may
reduce the number of necessary calculations to something closer to the capacity
of the computer. This could significantly reduce the length of time for
calculations and for transmitting data. These methods are some of the most
applied techniques around today. They are used in imaging problems from
everything from satellite imaging to x-rays. If one could significantly reduce
the calculations necessary for such computations, it should have broad
application to all of these important imaging problems.
