
* 9706760
* Viscosity Solutions and Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1997,08/08/1997
* Andrzej Swiech,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 49,999.00

9706760 Swiech The proposed research revolves around the notion of viscosity
solution, which is a notion of weak solution for equations of Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman-Isaacs (HJBI) type. It is both basic and applied and can be divided into
two parts: partial differential equations in infinite dimensional spaces and
applications to stochastic optimal control, and elliptic and parabolic
equations. As regards the first part, the investigator plans to continue
research in the development of the theory of viscosity solutions (i.e.
generalized solutions) of second order HJBI equations in Hilbert space. The
basic issues are the existence and uniqueness of solutions, their regularity,
convergence properties, etc. HJBI equations are of great importance from the
point of view of applications, since they are so-called dynamic programming
equations, corresponding to problems of stochastic optimal control of dynamical
systems driven by stochastic partial differential equations. The second part of
the proposed research concentrates on some fundamental problems in the theory of
fully nonlinear, second order, uniformly elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations. The major issue is the regularity and uniqueness of
solutions of nonlinear, uniformly parabolic and elliptic equations which are not
continuous in the space variable and, on a larger scale, the development of a
theory of generalized solutions for fully nonlinear equations with measurable
ingredients. Despite some recent results, uniqueness is in general still a major
open problem, even for linear equations, where it is connected to the uniqueness
of so-called martingale solutions of stochastic differential equations with
discontinuous diffusion coefficient. Finally the investigator proposes to work
on a notion of weak solution for degenerate elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations with measurable terms. Equations of this type appear, for
instance, in problems involving motion driven by mean curva ture. The classical
theory of viscosity solutions does not apply here. Its extension to such cases
is needed. The notion of viscosity solution is widely used by applied
mathematicians, and the proposed research has a potential of having far-reaching
consequences in applied sciences, especially the part of it dealing with HJBI
equations and control of dynamical systems driven by stochastic partial
differential equations. In real life these are systems governed by partial
differential equations that exhibit noisy behavior. Applications range from
engineering to mathematical finance. One has to mention stochastic optimal
control of nonlinear partially observed systems (so-called nonlinear filtering),
distributed and boundary control of systems modelled by stochastic partial
differential equations, minimax type control of infinite dimensional systems
widely used in engineering (which is connected to infinite dimensional
differential games), risk-sensitive control of small noise systems (important in
control of adaptive tracking devices), and recent market models of interest rate
dynamics (option pricing). The investigator is convinced that the proposed
research will help understand the above problems and will provide a mathematical
framework that can be used by people working in these areas.
