
* 9706840
* Lebesgue Space Estimates for Solutions to Hyperbolic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1997,05/27/1999
* R. Michael Beals,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 65,484.00

9706840 Beals The investigation involves the study of certain properties of
solutions to strictly hyperbolic partial differential equations ("waves"). New
qize and smoothness estimates in the linear case will be derived, in order to
analyze the properties of solutions to nonlinear problems. Estimates of time
decay for appropriate measures of the size of a solution will be obtained.
Results for the classical wave equation on a spatial domain which is exterior to
a convex obstacle will be extended to handle more general natural conditions at
the boundary of the obstacle. The key estimates correspond to finding the best
possible time decay subject to the weakest size and smoothness restrictions on
the data. More general obstacles, for which certain types of decay estimates are
known but for which explicit representations of approximations to solutions are
absent, will also be treated. Analogous full-space problems (no obstacles) will
be analyzed. The primary questions in these cases involve higher order equations
or systems, and the effects of interactions with changes in the properties of
the medium in which the waves are propagating. Nonsmooth perturbations in the
medium are one source of problems, including questions about the minimal
regularity needed for the perturbing potential. Propagation in inhomogeneous
media (for example, nonconstant wave speeds) where bounds involving explicit
time estimates are relatively sparse, will also be considered. (The classical
bounds involve those which measure size in terms of the classical energy, which
will not typically exhibit decay in time.) The optimal time estimates under the
best possible conditions on the size of the data measured in terms of other
natural spaces will be considered, in model problems and in general. Waves have
been studied classically in terms of a size quantity like energy, which is
typically conserved or behaves in a fashion which is easy to understand. In
order to go beyond the simpl est mathematical approximations to understand the
small- and large-scale properties of true physical waves, other means of
measuring the wave size must be used. Only the simplest model problems have been
fully understood in this context in the past - those for which the large-scale
behavior is merely a simple magnification of the small-scale behavior (such as
unperturbed waves in free space). In true physical problems, waves encounter
obstacles and are reflected or absorbed; they travel in media which are not
uniform; they interact with themselves and with the media in which they
propagate. The size behavior of such waves, and in particular the decay of their
amplitudes in time, will be analyzed, in order to understand what information
can be deduced about the wave source from measurements of such size quantities
made far away (or long after the wave is generated).
