
* 9706884
* Bilinear Singular Integrals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1997,06/22/2001
* Michael Lacey,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2003
* USD 249,137.00

ABSTRACT Lacey DMS-9706884 Lacey, in collaboration with C. Thiele, has made
substantial progress towards settling the conjecture of Alberto Calderon
concerning the boundedness of the bilinear Hilbert transform from L^2 times L^2
into L^1. Lacey and Thiele will work on developing a more complete understanding
of the theory of bilinear singular integrals. Their method of proof can be
refined to the point at which three significant aspects of harmonic analysis can
be understood from the same group of basic principles. They are the Cauchy
integral on Lipschitz curves, Carleson's Theorem on the pointwise convergence of
Fourier series and bilinear singular integrals and maximal functions. The method
of proof is based on a novel use of phase plane tecniques. The applications of
these techniques to other questions will be explored. A musical score is a
representation of the music built around temporal and frequency aspects. A phase
plane analysis is an adaptive counterpart of the musical score. The hallmark of
such an analysis is precisely that of a musical score, a high degree of
localization in time and frequency variables. This proposal pursues the study of
phase plane analysis and its applications to operators in Harmonic Analysis
which are difficult to compute due to their non--local nature. Harmonic
Analyisis provides the mathematical foundation for Signal Processing, most
recently popularized by the theory of wavelets.
