
* 9706599
* Quantum Statistical Mechanics of Lattice Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1997,07/01/1997
* Bruno Nachtergaele,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 86,886.00

9706599 Nachtergaele The main focus of the project is on quantum spin models
that arise in condensed matter physics. Nachtergaele will uork on three classes
of problems in quantum spin (and related) systems. The first is the
characterization of the complete set of ground states in infinite volume. Here,
ground states are defined in the sense of stability under arbitrary local
perturbations. This problem is best tractable for models with a unique ground
state, such as the AKLT model. A harder but also more important problem is to
characterize the complete set of ground states when this set includes non-
periodic states, such as interface states, which is the case, e.g., for the XXZ
Heisenberg model. A second problem is to study the fluctuation properties and
low-lying excitations of interface states in quantum statistical mechanics
models both at zero and non-zero temperature. The proposal is to prove stability
of the 111 interface at sufficiently low temperatures in the Falicov-Kimball
model, and, in a second phase, to study 111 interfaces in the XXZ Heisenberg
model, where new phenomena related to continuous spectrum should be expected.
The third proposed line of research is to analyze and use a new implementation
of the Density Matrix Renormalization Group method to study various phenomena in
quasi-one-dimensional systems. Quantum statistical mechanics is an area of
growing interest because many of the phenomena that are being discovered and
studied today are intrinsically quantum mechanical: Bose condensation,
superfluidity, superconductivity, quantum optics, quantum computation, and many
of the most interesting aspects of magnetism. Quantum spin models are models for
the magnetic properties of a large variety of materials, many of which have only
been recently synthesized. The importance of magnetic properties is not just
that they allow us to understand the behavior of magnets. Often there is an
interaction between magnetic (spin) structure and elect ronic and geometric
structure of the material. The novel spin-Peierls materials that in the last
couple of years received so much attention are a good example of this
interaction. It has been known for some time that antiferromagnetic correlations
are an important aspect of high-temperature superconductors. Another example
where magnetic and transport properties influence each other are the Giant
Magneto Resistance materials. The approach in this project is mathematical, and
is complementary to the experimental and theoretical research on the same
materials by chemists and physicists. This proposal addresses fundamental
questions about the mathematical structure of quantum lattice models.
Nachtergaele will also work on the implementation of new mathematical insights
into more efficient computational methods. This research will provide hands-on
learning opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students who not only want
to become well-versed in mathematics but also have an interest in concrete
applications. In the process these students will become familiar with the
language of physicists and chemists working on the same or related problems.
This will prepare them better for future careers in an interdisciplinary
environment.
