
* 9706648
* Nonsymmetric, Noncommutative, Non-Lipschitz Problems for Scale Invariant Elliptic Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1997,07/11/1997
* Gregory Verchota,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2000
* USD 98,389.00

9706648 Verchota The Principle Investigator wishes to study solutions to scale
invariant elliptic equations in Euclidean spaces under modification of certain
frequently assumed hypotheses, with the goal of better understanding the role
they play. Hence, symmetry for systems of equations, non-commutativity or
nonvariational formulation for higher order operators with bounded coefficients,
or boundary values on non-Lipschitz boundaries will be considered. Harmonic
analysis techniques, singular integrals over Lipschitz and non-Lipschitz
boundaries, and modern elliptic Partial Differential Equation theory will be
used. Though the proposal stays within the theoretic framework of elliptic PDE,
the subject matter is related to applications in engineering, numerical
analysis, and applied mathematics. Special cases of the equations considered
have been used for some time to model, for example, the distribution of
electrical charges, distribution of temperatures in a solid body, or the
displacements an elastic body can undergo under stresses imposed on its outside
surface or boundary. The emphasis here and recently on scale invariance allows
for bodies that have arbitrary numbers of corners and edges (something that
occurs naturally in many materials, e.g. in crystals). This is because the
measure of angles remains the same whether the angles are viewed through a
microscope or through the wrong end of a telescope, i.e. these very elementary
quantities are scale invariant. In contrast, our idea of how smooth the surface
of some material might be changes dramatically upon magnification, i.e. change
of scale. By grounding our theory in quantities more elementary than those which
describe smoothness and obtaining various results and estimates on the
quantities modeled (temperature, etc.) we obtain a theory that can be applied
both to bodies with rough boundaries or to bodies with smooth boundaries. The
proposal can be seen as a search for other more elementary quantities leading to
further generalizations or applications.
