
* 9706882
* Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Operators Generated by Damped Hyperbolic Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1997,05/19/1999
* Marianna Shubov,TX,Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 102,000.00

Abstract Shubov The primary goal of this proposal is to develop the spectral
analysis for a class of non-selfadjoint operators in a Hilbert space. These
operators are the dynamics generators of the systems governed by three-
dimensional wave equations with spatially non-homogeneous non-spherically
symmetric coefficients containing first order damping terms. This proposal is
based on twelve works by PI (supported by NSF Grant DMS-92 12037 and two Texas
Advanced Research Program Grants: 00364-116, 93-95 and 0036-44-124, 95-97). In
these works, the PI carried out a detailed asymptotic analysis of the spectrum
and proved the Riesz basis property of the root vectors for two classes on non-
selfadjoint operators: the dynamics generators for the equation of a non-
homogeneous damped string with dissipative boundary conditions at the ends of a
finite interval and the dynamics generators for three-dimensional damped wave
equation with non-constant spherically symmetric coefficients with dissipative
boundary conditions on a sphere. The first objective of this project is to make
the next significantly more difficult step: to extend the spectral results to
the three-dim damped wave equation with non-spherically symmetric coefficients
and dissipative boundary conditions on a sphere. The plan of this analysis is
based on a combination of the methods developed in the aforementioned works and
the PI's earlier works on resonances and resonance states for three-dimensional
Schrodinger operators with non spherically symmetric potentials. The second
objective is to apply the results to the control and stabilization problems for
linear distributed parameter systems using the spectral decomposition method. An
important area of modern mathematical analysis, which has a wide range of
applications to engineering problems, is related to control of the so-called
distributed parameter systems. Examples of such systems include complicated
vibrating elastic structures containing as their elements membranes, shell s,
etc. The objective of control is to achieve the desired behavior of the system
by applying an external control force to it. Problems of this type are of the
primary importance in robotics (e.g., manipulation of a robot arm) and in
aerospace engineering (e.g., stabilization of an aircraft). The aforementioned
control problems were considered in recent years in extensive mathematical
literature and a considerable progress towards their solution was made. In many
cases, however, only the existence of the desired control functions was
rigorously proved which left an open question of direct and efficient numerical
computations of the controls. A method that provides explicit algorithms for the
computation of controls is known. This is the method of the spectral
decomposition. The application of this method, however, encounters serious
mathematical difficulties which significantly restricts its area of
applicability to practical problems. Namely, the method deals with a complicated
area of modern analysis- "the spectral theory of non-selfadjoint operators." The
spectral theory of "selfadjoint operators" is a classical chapter of mathematics
and serves as a main tool in quantum physics. Because of the difficulties in the
area, the applications of the method were until recently restricted to one-
dimensional structures (like strings or rods). Moreover, the phenomenon of the
energy dissipation due to the internal friction was not taken into account in
these models. The main objective of this project is to extend the results to the
most practically important three-dimensional systems with the internal friction.
