
* 9706076
* Mathematical Sciences: Localization in Mathematical Models of Disordered Media
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1997,02/18/1999
* Gunter Stolz,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 66,201.00

9706076 Stolz Dr. G. Stolz of the University of Alabama at Birmingham will
conduct a research project on the appearance of "localization" in various
classes of random operators which arise in mathematical physics. Localization,
i.e. the existence of energy regions with dense pure point spectrum and
exponentially decaying eigenfunctions, has been found to be common to most one
dimensional models of disordered media. Dr. Stolz' research will aim at a better
understanding of mathematical models of multidimensional disordered media.
Specific goals include (i) the extension of existing results on localization to
models which give a more realistic description of disordered media, such as
alloys and amorphous materials, than the models studied previously; (ii) an
intensified investigation of three-dimensional models based on random point-
interactions, which have potential of providing new insights in high energy
spectral characteristics and can also be used to study physical properties of
random surfaces and random polymers. Disordered media are studied extensively in
various physical disciplines such as solid state physics, optics, and
electrodynamics, as well as in materials science. They comprise various types of
materials, for example alloys, crystals with impurities (e.g. semiconductors),
and amorphous solids. Random operators provide mathematical models of disordered
media. These operators can be studied by using methods from mathematical
spectral and scattering theory. They allow to describe and thus predict
conductivity properties and the characteristics of wave propagation in
disordered media. For example, the mathematical phenomenon of localization, as
studied by Dr. Stolz, characterizes insulators (electrical insulators,
respectively sound insulators, depending on the underlying physical model).
While a number of important results have been obtained for these models, it will
be the goal of future research to study more realistic models and to get a b
etter theoretical understanding of the underlying phenomena from physics.
