
* 9706441
* Endomorphisms on Von Neumann Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1997,06/26/1997
* Geoffrey Price,MD,United States Naval Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 56,455.00

Abstract Price Endomorphisms on von Neumann algebras are examples of
noncommutative dynamical systems which may proceed forward, but not backward, in
time. The analysis of the cocycle conjugacy classes of discrete endomorphisms is
related to the Jones theory of index for subfactors and has numerous connections
to the classification theory of Connes of the outer conjugacy classes of
automorphisms on the tracial hyperfinite factor. An important family of
endomorphisms is the family of Powers shifts, which appear naturally in the
construction of shifts on Jones tunnels of subfactors and as restrictions of
endomorphisms with finite relative commutant index. Using a connection between
Powers shifts and linear shift register systems, Price will attempt to complete
his classification of the rational Powers shifts. Price has also computed the
entropy of all rational Powers shifts and expects to work with E. Stormer on the
problem of determining the range of values of the Connes-Stormer entropy among
the family of all Powers shifts. In addition, a number of combinatorial problems
have arisen from the interplay between the study of Powers shifts and shift
register systems, and as part of this project Price will work with some
undergraduate students to answer some related questions about the ranks of
Toeplitz and Hankel matrices over finite fields. This research project
represents an attempt to exploit connections which Price has shown to exist
between two fields of mathematics, one of which is relatively abstract and one
of which is comparatively concrete. Since the 1930's operator algebras have been
used as mathematical constructs to model the behavior of quantum mechanical
systems. The field of shift register systems, on the other hand, is a branch of
cryptology, and is one of the means by which secure messages are encoded and
transmitted. Using some number-theoretic aspects of linear shift register
systems, and with the participation of undergraduate research assistants, Price
will con tinue his program of classifying families of mappings known as Powers
shifts. Powers shifts are mappings which may be viewed as determining the
forward time evolution of a particular algebra of physical observables. Although
this algebra has been used in modeling quantum mechanical systems, it has also
been studied for its applications to knot theory and for its potential
applications towards the understanding of the structure of DNA.
