
* 9708261
* Emphasis Year: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Their Applications; Spring, 1998; Evanston, Illinois
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/1997,06/27/1997
* Gui-Qiang Chen,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9708261 Chen This award will provide partial support for the 1997-98 Emphasis
Year in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Their Applications at
Northwestern University. The goal of this special year is to develop some of the
new connections between nonlinear partial differential equations and such
diverse areas as fluid mechanics, phase transitions, free boundary problems,
materials science, and mean curvature flow. The focus of this emphasis year will
be an International Conference on Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and
Applications in the Spring of 1998. During the year, a series of visits of
experts and junior researchers in the indicated areas is planned. Nonlinear
partial differential equations arise in almost all areas of science and
engineering. In particular, they arise in materials science, biophysics,
environmental and global change processes, and industrial manufacturing
processes. These equations are predominant in such areas as elasticity,
plasticity, semiconductors, biological transport of ions, phase transitions,
multi-phase processes, combustion, and etching and deposition processes.
Understanding solutions of such nonlinear equations enables one to gain new
physical insights, to discover the intrinsic laws, and, in turn, to solve some
challenging problems in these areas. The proposed project is intended to bring
together a diverse group of applied mathematicians and theoretical analysts in
partial differential equations and their applications who are able to explore
connections between their fields. Individuals will be selected who can share
expertise with an eye toward applications in the indicated areas in applied
sciences and other mathematical areas represented by the Northwestern faculty.
Researchers with such diverse expertise have often unexplored common interests
which, by means of fruitful exchanges, can lead to novel results and
discoveries. Particular attention will be focused on the p articipation of
recent doctoral recipients and/or graduate students in order to foster their
interests in nonlinear partial differential equations and applications in
science and engineering.
