
* 9732891
* Operator Theory and Systems Engineering
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,04/14/2000
* J. William Helton,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2001
* USD 150,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT DMS-9732891, PI: Helton This is a proposal to continue support
for several projects in the parts of operator theory and functional analysis
related to engineering system theory. Linear operator theory has had a strong
interplay with analytic function theory and engineering for many decades. Indeed
most commercial software (at least in the control engineering community) for
solving analytic function problems is based on this type of interplay between
functions and matrices. One branch of analysis closely related to applications
is classical Nevanlinna-Pick-Nehari theory,or equivalently commutant lifting
theory, a part of the area called operator model theory. The early development
of this was done for the purest of mathematical reasons, but in the mid 1970's
and early 1980's this was shown by this investigator and others to be critical
to the design of engineering systems where stability of the system is the key
constraint. This motivated much more mathematical development and now it is one
of the areas of functional analysis most closely associated with control
engineering. For many years (since Norbert Wiener) design tools optimized mean
square performance. The theory above ultimately lead to (commercially
commonplace) tools for optimizing worst case frequency domain performance. The
aim of this proposal is to extend this core theory in radically new directions:
1.Highly nonlinear generalizations. The goal is to find canonical ''nonlinear
generalizations" of analytic function theory and the related parts of operator
theory. Many systems which people wish to control are nonlinear (e.g., jet
engines), so there is a big demand for an effective nonlinear theory. 2.Linear
Operators} Intersections of matrix intervals, and Hereditary operators and
polynomials are the subject of work with Jim Agler. 3. Optimization over spaces
of analytic functions} (with Orlando Merino and others). Qualitative theory,
computer algorithms based on this theory, a nalysis of such algorithms.
Connections of this work with other branches of mathematics. These are the key
optimization problems which arise in designs of linear engineering systems where
there are competing constraints, or uncertainty in the math model of the
physical system one is trying to control. 4. Computer operator algebra.Linear
engineering systems theory and operator theory are rife with calculations in a
noncommuting algebra. For example, if the classical core above is set in
engineering `statespace coordinates', the main theorems can be derived mostly by
matrix algebra. Helton's group are the main providers of software (called
NCAlgebra) for performing general noncommuting calculations in Mathematica. The
work has gone thru several phases and in current research the investigators now
have extensive software implementing noncommutative Groebner basis algorithms
due to Mora in C++ and linked Mathematica software for sorting and ''shrinking"
the output in various ways. It is used in the highly ambitious pursuit of trying
to find computer methods for helping a researcher ''discover" (rather than just
verify) theorems in branches of operator theory and engineering systems.
