
* 9800782
* Index Theory of Perturbed Dirac Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,07/17/2000
* Peter Haskell,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 05/31/2002
* USD 67,977.00

Haskell. Abs Abstract Proposal: DMS-9800782 Principal Investigator: Peter
Haskell Professor Haskell plans to study the index theory of perturbed operators
of Dirac type on complete and incomplete noncompact manifolds. Index-theoretic
invariants of such operators extend the invariants arising from coarse geometry
and suggest a formulation of a theory of ends for operator algebras. Some
examples of Dolbeault operators with meromorphic perturbations have been used in
physical models. Index formulas for more general examples involve the Todd class
of the perturbation's possibly singular zero set. The index of an operator that
is invariant under and elliptic in directions transverse to a smooth action of a
compact Lie group on a closed manifold is usually expressed as a distribution
but can be expressed in terms of differences of multiplicities of irreducible
representations in the operator's kernel and cokernel. Professor Haskell plans
to calculate the latter version using indices of perturbed first-order
differential operators on incomplete manifolds. Professor Haskell also plans to
develop the index theory associated with self-adjoint perturbed Dirac operators.
This will include the role of such operators in the index theory of perturbed
Dirac operators on noncompact manifolds with noncompact boundaries. Such work
will begin with the investigation of the effect of perturbation growth and end
geometry on the spectral theory of self-adjoint perturbed Dirac operators.
Because much of physics is about quantities, such as velocity and acceleration,
which represent rates of change, mathematical models of physics are often
expressed as differential equations, the solutions of which are functions whose
rates of change have specified properties. Index theory (for instance, the
Atiyah-Singer index theorem) is the study of geometric properties revealed by
the comparison of sizes of solution sets of differential equations. Many of the
most challenging problems in geometry and topology involve spaces that extend
indefinitely. Because many physical models are based on Euclidean space,
physicists have studied examples of differential equations on spaces that extend
indefinitely. Physical problems involving these differential equations are most
tractable in the presence of a constraining force, whose mathematical
manifestation is as a potential term in the differential equations (for example,
in the Schroedinger equations of quantum physics). Professor Haskell plans to
investigate the geometric information carried by differential equations with
potential terms in more complicated geometric settings. While understanding the
analysis on and geometry of complicated spaces that extend indefinitely is a
goal in itself, this work may also have implications for models of geometrically
constrained physical systems. Because Professor Haskell's techniques are based
on "noncommutative topology" (that is, spaces are studied via algebras of
functions on them), this work should also reveal finer structures, such as
symmetries, that can be encoded in noncommutative algebras.
