
* 9800805
* RUI: Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems and Application: An Operator Theorectic Approach
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,02/23/1998
* Lawrence Fialkow,NY,SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 57,420.00

Fialkow.Abs Abstract Proposal: Dms-9800805 Principal Investigator: Lawrence
Fialkow Professor Fialkow will study several significant problems concerning an
operator-theoretic approach to multivariable moment problems. The principal
focus of this research is an approach to multidimensional truncated moment
problems based on an extension theory for the associated moment matrix. When
this matrix admits an infinite, positive, finite rank moment matrix extension,
this method yields an explicit formula for a finitely atomic representing
measure supported on the joint spectrum of a normal tuple of operators
corresponding to the extension. The aim of this research is to determine
concrete conditions on the moment data which permit the desired extension.
Existence theorems for representing measures can also be interpreted as
subnormal completion criteria for multivariable weighted shifts. Another facet
of this research concerns the multidimensional K-moment problem, where the
support of a representing measure is required to be contained in a prescribed
closed set K. A direct application of this study concerns the Multidimensional
Quadrature Problem in Numerical Analysis. By applying the matrix extension
technique in the context of quadrature, this research seeks to construct minimal
quadrature rules for such sets as the disk, square, triangle, or annulus. The
algorithms that we develop can be explicitly implemented as computer programs.
Mathematical moments are used to model many real-word phenomena, such as area,
velocity, momentum, weighted averages, probability distributions, etc. In the
evaluation of moments using integrals, the greatest computational costs are
associated with function calls. It has long been of interest to scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers to devise efficient computational methods for
evaluating integrals, methods which minimize the number of expensive function
calls. For classical moments, computed as integrals over a straight line, this
problem is solved by classical tools of Numerical Analysis, particularly
Gaussian Quadrature. In the present study we seek to devise highly efficient
computational algorithms for integrals over sets in the plane (such as a
triangle, disk, or square.) We use a new matrix extension method to develop
concrete computational rules for efficient evaluation of two-dimensional moments
over planar sets. These rules can be coded into computer programs which enhance
the ability of scientists and engineers to evaluate integrals efficiently.
