
* 9800704
* Almost Periodic and Multivariable Periodic Matrix Functions: Extensions, Factorizations, Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,02/02/1999
* Leiba Rodman,VA,College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 12/31/2000
* USD 120,522.00

DMS-9800704 PI: L. Rodman, I. M. Spitkovsky, H. J. Woerdeman. For periodic
matrix functions of several variables, the positive extension and contractive
extension problems will be studied.The positive extension problem arises in
signal processing when spectral estimation of stochastic processes are required.
The contractive counterpart arises in such fields as the worst-case control,
e.g., in the model-matching problem. New support sets with the positive
extension property will be identified, and a description of all solutions
(including a maximum entropy solution) of the respective extension problems will
be given. For this purpose, new versions of the band method, suited for the
multivariable setting and including dual norm results, will be formulated. For
finite sets which do not have positive extension property, numerical algorithms
based on the reduction to matrix completion problems will be developed. The
results obtained will be related back to their applications.The principal
investigators will continue a systematic study of almost periodic factorization.
This factorization arises naturally in diffraction theory, distributed
parameters control systems, and the spectral estimation problem for a class of
stochastic processes. New existence results will be obtained and then used in
applications to almost periodic versions of the Corona problem and stable rank
one property, Krein's theorem on orthogonal matrix polynomials, the Beurling-Lax
theorem and the geometry of shift-invariant subspaces of the Besicovitch space.
Almost periodic factorization will also be used in the spectral theory of
various operators (including Toeplitz, Wiener-Hopf and other convolution type
operators) with matrix almost periodic and semi almost periodic symbols on
weighted Lebesgue spaces, and in almost periodic extensions and interpolation
problems. Connections with the respective problems for periodic functions of
several variables will be exploited. New procedures for explicit almost periodic
factorization will be developed and applied to a constructive solution of
convolution type (in particular, difference) equations on finite intervals.
These results will be further applied in the scattering theory for the
generalized Schrodinger equation. The proposed research aims to develop new
mathematical tools and techniques, motivated by potential uses in diverse areas
of science and technology. A typical application in medical sciences,
seismology, signal processing, or physics involves reconstruction (as much as
available data allows) of the intrinsic structure of an object of study, given
only a few surface measurements. Statistical applications involve prediction, or
prognosis, of a process in probabilistic terms, when only a brief history is
known. There are currently available mathematical techniques that underlie many
recent technological advances in these areas. However, the existing techniques
deal mostly with the case when there is only one variable (typically time or
distance along a line) involved. The immense complexity of real-life systems
calls for new mathematical developments, in particular it calls for an extension
of the existing theory to the case of more variables (allowing for instance for
planar and spatial variables). The proposed research seeks to make substantial
contributions in this direction. Interaction and collaboration with many
researchers in different fields is an integral part of the proposal. The
principal investigators also plan to involve undergraduate students in parts of
their research.
