
* 9800931
* Multivariable Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,04/20/2000
* Raul Curto,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 05/31/2002
* USD 160,155.00

To: Dr. Joe Jenkins >From: Raul Curto Date: January 7, 1998 Re: Abstract of
Project, Multivariable Operator Theory This research project deals with four
areas of multivariable operator theory: (i) existence, uniqueness, and
localization of the support of representing measures for truncated moment
problems; (ii) structure and spectral theory for polynomially hyponormal
operators; (iii) standard operator models over Reinhardt domains; and (iv) a
multivariable analog of Apostol's Lemma on hyperinvariant subspaces for
contractions. Concerning the first area, special emphasis will be given to the
study of moment problems associated with singular matrices, building on recent
work (joint with L.A. Fialkow) on flat extensions of positive moment matrices,
which has led to a general framework for the study of truncated complex moment
problems. With the aid of a new moment matrix associated to a semi-algebraic
set, progress is expected in the localization-of-support problem. A
characterization of quadrature domains in terms of their moment matrices, and
further applications to quadrature and cubature formulas will also be sought. As
part of (ii), a characterization of polynomially hyponormal weighted shifts, a
structure theorem for quadratically hyponormal shifts, and the detection of non-
subnormal polynomially hyponormal operators through the Pincus principal
function and through Putinar's 2-subscalar model, will be sought. The research
aim in the third area (which deals with a Sz. Nagy- Foias dilation theory in
several variables and builds on recent work of A. Athavale, V. Muller, F.-H.
Vasilescu and others), is to extend the existing theory to functional Hilbert
spaces over Reinhardt domains. The suitability of multi-shifts as standard
models, the validity of von Neumann's inequality for special n-tuples, and the
structure of C*-algebras generated by spherical isometries, will be considered.
The fourth and final area deals with the invariant subspace structure of
commuting contractions on Hilbert space. Using recent results of J. Eschmeier,
M. Kosiek, A. Octavio, M. Ptak, and others, two main goals will be pursued: (a)
an extension to the Taylor spectrum of results on spectral dominance currently
available only for the Harte spectrum, and (b) an analog of Apostol's Theorem in
several variables. Multivariable operator theory is a rapidly evolving area of
mathematics, with deep and significant connections with areas of differential
geometry, topology, complex analysis, and algebraic geometry, and with exciting
applications to engineering, quantum and relativistic mechanics, and
computational mathematics. The theory of truncated moment problems provide
easily accessible formulas for the evaluation of areas and volumes of complex
regions, of moments of inertia and centers of gravity. Dilation theory and
invariant subspace theory are essential tools to describe the algebraic
properties of elaborate physical or engineering systems, and the study of
transformations on function spaces has often led to the solution of problems in
control theory, intimately tied to systems theory and electrical engineering.
Our research project is aimed at resolving some outstanding problems in
multivariable operator theory, while creating recruitment and retention
opportunities for women and minorities to pursue careers in mathematics, by
engaging their participation in projects related to the interaction of
mathematics with other sciences.
