
* 9800794
* Boundary and Interior Regularity for Minimizers of the p-Energy and Related Functionals in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1998,07/17/1998
* Luca Capogna,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/07/1998
* USD 77,276.00

Abstract Capogna The main theme of this project is the study of the interior and
boundary regularity of minimizers for functionals that involve the "horizontal"
gradient of functions defined in a Carnot group or in a sub-Riemannian manifold.
Such functionals have a special interest both in geometry and partial
differential equations, and include the energy functional and the area
functional. Among the applications of the regularity theory one has the
Dirichlet problem for subLaplacians, regularity and rigidity properties for
quasiconformal maps between Carnot groups and the geometry of minimal surfaces.
As a variation on the main theme, this projects also includes the study of
minimizers for a suitably defined energy of maps with sub-Riemannian target. The
study of the regularity for minimizers of variational problems has been one of
the main concerns in mathematics for centuries. It is deeply related to the
study of natural phenomenon, since in nature the energy minimizing
configurations are the most likely to appear. If a minimizer is very regular
then it is easy to study its structure. Translated out of the mathematical
formalism, this means that the physical system corresponding to a very regular
minimizer can be predicted very accurately. This observation is at the basis of
a wide range of applications, from meteorological forecasts to the planning of a
space shuttle launch (depending on the specific functional and minimizer
studied). The variational problems involved in this project are associated to a
special structure of the space that arises naturally in the study of many
physical systems, among them thermodynamical systems and crystalline materials.
A main feature of this special structure is that not all directions in space are
equivalent. It costs more to travel along some directions than to move along
others. The mathematical problems related to this feature are very difficult and
interesting.
