
* 9801337
* Motion By Curvature In Phase Transitions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1998,04/14/2000
* Gieri Simonett,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2001
* USD 63,243.00

PI: Gieri Simonett DMS-9801337 ABSTRACT: Over the last years the PI has worked
on various free boundary problems and has studied existence, uniqueness,
regularity, and qualitative properties of classical solutions for such models as
the gravitational flow of a fluid in a porous medium, the multi-dimensional one-
phase Hele-Shaw problem, the one and two-phase Mullins-Sekerka model,the quasi-
stationary Stefan problem with surface tension, and the surface diffusion
flow.This research led to the solution of some long-standing open problems. In
this project the PI will continue to study geometric evolution problems for
surfaces driven by mean curvature. These models are widely used in material
sciences, physics, and chemistry to model phase changes, domain growth,and
interface controlled crystal growth. Progress on the mathematical front will
necessarily have an impact in material sciences. The Mullins-Sekerka model is a
nonlocal geometric evolution law in which the normal velocity of a propagating
interface depends on the jump across the interface of the normal derivative of a
function which is harmonic on either side and which equals the mean curvature on
the propagating interface. It was introduced to study solidification and
liquidation of materials of zero specific heat and has attracted considerable
attention since then.Important contributions by Alikakos, Bates and Chen have
tied this model to a singular limit for the Cahn-Hilliard equation, a fourth
order parabolic equation which is widely used as a model for phase separation
and coarsening phenomena in a melted binary alloy. This model has also been
proposed to account for aging or Ostwald ripening in phase transitions. In
general, the kinetics of a first order phase transition is characterized by a
first stage where small droplets of a new phase are created out of the old
phase, e.g., solid formation in an undercooled liquid. The first stage, called
nucleation,yields a large number of small particles .During the next stage the
nuclei grow rapidly at the expense of the old phase.When the phase regions are
formed,the mass of the new phase is close to equilibrium and the amount of
undercooling is small,but large surface area is present.At the next stage, the
configuration of phase regions is coarsened, and the geometric shape of the
phase regions become simpler and simpler, eventually tending to regions of
minimum surface area with given volume. The driving force of this process comes
from the need to decrease the interfacial energy. There have been considerable
effortsin finding a theory which describes Ostwald ripening, and the Mullins-
Sekerka model is a prominent candidate.The surface diffusion flow and the
intermediate surface diffusion flow are geometric evolution problems which model
morphological changes where surface diffusion and interface kinetics are the
transport mechanisms. These laws constitute a class of dynamic problems where
the volume is conserved and the driving force is surface energy reduction.
