
* 9801094
* Motion of Interface Between Two Fluids
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,06/25/1998
* Sijue Wu,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 10/31/2000
* USD 62,046.00

Proposal: DMS-9801094 Principal Investigator: Sijue Wu Abstract: Wu will study
the long time behavior of water waves, as well as the motion of a general two-
layered fluid flow. To understand the long time behavior of a water wave, Wu
would like to determine whether the free surface of such a wave remains non-
self-intersecting and whether solutions of water wave problems exist for all
time, given that the initial free surface of the water wave is a small
perturbation of still water. To be more precise, she would like to characterize
those initial free surfaces that guarantee the non-self-intersection of the free
surface of a water wave for all time. She also wants to study the blow-up
mechanism for those solutions of the water wave problem that fail to exist for
all time. The methods used to tackle these problems arise from harmonic analysis
and the theory of partial differential equations. They include: decay estimates,
maximal principle arguments, and the construction of a self-similar solution to
the problem. To understand the motion of the interface between any two
superposed fluids, Wu intends to study such fundamental questions as the
existence of solutions to the equation governing the motion and the singularity
profiles of solutions. To achieve this goal, she hopes to adapt the methods in
her earlier work on water waves to derive a quasilinear equation equivalent to
the equation that describes the motion of the interface. The reason for this
approach is that the equation which models the motion of a two-fluid interface
is highly nonlinear. In general, one has a better understanding of quasilinear
equations than of fully nonlinear equations. The proposed research is a
continuation of the work started by Nalimov, Yosihara and Craig and later
advanced by the principal investigator on the existence and uniqueness of
solutions of water wave problems and the work of Sulem, Dochun and Robert,
Caflisch and Orellana, and Ebin on the well-posedness of vortex sheet motion.
Fluid waves, in numerous guises, are present in some of the most familiar
experiences of daily life, from the jarring impact of loud noises on our
eardrums to the soothing ebb and flow of surf at a beach. The rich variety of
phenomena associated with wave motion have provided generations of physicists
and mathematicians with an important and challenging research subject. The
general problem of motion of the free interface of two superposed fluids has
applications to a wide variety of concrete physical problems. It has been used
to understand the mixing of fluids, the separation of boundary layers, the
generation of sounds, and coherent structures in models of turbulence. The long
term objective of the proposed work is to understand wave-breaking in surface
waves and the singularity mechanism in vortex sheets, both topics that have
significant ramifications for physics and engineering.
