
* 9801374
* Regularity for Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,07/07/2000
* Lihe Wang,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 127,851.00

DMS-9801374 Lihe Wang This proposal is directed in the study of regularity
theory of bi-harmonic maps, level surfaces of solutions of partial differential
equations, problems of geometric flows and degenerate equations. Regularity of
weakly bi-harmonic maps are established. Bi-harmonic maps are expected to play
an important role in the theory of four manifolds. The level surfaces are the
central subject of study in the theories of phase transitions, geometric
evolutions and free boundary problems. Some special level surfaces appear as the
boundary of crystals and the wave fronts of shock waves in many practical
problems. We plan to develop some new ideas which help to understand the nature,
stability and regularity of these level surfaces. The mathematical existence of
flow of crystals and the regularity of the boundary of the crystals are also
established. Since Newton discovered the second law of physics, progress in
mathematical physics has relied on the partial differential equations, from
fluid mechanics, relativity to quantum mechanics. Although partial differential
equations describe nature quite precisely, they have many challenges. The major
difficulty is due to their nonlinearity. Another big source of the complications
comes from the singularities of some of the physical quantities. Physically
these came from a phenomenon like that of the formation of a black hole or other
physical phenomena such as explosion, phase transition or even super-
conductivity. We try to understand these singularities by studying the structure
and the configuration of the singularity set. A class of this kind of problems
comes from crystal growth and free boundary problems. The motion of the boundary
of the crystal is the geometric flow problem. Here the boundary of the crystal,
such as in the case of melting ice, is a level surface of the temperature
function. The whole dynamical process of the crystal growth is studied from This
point of view.
