
* 9801074
* Multivariable Complex Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1998,04/09/1998
* Jeffrey Diller,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 09/17/1998
* USD 59,939.00

Diller proposes to study the iteration of rational maps on complex projective
space, focusing primarily on birational maps of the projective plane. Chaotic
sets for such maps tend to occur as the support of certain positive closed
currents, thus pluripotential theory is a natural tool to use in understanding
the dynamics of birational maps. Diller plans to take this insight a step
further, by understanding a birational map entirely in terms of its action on
appropriately chosen positive currents. For instance, he proposes to replace the
projective plane by a dynamically defined quotient of the space of non-constant
analytic disks as the natural domain of a birational map. The hope is that since
the refined domain will not have points which are indeterminate for the map, it
will be a more natural setting for constructing and understanding the
dynamically significant currents. A dynamical system is any process that evolves
in time-for instance, the weather or information traffic on the internet. It is
often both very useful and very difficult to understand the behavior of such
systems. The problems and solutions concerning such systems are often
mathematical and can be reduced to sets of equations which can then be analyzed
theoretically by hand or experimentally by computer simulation. This work will
contribute to the further understanding of still more complicated and ever more
realistic systems.
