
* 9801713
* Reductive Dual Pairs in Exceptional Groups: Cohomology, and Unipotent Representations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,04/24/1998
* Jian-Shu Li,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 70,596.00

Abstract Li The ``classical'' theory of theta series and reductive dual pairs in
the symplectic group has become a standard part of representation theory and
automorphic forms, and continues to attract a great amount of interest and
activity. The analogous theory for exceptional groups was begun just a few years
ago, and is going through rapid development. In previous NSF sponsored projects,
the proposer fruitfully studied some basic questions in the theory, such as the
correspondences of infinitesimal characters, and developed new methods to
determine the discrete spectrum of exceptional dual pairs. Here he proposes to
continue his study of the remaining fundamental problems, and to apply the
results to specific problems such as cohomology of arithmetic manifolds and
unipotent representations. He plans to combine his own methods with those of
Burger and Sarnak, and hopes to establish close relations between discrete
series of certain non-symmetric homogeneous spaces and the spectrum of reductive
dual pairs. The theory of Lie group representations is concerned with the study
of certain kinds of symmetries. When two groups are embedded in a larger ambient
group in a interesting way, one could ask how the symmetries of the larger group
would behave upon restriction to the two embedded groups. Frequently this leads
to deep information which plays important roles in both representation theory
and number theory. Building upon earlier work by the proposer and other
mathematicians, this project aims to settle several fundamental questions in the
study of such restrictions of symmetries, and apply the results to the study of
geometry and arithmetic of various interesting spaces associated to the groups
in question.
