
* 9801474
* Quantum Dynamics and Spectral Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,07/11/2000
* Yoram Last,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2001
* USD 113,634.00

Proposal: DMS-9801474 Principal Investigator: Yoram Last Abstract: The main aim
of this project is the study of fundamental relations between dynamical
properties of quantum mechanical systems, spectral properties of the
corresponding operators, spatial properties of their eigenfunctions, and various
other spectral related and transport related properties. The key model problem
to be considered is that of a d-dimensional (time independent) Schroedinger
operator and its associated free time evolution. The operators of interest here
are mainly those with long-range potentials that do not converge to infinity,
such that rich spectral phenomena and dynamical behaviors may arise. The study
is expected to be applicable to a more general context of problems involving
unitary time evolution. Moreover, the project is expected to provide effective
tools for spectral analysis of unitary and self adjoint (in particular,
Schroedinger) operators, as well as for the study of dynamical properties of the
corresponding quantum systems. The project aims at some fundamental questions of
quantum mechanics that are expected to be important to modern physics. The core
mathematical questions are also of interest in more general contexts, such as
problems arising in classical chaos theory. The project would seek relations
between various fundamental quantities that are associated with the systems
under consideration. This is expected to provide improved and coherent
understanding of such systems as a whole, as well as to provide effective
analytical tools for the study of the properties themselves. The need to develop
such general understanding arises in connection with various rich mathematical
phenomena which until recently where mainly considered as theoretical
curiosities. Recent studies show, however, that such phenomena occur in many
natural models for physical systems that are now within experimental reach.
