
* 9801582
* Multidimensional Hypergeometric Function Associated with Riemann Surfaces and Dynamical Quantum Groups
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 05/15/1998,04/03/2002
* Alexander Varchenko,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2004
* USD 463,176.00

Title: "Multidimensional Hypergeometric Functions Associated with Riemann
Surfaces and Dynamical Quantum Groups" Principal Investigator: Alexander
Varchenko Abstract: The goal of the project is to solve differential equations
for conformal blocks on Riemann surfaces of an arbitrary genus, to quantize the
differential equations for conformal blocks and develop modular properties of
solutions of the quantized difference equations, to construct the representation
theory of dynamical quantum groups, which form an algebraic structure underlying
the properties of the quantized conformal blocks.The theory of special functions
is a useful tool to solve differential equations important for applications. New
problems of mathematical physics require new special functions and suggest new
approaches to studying special functions. The Gauss hypergeometric function is
an example of a classical special function. The Gauss hypergeometric function
satisfies the remarkable hypergeometric differential equation. The
hypergeometric differential equation is connected with representation theory of
affine Lie algebras. The monodromy properties of the Gauss hypergeometric
function lead to the theory of quantum groups. Modern field theory and
statistical mechanics suggest a new point of view on the Gauss hypergeometric
function, namely, one considers the hypergeometric differential equation as a
special example of the differential equation for conformal blocks on the Riemann
sphere and the Gauss hypergeometric function as a special conformal block on the
Riemann sphere. Thus, a new class of special functions arises - the conformal
blocks on Riemann surfaces. To describe algebraic properties of conformal blocks
one will need new algebraic structures. Namely, the algebraic structure
underlying the properties of conformal blocks on the Riemann sphere is the
standard quantum group structure. The algebraic structure underlying the
properties of conformal blo cks on the torus is the recently discovered
dynamical quantum group structure. One can expect that to describe properties of
conformal blocks on Riemann surfaces of a given genus, one will need the
corresponding to this genus variant of the quantum group theory. The aim of this
project is to develop the theory of special functions associated with Riemann
surfaces of an arbitrary genus and study algebraic structures associated with
these special functions.
