
* 9801583
* Measures, Dynamics and Dimensions
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 06/01/1998,06/19/2000
* R. Daniel Mauldin,TX,University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 05/31/2002
* USD 196,973.00

Abstract Mauldin/Urbanski The investigators will continue ongoing research
involving measures of various kinds-Hausdorff, packing, conformal, Gibbs state,
etc.; associated functions-capacities, pressure and associated dimensions. These
notions will be studied from two interlaced viewpoints. One is that of various
dynamical systems and the other is that of geometric measure theory as applied
to recursively generated objects. These approaches naturally meld with one
another and lead to some interesting mixtures of ideas. During the last few
years we have developed a fairly extensive theory of the iteration of infinitely
many uniformly contracting conformal maps(hyperbolic systems) and have made some
applications of it to some well known problems. We would like to extend this
theory to cover a more structured iteration of maps-whose governed by directed
graphs or substitutions and random iterations. We also wish to apply our theory
to geometric object obtained as limit sets of Kleinian groups or more generally
a system of maps which are not uniformly contracting(parabolic systems). We
intend to develop the tools necessary to apply our theory to continue obtaining
new results about the geometric structure of sets of continued fractions and
relationships to classical arithmetic density results. We also plan to develop
an appropriate multifractal formalism for our systems. We want to use these
tools to describe some aspects of the geometry of the Julia sets of Collett-
Eckmann rational functions. Finally, we want to obtain some approximation
theorems which should be useful for obtaining analogues of known section and
projection theorems concerning Hausdorff measures and dimension to packing
measures and dimension and other mixed geometric measures. The specific problems
of this proposal arise from many contexts and their solutions will involve a
mixture of techniques from various areas: complex analysis, dynamics, functional
analysis-theory of positive operators of the Reulle-Perron-Frobeni us
type(transfer operators), measure theory and probability, statistical physics-
equilibrium states, and thermodynamic formalism. This work arises from problems
occurring in several diverse areas-statistical physics, thermodynamics, the
theory of turbulence, geometry, algorithms or recipes for generating various
geometric objects which are subject to random errors and finally, to dynamical
systems where the long term behavior of the system is governed by some seemingly
strange object. Our work focuses on some common features of all of these
systems. First, we intend to show how, in a natural way, to produce measures
associated with each system. For some systems, these measures give us a means of
measuring the long term behavior of the system. For some systems, it gives us a
means of quantifying the fine scale geometric structure of the object produced
or of stating what the geometric structure will be like on average. To each of
these measures is associated a dimension, a number which might not be an
integer-a fractal dimension. These dimension numbers can be computed or
estimated by some basic formulas which we have developed. This is useful for
applications. This part can be carried out with the aid of computer studies and
thus is of direct interest for pratical reasons. We intend to continue to
develop applicable formulas for determining these dimensions and from that how
to produce the associated measures which yield so much information about the
system.
