
* 9801482
* The Structure of Nuclear C*-Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,02/13/1998
* Huaxin Lin,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2001
* USD 67,473.00

Abstract Lin The project is to study nuclear C*-algebras by studying their
homomorphisms, isomorphic types and their invariants, and by studying extensions
of C*-algebras. Continuous maps between topological spaces are of fundamental
importance in topology. As their noncommutative counterparts, homomorphisms are
of fundamental importance in the theory of C*-algebras. One part of the project
is to determine when two homomorphisms from one unital separable nuclear
C*-algebra to another C*-algebra are (stably) approximately unitarily
equivalent. It is always in the center of the theory of C*-algebras to determine
when two C*-algebras are isomorphic and to describe their invariants. Another
part of the project is to classify (simple) nuclear separable C*-algebras via
their K-theory. These two parts are closely related and both involve the general
theory of C*-algebras, KK-theory, the theory of automorphisms, the C*-algebra
extension theory, the group representations as well as algebraic topology. Many
important and significant problems in engineering, the physical sciences, and
social sciences require the knowledge of linear algebras (or matrix algebras) to
solve them. Many problems in linear algebras, in particular asymptotic and
approximation problems in linear algebras are best described in infinite
dimensional linear algebras. The study of C*-algebras is the study of infinite
dimensional linear algebras. However the applications of C*-algebras range from
linear algebras, operator theory, group representations, dynamic systems, to
model quantum field theory and quantum statistical mechanics. For the
development of the theory of C*-algebras as well as for the purpose of
applications to other areas, it is primarily important to have a better
understanding of the structure of C*-algebras. It is the ambitious goal of this
project to determine the structure of C*-algebras with fewest possible data.
