
* 9801435
* Potentials, Polynomials and Weighted Polynomial Inequalities
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,05/01/1998
* Vilmos Totik,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 05/31/2002
* USD 63,493.00

The principal investigator explores several problems in approximation theory
with special interest in applications of potentials and in polynomials. One of
these topics is polynomial approximation with varying weights. Recently several
problems have lead to this type of approximation, and the PI continues its study
with the help of logarithmic potentials in the presence of an external field.
This approximation problem is fundamental in proving different types of
asymptotics for orthogonal polynomials and Christoffel functions with respect to
varying weights. These in turn are related to some mechanical models of quantum
physics, in particular to the universality hypothesis (saying that the
distribution of energy levels in small intervals is independent of the original
(random) distribution of the particles). Another related problem is on
orthogonal polynomials with respect to a measure with compact support on the
complex plane (bounds for polynomials, regularity criteria, Szego's problem on
curves or disjoint intervals). Finally, the PI plans to investigate polynomial
inequalities with as general weights as possible. Recently it has turned out
that classical polynomial inequalities are also true in weighted form, and for a
surprisingly wide class of weights, namely for so called doubling weights, or
for weights satisfying the weakest of the Muckenhoupt A conditions. The PI
further investigates weighted polynomial inequalities, as well as their
consequences in other areas. This research project deals with some theoretical
questions of mathematical analysis with the aim of using in more applied areas
of mathematics and theoretical physics. Some basic problems in approximation
theory are investigated with tools that have been traditionally associated with
classical physics (potential theory). This novel application of potential theory
makes it possible to attack problems that resisted classically applied tools,
e.g. it makes possible to find the behav ior of some nonclassical orthogonal
polynomials (Freud polynomials). A new impulse to the research came in recent
years when it has been found that these orthogonal polynomials are related to
some questions of theoretical physics that are modelling the uncertain nature of
quantum systems by random mechanical models. Another major area of research is
on weighted inequalities on polynomials. Polynomials are basic tools in
replacing complicated structures by simpler ones that can be mathematically
handled; and in this approximation process one needs various inequalities that
relate various quantities of polynomials to one another.
