
* 9801539
* Research and Education in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,04/20/2000
* Harold Boas,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2002
* USD 309,366.00

Proposal: DMS-9801539 Principal Investigators: Harold P. Boas, Emil Straube
Abstract: The L-2 Sobolev theory of the d-bar Neumann problem on pseudoconvex
domains has seen dramatic progress in the 1980s and 1990s, notably through the
work of Catlin and D'Angelo on subellipticity and finite type, of the principal
investigators on global regularity on large classes of (weakly) pseudoconvex
domains, and of Barrett, Christ, and Siu on failure of regularity on the so
called "worm" domains. However, there is currently not even a conjecture about
what combination of geometric and potential theoretic conditions might be used
to characterize global regularity in the d-bar Neumann problem. The study of
such conditions is one of the directions of this project. A related (and quite
possibly more tractable) question is that of characterizing domains with compact
d-bar Neumann operators. (This question also has repercussions in operator
theory.) In addition, the principal investigators will study L-p estimates with
gain for the d-bar Neumann problem on domains of finite type. Here, they will
build on new insight gained from recent work concerning nonsmooth domains of
finite type. These investigations are also of interest from the point of view of
the Kaehler geometry associated with the Bergman kernel of a domain. (In
addition to their intrinsic significance, Bergman-like kernels play a prominent
role in a quantization scheme --Berezin quantization -- that has recently
attracted much attention from both mathematicians and physicists). During this
project, the principal investigators will train three graduate students, and
they will supervise a young mathematician at the post-doctoral level (supported
through a Group Infrastructure Grant at Texas A&M University) in his study of
problems concerning polynomial hulls. (While intrinsically motivated, these
questions have intimate connections to control engineering). The study of
analysis in several complex variables can be motivated by the centrality of the
subject within mathematics (thus making it essential, in the long term, for the
well-being of the scientific and technological enterprise) or through a more
direct appeal to its usefulness. For example, one of the basic laws of nature,
causality, when transcribed via a mathematical device called the Fourier
transform, immediately gives rise to analytic functions of several (in this case
four) complex variables. Likewise, as indicated above, the work in this project
will impact not only the core areas of several complex variables and partial
differential equations, but also other areas of science through connections to
operator theory, to mathematical physics, and to control engineering. Finally,
the project will contribute significantly to human resources development in
mathematics.
