
* 9801555
* Partial Differential Equations and Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,05/09/2000
* Francois Treves,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 05/31/2002
* USD 95,665.00

Proposal DMS-9801555 Abstract of the Research Project of Francois Treves F.
Treves plans to carry out his research in the coming years, in the following
three distinct areas: 1. Global parametrices for the time-dependent Schroedinger
equation on Euclidean space equipped with a non-Euclidean Riemannian metric.
This is joint work with S. Chanillo (Rutgers Univ.). The first step is to
construct a parametrix when there is no potential. The next step is to do the
same with a potential, whose derivatives are decaying at infinity at a suitable
rate (with similar contions on the metric). They propose to use the parametrix
to describe the critical set and the propagation of singularities (in Lbesgue
and Sobolev spaces), with special attention to the presence of trapped
geodesics. 2. Boundary values of Dolbeault cohomology classes. Treves is
completing a research program begun with P. D. Cordaro (Univ. of Sao Paulo,
Brazil) and S. Gindikin (Rutgers Univ.). The objectives are several: to obtain
integral formulas for the solutions of second-order hyperbolic and ultra-
hyperbolic partial differential equations; to define spaces of generalized
functions (actually hyperfunctions) well suited for the representations of the
classical groups which preserve those equations; to lay the ground for the study
of ``analytic extension" to domains more complicated than wedges. 3. Analyticity
of the solutions of second-order linear partial differential equations of the
form ``sums of squares of (analytic, real) vector fields". Recently Treves has
formulated a necessary and sufficient condition for such a property to be valid;
he plans to use microlocal analysis to initiate a proof of the conjecture. The
solutions of the Schroedinger equation are the fundamental elements in the
``wave description" of the states of particles in Quantum Physics. The
construction attempted by Chanillo and Treves is aimed at providing explicit
formulas for solving the Schroedinger equation - formulas that make it possible
to describe very precisely the behaviour of the particles in the large (so as to
take into account distant ``radiation") and in ``curved" space (so as to take
into account special constraints on the trajectories of the particles). The work
of Treves on boundary values aims at forging new mathematicatools, and again
explicit formulas, that could be used in the theory of the Radon and X-ray
transforms (which lie at the theoretical foundations of tomography). Finally,
the differential equations of the kind ``sums of squares of vector fields"
describe, through their solutions, various kinds of Brownian motion and of
random processes (they have been extensively studied by probability theorists).
The analyticity of their solutions is a precise mathematical formulation of
their great smoothness, as well as indicating the possibility of computing some
of their properties in finitely many steps.
