
* 9803121
* Mathematical Aspects of Classical Fields
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,07/24/2000
* Jalal Shatah,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 05/31/2002
* USD 116,792.00

This project is concerned with the study analytical and dynamical aspects of
generalized wave maps and the Yang-Mills equations. From the analytical
standpoint we plan to address fundamental questions such as existence,
uniqueness, and formation of singularities for these models. Specifically we
will consider wave maps with torsion and will study how the addition of the
torsion tensor affects propagation of regularity and development of
singularities for these equations. From the dynamical standpoint we will start
by considering the integrable versions of wave maps with torsion, as well as
other integrable equations, and will study how homoclinic solutions behave under
perturbation. Specifically we will study how the persistence of homoclinic
orbits leads to chaotic systems. We will also attempt to quantify the difference
between temporal chaos and spatial chaos, which is observed numerically in
perturbations of the above models. We will test for spatial chaos by actually
computing the probability distributions at two spatially distinct points and
show that the mutual information function decays to zero at an exponential rate.
Many physical phenomena are described by equations which have a geometric
interpretation. The best known examples are Maxwell's equations and Einstein's
equations for gravity. These physical models pose challenging mathematical
questions whose answer will add significantly to our understanding to the nature
of things. For instance, blackholes are interpreted as a certain type of
singularity that occur in the equations of general relativity. However in
addition to blackholes, these equations also exhibit another type of singularity
called naked singularity, which are purely mathematical and do not exist in
nature. In this project we will consider models and study the existence and
nature of singularities, and how the geometry of the problems influence these
issues. This study will help in the understanding of how , and of what type,
singularities may develop in the given systems. We will also study the onset of
chaos in deterministic partial differential equations, which can exhibit spatial
chaos as well as temporal chaos. In such systems the precise physical
information is usually lost and replaced by statistical quantities. In addition
to this, the equations themselves become less useful and should be replaced by
effective probablistic equations to capture the stochastic nature of
deterministic spatial-temporal chaos. In this project we will develop tests for
the occurrence of spatial chaos based on mutual information, which measures the
amount of information transmitted spatially by the equation. We will also
attempt to develop a mathematically rigorous procedure to derive from the
original systems the relevant effective probabilistic models.
