
* 9803443
* Basic Fourier Series and Their Extensions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1998,04/14/2000
* Sergei Suslov,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 05/31/2002
* USD 140,521.00

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sergei K. SUSLOV, PROPOSAL ID# DMS-9803443 PROPOSAL
TITLE: Basic Fourier Series and Their Extensions ABSTRACT OF THE RESEARCH
PROJECT The area of special functions, and q-series in particular, has seen
significant advances in the last twenty years. One major event is the discovery
of the Askey-Wilson polynomials. There are also a variety of recent problems in
analysis, algebra, and combinatorics related to q-series. In the current project
we plan to investigate basic Fourier series and their extensions. This is quite
a new area of research in analysis. The Fourier and Fourier-Bessel series have a
rich and deep theory. But only recently Ismail, Masson and Suslov have
established a continuous orthogonality property for the basic Bessel functions
and considered basic extension of the Fourier-Bessel series. Bustoz and Suslov
have introduced basic Fourier series and established several facts about
convergence of these series. Askey suggested that the "Bessel-type
orthogonality" found by Ismail, Masson, and Suslov has a general character and
can be extended to a larger class of basic hypergeometric series. Askey's
conjecture has recently been proven by Suslov. In this project we propose to
develop a theory of basic Fourier series and their higher extensions which is
similar to the classical theory of Fourier and Fourier-Bessel series. This
theory will include detailed study of properties of the new q-orthogonal
functions, investigation of convergence of the corresponding series and related
topics. This naturally includes certain computational problems: eigenvalues of
the corresponding Sturm-Liouville problem can be found only numerically,
investigation of convergence of these new series should be done. Explicit
examples of basic Fourier series naturally lead to a new class of formulas never
investigated before from the analytical and numerical viewpoint. The method of
basic Fourier series can be applied to study solu tions of a q-heat equation and
for some other basic versions of the equations of mathematical physics. The
study of Fourier series has a long and distiguished history in mathematics.
Historically, Fourier series were introduced in order to solve the heat
equation, and since then these series have been frequently used in various
applied problems. Much of modern real analysis including Lebesgue's fundamental
theory of integration had its origin in some deep convergence questions in
Fourier series. There is a great deal of interest these days in basic or
q-extensions of Fourier series and their theory. In this project we intend to
lay a sound foundation for this study. We introduce basic Fourier series,
investigate their main properties, and consider some applications in
mathematical physics.
