
* 9812460
* UAB-GIT International Conference on Differential Equations and Mathematical Physics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 12/01/1998,10/23/1998
* Rudi Weikard,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 15,000.00

The Department of Mathematics of the University of Alabama at Birmingham is
hosting an international conference on differential equations and mathematical
physics during March 16-20, 1999, in Birmingham. Topics will include the
analysis of multiparticle Schroedinger operators, stability of matter,
relativity theory, fluid dynamics, spectral and scattering theory including
inverse problems, as well as related topics. There will be ten plenary lectures
given by the following leading experts: Profs. S.Y.A. Chang (Princeton), D.
Christodoulou (Princeton); P. Lax (NYU), E. Lieb (Princeton), P.L. Lions
(Paris), A.I. Nachman (Rochester), S.P. Novikov (Steklov Institute and
University of Maryland), B. Simon (Cal Tech), J. Smoller (Michigan), J. Yngvason
(Vienna). There will be 30 minute lectures organized in parallel topical special
sessions of six to eight talks each (organizers in parentheses): General
Relativity (G. Galloway, Miami), Integrable Systems (F. Gesztesy, Missouri),
P.D.E.'s in Geometry (Y. Li, Rutgers), Quantum Mechanics (H. Siedentop,
Regensburg), and Inverse Problems. There will also be parallel sessions for up
to one hundred 30-minute contributed talks.

Previous conferences with related emphases in this series were held in March of
1981, 1983, 1986, 1990, and 1994 at UAB and in March of 1992 and 1997 at the
Georgia Institute of Technology. This conference series between UAB and Georgia
Tech has been of great interest in the past, both here and internationally,
bringing together scholars from around the world for fruitful scientific
exchange in an active area in which modern mathematical analysis comes to grips
with problems of scientific importance.
