
* 9816480
* Mini Conferences on Harmonic Analysis, Real Analysis, and Related Areas
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/1998,07/08/2002
* Geraldo Soares de Souza,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/2002
* USD 30,000.00

Since 1984, faculty in the Department of Mathematics at Auburn University have
organized a total of 25 one- and two-day conferences in harmonic analysis, real
analysis, and related areas. The main purpose of these meetings was to enable
mathematicians and mathematics students in the universities in the Southeast to
interact with each other and with mathematicians and students from outside the
region who have also been attending the conferences and to provide a forum for
presentation of recent mathematical research. The National Science Foundation
began regular support of these biannual meetings in 1986. The current award will
be used to continue this conference activity for the period 1998-2001. Three
Miniconferences on Harmonic Analysis and Related Areas will be held at Auburn
University during the fall semesters of 1998, 1999, and 2000. Three
Miniconferences on Real Analysis and Related Areas will be held at Auburn
University (spring 1999), University of Louisville (spring 2000), and California
State University at San Bernardino (spring 2001), respectively. Each meeting
will feature hour talks by the (usually 2 or 3) Invited Principal Speakers plus
contributed 20-minute talks and problem sessions. All of the funds provided by
the grant will be used to pay expenses of participants attending the
miniconferences. Expenses for Principal Speakers are paid in full and local
housing, local transportation, and some meals will be provided for all
participants. Additional support in the form of additional food allowances and
some travel support is provided for student participants. There are no
registration fees.

These conferences have been effective in stimulating research activity of
"professional research mathematicians" in the areas of mathematics represented.
Speakers have been attracted from over 30 states and as many as 14 foreign
countries in the past 13 years. Possibly of more importance is the impact this
activity has had on the faculty and students at the institution where the
conferences are held as well as on faculty and student participants from other
universities in the state and region. Such participants usually make up about
half the total who attend. For the meetings held at Auburn, participants
regularly come from UA Tuscaloosa, UA Birmingham, Troy State U, U West Ala,
Jacksonville State U, U South Ala, Spring Hill Coll, U Mobile, U Montevallo, Ala
State U, AU Montgomery, and Tuskegee Institute, as well as from institutions in
the neighboring states of Florida, Georgia, Tennessee, and Mississippi. For many
of these participants, especially the students, this opportunity for contact
with mathematicians and mathematics students from other parts of the country is
the most intellectually stimulating experience of the year. The meetings to be
held in Kentucky and California are expected to yield similar regional benefits.
