
* 9820775
* Cooperative International Research Project with Russia: Blaschke Inductive Limits of Disc Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 06/01/1999,04/30/1999
* Thomas Tonev,MT,University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2003
* USD 31,380.00

Proposal: DMS-9820775 Principal Investigator: Thomas Tonev

Abstract: This project focuses on a circle of problems arising from the
interaction between complex function theory, commutative Banach algebras, and
inductive and projective limits of spaces. Classical and modern techniques of
complex analysis will be applied to inductive limits of disk algebras generated
by Blaschke products and inner functions, a special case of which is the algebra
of generalized analytic functions, i.e., of functions on a compact abelian group
with ordered dual that are analytic in a particular sense. Relationships between
inductive limit algebras generated by one inner function and complex dynamical
systems will be investigated. It appears that the ideas involved have great
potential for further developments in the analysis on compact groups with
ordered duals and for a host of topics: Wiener-Hopf operators, invariant
subspaces of some function spaces, dynamical systems, commutative Banach algebra
theory, analytic function theory, corona type problems, Bourgain algebras and
Hankel type operators, stability under small perturbations.

This international cooperative research project is jointly funded by NSF's
Division of Mathematical Sciences and Division of International Programs. Its
objectives will be achieved through direct cooperative research between Thomas
Tonev of the University of Montana in the U.S. and Dr. Suren Grigoryan of Kazan
State University in Tatarstan, Russia. Work on the project will serve to
internationalize an ongoing domestic research effort in the area of abstract
harmonic analysis by linking it with a similar project and other related
research activities in Russia. The research will draw on the intellectual
resources of both sides, and the direct contacts will allow the project to
proceed at an optimal rate. It is the theory of dynamical systems, through its
connections to abstract harmonic analysis, that lies at the root of the proposed
research. This area, which is developing very rapidly at present, has important
applications to many physical problems. It is well-known, for instance, that
most processes in the physical world have an almost-periodic rather than
strictly periodic behavior. One of the triumphs in the theory of dynamical
systems has been the creation of mathematical tools for studying almost-periodic
phenomena. This explains the great interest in almost-periodic functions and
their close relatives, generalized analytic functions, which are among the
principal objects of investigation in this cooperative endeavor. A successful
completion of this project would lead to new discoveries of at first primarily
mathematical interest but with great future potential for application.
