
* 9870156
* Eigenvalue Problems in Mathematical Physics and Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,07/06/1998
* Mark Ashbaugh,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 80,000.00

Proposal: DMS-9870156 Principal Investigator: Mark S. Ashbaugh

Abstract: The objective of this research project is to establish bounds on the
eigenvalues of the partial differential operators which arise in mathematical
physics and geometry. The emphasis will be on the eigenvalue problems for the
fixed and free vibrations of a membrane and for the vibration and buckling of a
clamped plate. Concentration will be focused on the following specific problems:
(1) finding lower bounds for the first, or fundamental, eigenvalues of these
problems in terms of geometric quantities; (2) finding inequalities for ratios
of low-index eigenvalues and, more generally, inequalities bounding an arbitrary
eigenvalue in terms of lower eigenvalues; (3) finding comparison results
relating eigenvalues from two or more of the problems or relating eigenvalues
for domains in one space to those in some other, perhaps better understood,
space. Included in these comparison results would be those where a given
eigenvalue of one of the problems formulated in an arbitrary Riemannian manifold
is related back to the corresponding eigenvalue of a more regular problem -- for
example, the corresponding eigenvalue of a ball in a constant curvature space
(Euclidean, spherical, or hyperbolic space). Because of the normalizing role
they play, much of the effort will be directed at obtaining sharp bounds for
eigenvalue problems in these basic spaces, and particularly at understanding
eigenvalue problems for geodesic balls in these spaces.

The main reason for studying the problems described above is that eigenvalues
bear a simple relation to the characteristic (or natural) frequencies of
vibration of membranes and plates, as well as to the critical buckling load in
the buckling problem (i.e., the minimum force that needs to be applied around
the perimeter of a plate to make it buckle). The importance of such issues for
physics and engineering cannot be overstated. Here membranes and plates of
arbitrary shape are contemplated, and results that control the characteristic
frequencies and buckling loads in terms of geometric parameters are sought. In
particular, one is often most interested in the lowest, or so-called
fundamental, frequency of a membrane or plate, since it is usually the most
important one physically. Having a general understanding of how various
geometrical features affect these frequencies can be a great aid in the design
of physical components, whether the desire is to tune a given natural frequency
to a specific value or to suppress vibrations of the component in a certain
frequency range (to avoid resonance, for example). The eigenvalue problems
considered also describe key properties of waveguides, and as such have
important implications for fiber optics. Moreover, it ought to be possible to
establish eigenvalue inequalities of much the same form that apply to more
general differential operators; e.g., the Schroedinger equation, which is
fundamental to quantum physics.
