
* 9877194
* Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,05/11/1999
* Jean-Pierre Rosay,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2003
* USD 78,840.00

Proposal: DMS-9877194 Principal Investigator: Jean-Pierre Rosay

Abstract: The first goal of Professor Rosay is to continue his study, in
collaboration with E.L. Stout, of the theory of boundary values (in the sense of
hyperfunctions). Indeed, the two have started developing an entirely new theory
of boundary values. This is research in function theory, with strong connections
to several complex variables and partial differential equations. Rosay's project
also entails the continuation of his study of various questions on the dynamics
of biholomorphisms of complex n-space (collaborations with P. Ahern and F.
Forstneric). Several other topics (e.g., uniqueness in the Cauchy problem, the
nonlinear d-bar equation) will also be explored.

Rosay's main area of activity is the theory of functions of several complex
variables. This field is a central one in mathematics, with direct ties to such
areas as approximation theory and partial differential equations that are very
close to immediate applications (e.g., image processing, modeling, scientific
computation). It should be stressed that mathematical results that may at first
glance look quite abstract can in fact lead to very practical applications, by
creating the possibility of new computational tools. (Even if, as usual in
fundamental science, benefits may take many years to surface.) In order to
illustrate how a shift from what seems to be purely theoretical to something
more applied or at least applicable is possible, one need look no further than
the present project for an example. Stout and Rosay recently gave a totally new
proof of a very classical and fundamental theorem known as the Paley-Wiener
theorem. This new proof was unlikely to be found in the classical setting,
because the approach only became natural in the generalized and more abstract
setting of "analytic functionals." However, despite the fact that it arose in a
generalized setting, it turns out that the new proof is constructive in nature,
and therefore much more closely linked to the possibility of practical
computations. From one perspective, this development is not so surprising. It
has been known for centuries that the full explanation of many basic
mathematical phenomena (as fundamental as the convergence of power series
expansion) is to be found only in the realm of complex numbers. It has likewise
been known for centuries that many computations are best done with complex
variables, even if one is interested in a final answer expressed in terms of
real numbers. Of course, no more so than in any other science can one claim that
all the research in the field of complex analysis will lead to applications, and
often the applications that are found will come as complete surprises. But
complex analysis clearly furnishes an essential tool to both pure and applied
mathematicians.
