
* 9877157
* Operator Spaces and Their Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/1999,11/03/2000
* Zhong-Jin Ruan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2003
* USD 119,988.00

Abstract Ruan

An operator space is a norm closed subspace of bounded linear operators on a
Hilbert space, equipped with a distinguished matrix norm. The operator space
theory is a natural quantization of Banach space theory. The major difference
between operator spaces and Banach spaces is that one considers operator matrix
norms and completely bounded maps in the category of operator spaces. In 1987,
the PI succeeded in formulating an axiomatization of operator spaces by matrix
norms. Since then, a lot of progress has been made in this area. In this
proposal, the PI plans to continue his research in this direction and proposes
the following research topics: (1) investigate the local structure of the
operator preduals of von Neumann algebras and the operator duals of
$C^*$-algebras; (2) investigate the local structure on $C^*$-algebras and von
Neumann algebras; (3) investigate the geometric structure of matrix unit balls
of operator spaces; (4) investigate the application to locally compact quantum
groups.

The most profound distinction between classical and quantum mechanics is
Heisenberg's principle that one must represent the basic variables of physics by
operators rather than functions. The work of J. von Neumann emphasized that it
is important to pursue the "quantized" forms of mathematics. Collaborating with
F.J. Murray, von Neumann succeeded in quantizing integration theory during the
1940's. Since then, mathematicians have tried to quantize many other areas of
mathematics such as topology, differential geometry, analysis and probability
theory. The theory of operator spaces is a natural quantization of functional
analysis, or more precisely, a natural quantization of Banach space theory. This
is a recently developed promising research area in modern analysis. The PI and
his colleagues have established the foundation of this area. They have also
discovered some far-reaching applications of operator space theory to related
areas in mathematics such as operator algebras, non-commutative harmonic
analysis, Kac algebras and locally compact quantum groups. The PI plans to
continue his research in this direction and plans to explore a much broarder
range of applications.


