
* 9877101
* Fourier Integrals and Generalized Radon Transforms
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,04/30/1999
* Allan Greenleaf,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 12/31/2002
* USD 79,850.00

Proposal: DMS-9877101 Principal Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf

Abstract: Estimates for Fourier integral operators associated with canonical
relations whose projections exhibit stable classes of singularities, higher-
order cusps in particular, will be investigated. For two-sided cusps, new
decompositions of the operators near the singular varieties will be developed.
These estimates and decompositions will have applications to boundedness
properties of generalized Radon transforms, particularly averages over families
of curves and restricted X-ray transforms, on Sobolev and Lebesgue spaces. In
addition, classes of degenerate Fourier integral operators arising in integral
geometry and inverse seismic problems will be studied and composition calculi
obtained for them. Real analogues of Goncharov's complexes of hyperplane
sections of algebraic varieties of minimal degree and the forward operator for
linearized source problems will provide important prototypes of such operators.

The operators analyzed in this project are special classes of Fourier integral
operators, which have been used for the last thirty years to construct
approximate solutions to linear partial differential equations. Such equations
govern basic physical processes, such as vibration of membranes and propagation
of electromagnetic fields. More recently, it has been found that Fourier
integral operators arise in other settings, such as tomography (medical imaging)
and geophysical exploration. More detailed understanding of these operators
under a variety of geometric assumptions will improve our understanding of both
the qualitative and quantitative behavior of the physical systems being
modelled.
