
* 9877155
* Tomography and Integral Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,06/30/1999
* Eric Todd Quinto,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2002
* USD 78,706.00

ABSTRACT Quinto

This project continues research supported by National Science Foundation grant
DMS 9622947. Professor Quinto will pursue problems in tomography and in integral
geometry. He will develop and refine algorithms for industrial limited data
tomography, including his current algorithm and Lambda CT, and test them on
rocket data. Professor Quinto will develop a boundary detection method for SONAR
in shallow water and geophysical examination of structures near the surface. The
algorithm will be tested on simulations using different physical models.
Professor Quinto will work jointly with Professor Boergers on medical radiation
dose planning, the goal of which is to use X-rays to kill tumors in the body and
to damage as little surrounding tissue as possible. The researchers will
characterize the null space of the dose operator for both the semi-discrete and
completely discrete problems. They will investigate the dependence of the
singular values of the dose operator on the attenuation. Professor Quinto will
discover properties of generalized Radon transforms and apply them to other
areas of mathematical analysis. He will prove uniqueness and support theorems
for Radon transforms defined by spreads of polynomials, including spherical
transforms in Euclidean space and the hyperbolic plane and spreads defined by
other polynomials in Euclidean space. He will use these results to answer
questions in approximation theory and partial differential equations. He will
prove properties of the X-ray transform in Euclidean space. He will prove
support theorems for Radon transforms on spheres and other surfaces on manifolds
and use these to solve Morera problems on complex manifolds.

This research encompasses both applied and pure mathematics: tomography and
integral geometry. The pure research will be used to develop, understand, and
justify the applied algorithms, and the applied problems will motivate some of
the pure research. Computed tomography algorithms will be developed and refined
to to detect defects in industrial objects. They will be tested on real rocket
data. The algorithms will allow scientists to detect cracks in rocket bodies,
air pockets in rocket fuel, and delaminations in rocket exit cones. His current
algorithm works well, in general, but it does not detect some types of rocket
defects well enough. So, he will develop other algorithms that will work in
conjunction with his algorithm to get optimal reconstructions. He will develop
pure mathematics that will show how well the algorithms work and where their
limitations might show up. These pure mathematical underpinnings are required to
ensure that his (or any other) reconstructions are correct and are not lucky
guesses. In cancer radiation therapy, doctors irradiate tumors with radiation
from different directions. Professor Quinto will develop and analyze mathematics
that will help doctors choose how to irradiate tumors effectively. SONAR data
can be modeled as averages over spheres (the spherical wave fronts of the sound)
and Professor Quinto will prove theorems about these averages. He will use these
theorems to develop simple algorithms to map the ocean floor and to find
boundaries of objects in the ocean. These algorithms could also be useful for
geophysical examination. The algorithms will be tested on simulations using
different physical models. This pure mathematics is intriguing in its own right.
Professor Quinto will prove theorems about spherical averages which will be used
to understand the wave equation (the equation that describes how sound and light
behave) and for SONAR. He will also prove theorems about the X-ray transform,
the mathematics behind the newest X-ray tomography scanners. Finally, he will
prove theorems he will apply to complex analysis, a field in pure mathematics.
