
* 9877055
* Problems in Regularity Theory for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,03/07/2001
* Vladimir Sverak,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 05/31/2003
* USD 278,502.00

The proposal is aimed at the study of regularity properties of solutions of
various systems of nonlinear partial differential equations. These include: (i)
Quasilinear elliptic systems arising as Euler-Lagrange equations of general
multiple integrals in the Calculus of Variations and hyperbolic systems of
conservation laws. Questions arising in the study of regularity of solutions of
these equations will be studied from the point of view of the theory of
Compensated Compactness, which provides a unifying platform for approaching
these seemingly diverse problems. We expect that new methods in Compensated
Compactness recently developed by Stefan Muller and the PI will enable us to
give answers to some relatively old open questions. (ii) The Navier-Stokes
equations. Here we plan to study both the interior and boundary regularity for
important special classes of solutions. The motivation for these investigation
is the following: since regularity questions for general solutions are
notoriously intractable, it will be useful to study some non-trivial special
cases. Hopefully this will provide insights for the general case. We also plan
to study the relationship between Morrey's quasiconvexity and local ellipticity
conditions for functions on two by two matrices. This problem has recently been
linked to some old and difficult conjectures in Harmonic Analysis and the theory
of quasi-conformal mappings, and we expect that the interaction of ideas from
these different areas will be fruitful.

The main aim of this proposal is the study of regularity properties of solution
of nonlinear partial differential equations. Such equations appear in many
models of the real-world processes. The task of mathematicians is to solve these
equations. Often this is done by a numerical simulation on a computer. To be
able to do such simulations in a reliable way, one must know something about the
qualitative behavior of the solutions. For example, if we expect that the
solutions will oscillate wildly over small distances, we might need a different
method than in the case when the solutions change only slowly. Roughly speaking,
one of the main task of regularity theory is to develop methods which would
enable us to reliably predict the behavior of the solutions, so that we can then
choose adequately the methods for solving the equations. The proposed research
will hopefully improve our understanding of these difficult and important
questions.


