
* 9970310
* Nonlinear Waves in One-Dimensional and Multi-Dimensional Conservation Laws
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1999,11/05/2004
* Suncica Canic,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2005
* USD 173,378.00

The focus of this research proposal is on the study of solutions of one-
dimensional and multi-dimensional systems of conservation laws. In spite of an
extensive experimental and numerical exploration of problems that are governed
by MULTI-DIMENSIONAL conservation laws, there is no theory that would describe
properties of nonlinear waves that arise as solutions of these problems. Recent
results by the PI and co-worker Keyfitz indicate that for a large class of two-
dimensional problems, including standard equations of compressible flow, an
analysis of their self-similar solutions leads to many results that are shared
by the entire class of problems. They include an existence and uniqueness
theorem that holds in the region where the flow is supersonic, and a description
of possible singularities that may arise at the boundary where the flow changes
from supersonic to subsonic. To complete the analysis, a theory of free-boundary
problems for the positions of transonic shocks is needed. Preliminary results in
this vein are encouraging, and the PI, plans to continue research in this
direction. Tools of study include analysis of free-boundary problems for which a
degenerate elliptic equation of novel type has to be solved, and asymptotic
analysis of singularities. When completed, the results of this project will
contribute to solving open problems in the field of multi-dimensional wave
interactions and shock reflection problems, which include an existence theorem
for oblique shock reflection by a ramp, bifurcation criteria for two-dimensional
elementary waves, and the correct function space for a general existence theory
that will capture possible singularities in the solution. In ONE-DIMENSIONAL
conservation laws several novel phenomena, recently discovered by the PI, call
for further exploration and understanding. They include nonexistence of
classical weak self-similar Riemann solutions and the presence of bounded
amplitude, high frequency, oscillatory solutions replacing the classical ones.
Using compensated compactness methods these solutions were shown to satisfy the
system of conservation laws in a measure-valued sense. Understanding what causes
nonexistence, and what is the physical meaning of the oscillations, is one of
the goals of this research project.

Conservation laws are mathematical equations that describe processes central to
technology, such as high-speed flows, supersonic jets, as well as flows through
porous media which arise in environmental engineering and reservoir simulation.
Understanding the structure of solutions of conservation laws is crucial for a
successful simulation of these phenomena. The main difficulty lies in the fact
that solutions to conservation laws admit ``shock waves'', which correspond to
the sudden, abrupt changes in the flow properties. Shock waves influence the
stability of high-speed flows, and are crucial in the simulation of oil
recovery. In addition, based on the recent PI's findings, multi-dimensional
conservation laws admit ``singularities'' in the solutions that have not yet
been theoretically understood and which are difficult to resolve numerically.
Their presence influences the outcome of the simulations. This project proposes
an original approach towards understanding these singularities. Even more
generally, in this project the PI proposes an organized approach towards the
development of a general theory that would describe the structure of solutions
of multi-dimensional conservation laws such as the equations that describe high-
speed flows. Because the methods used to study one-dimensional conservation laws
cannot be generalized to more than one space dimension, this research area is
wide open. However, since almost all processes in technology are multi-
dimensional, the development of such a theory is an imperative. In addition to
the research aspects of this proposal, aspects of the work involving nonlinear
conservation laws have been used successfully by the investigator in graduate
student education, and continuation of this effort in similar directions is
proposed.


