
* 9970614
* Scattering Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,03/07/2001
* Maciej Zworski,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2003
* USD 145,000.00

DMS-9970614

The main interest of the PI is the study of resonances and of the wave equation.
Resonances which are described by complex numbers constitute a replacement of
eigenvalues for problems on noncompact domains and they appear naturally in many
branches of mathematics and physics. The real part of a resonance describes the
energy (or frequency) of a state and the imaginary part its rate of decay. This
constitutes a more realistic model than an eigenvalue which provides energy only
and assumes eternal existence of a state. A new wealth of phenomena appears and
our understanding is still rather fragmentary. Linear and non-linear wave
equations describe many physical phenomena often closely related to resonances.
In the contexts of propagation, spectral and scattering theories the PI will
investigate them further. The specific directions include: understanding of the
dynamical definition of resonances and their appearance in the long time
behaviour of solutions of the wave and Schroedinger equations, obtaining lower
bounds on the number of resonances in terms of dynamical quantities, developing
the theory of the FBI transformation on non-compact manifolds with applications
to resonances and to the study of propagation for Schroedinger equation in mind,
estimates of resonances at low energies, understanding of "quantum chaos" in
scattering theory.

For a broad range of phenomena, a physical state can be described by two
parameters: its rest energy and its rate of decay. This information is elegantly
encoded in a complex number, whose real part is the energy and the imaginary
part, the rate of decay. This description of a state, called a resonance,
appears naturally in mathematics, physics and chemistry: from the Riemann zeta
function to experimental scattering data.

The PI studies general principles in the distribution of resonances, their
relation to wave propagation, and their behaviour in various specific
situations. He is also interested in "quantum chaos", the study of which raises
questions in many areas: from number theory to mezoscopic systems of physics.
The main issues are universal relations between the classical and quantum views
of the world -- one of the yet unresolved central themes of the 20th century.
