
* 9970323
* Asymptotic Analysis of Complex Quantum Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/1999,04/10/2001
* Laszlo Erdos,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2002
* USD 84,375.00

Proposal: DMS-9970323 Principal Investigator: Laszlo Erdos

Abstract: This research project has two parts. The objective of the first part
is to study the ground state properties of large atoms in a strong
nonhomogeneous magnetic field. On physical grounds it is expected that the
magnetic version of the classical Thomas-Fermi theory correctly describes the
atom as the nuclear charge tends to infinity. The following specific problems
need to be solved to prove this rigorously: (1) finding the proper Lieb-Thirring
type inequality for magnetic fields; (2) describing the zero energy eigenstates
of the three dimensional Dirac operator; (3) proving a semiclassical asymptotics
result on the sum of the negative eigenvalues of the Pauli operator by
constructing appropriate magnetic coherent states. The second part of the
project aims at finding kinetic scaling limits of the long time Schrodinger
evolution. Random impurities, phonons and electron-electron interactions modify
the free evolution of an electron cloud via collisions. The goal is to
characterize the large scale effects of these collision mechanisms by proving
that the Schrodinger evolution converges to a macroscopic transport evolution
described by the Boltzmann equation. The collision kernel needs to be determined
separately in each case: it is linear in case of impurity and phonon effects,
and it is nonlinear for many-body interactions.

First principles of physics (e.g., the famous Pauli or Schrodinger equations)
tell us exactly what mathematical equation governs the behavior of any quantum
system. Due to the size and complexity of the real systems, these equations are
usually far too complicated to solve with even the most advanced of present-day
computers. Approximate problems and models need to be set up and studied that
retain the relevant features of the true problem but are simple enough to be
computationally feasible. Physics and engineering generally use such simpler
models (e.g., the Thomas-Fermi theory in atomic physics or the Boltzmann
equation in electron transport theory). Besides the computational and numerical
aspects of such models, it is equally important to investigate the extent to
which these simplified models are consistent with the real ones; i.e., to
determine the regimes of physical parameters in which it is justified to use
them. Rigorous mathematical study not only gives a solid theoretical
justification of the often ad hoc simplifying procedures, but very often helps
to find the correct model as well. This is precisely the objective of the
present proposal in the case of two important physical problems: (1) behavior of
atoms in strong magnetic fields; (2) electron transport in an impure medium.
Both problems have direct applications in semiconductor design. In addition, the
first problem is of interest from an astrophysical perspective, for strong
magnetic fields occur naturally on the surfaces of neutron stars and are
responsible for such unusual physical phenomena as highly nonspherical atoms.
This award is jointly funded by the Analysis Program in the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Physics Program in the Division of
Physics.
