
* 9970427
* Quasiregular Mappings and Analysis in Nonsmooth Spaces
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,01/07/2005
* Juha Heinonen,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 463,358.00

DMS-9970427 ABSTRACT

This proposal has three parts. In Part I, Heinonen outlines a program for a
study of geometric branched covers between generalized manifolds. This is a
joint project with Seppo Rickman. The motivation to build such a theory comes
from the attempts to understand what metric spaces admit (possibly branched)
Lipschitz or quasisymmetric parametrizations in Euclidean space. In Part II,
Heinonen explains how branched covers and the recent advances in analysis on
metric spaces could be used to approach the parametrization problem. In
different terminology, Heinonen proposes to characterize locally Euclidean
metric gauge by using the theory of quasiregular maps. This is a joint project
with Dennis Sullivan. In Part III, Heinonen discusses the problem of the branch
set of a quasiregular map. Analytic conditions are searched that would imply a
given quasiregular map is a local homeomorphism. This problem is relevant to
Part II, and to problems in nonlinear elasticity where deformation of bodies are
investigated. Part III is a joint project with Tero Kilpel"ainen.

The proposal continues the PI's earlier investigations, where discrete methods
in analysis and geometry are being searched that would serve in spaces that are
not smooth in the classical sense. Here the word ``analysis'' means the branch
of mathematics that developed out of the Calculus; it is the study of continuous
changes in infinitesimal data, from which one wants to predict global
conclusions. ``Geometry'' is the study of space, its many forms and varieties,
in many possible dimensions. Discrete methods mean the opposite to continuous,
or calculus methods, and involve more finite, ``counting'' ideas, such as those
done by a computer, albeit in this work still of analytic and geometric flavor.
The concept of quasiconformality enters the discussion in the most subtle way:
it allows the space and its formation to be singular (for instance, with kinks
or roughness) at times and in places, but not everywhere and not all the time.
There is a certain control in the distortion, which perhaps looked artificial to
the mathematicians 40 years ago when the first research in the field was
conducted. Now quasiconformality is a ubiquitous phenomenon in mathematics. From
the work of Dennis Sullivan in the late seventies we know that every space that
locally looks like a flat space of Euclid has a quasiconformal structure albeit
not a smooth structure in general; and this is true in every dimension but four.
Nevertheless, also in dimension four, there are conjecturally an infinity of
spaces where one cannot do ordinary, smooth analysis, or calculus, but where one
can do quasiconformal, nonsmooth analysis. The proposal addresses both the need
to have a better understanding of this new calculus in nonsmooth spaces and
methods how to recognize spaces that are quasiconformally Euclidean. Although
the main questions in the proposal are motivated by a basic quest for
understanding the structure of space, the consequent study of singularities in
transformations has had applications to material sciences, where one wants to
know when a deformed body collapses onto itself under a strain.




