
* 9970693
* Problems in Operator Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,04/22/1999
* Donald Hadwin,NH,University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2003
* USD 84,326.00

Proposal: DMS-9970693 Principal Investigator: Donald W. Hadwin

Abstract: This project includes the study of a generalized notion of composition
operators based on unital endomorphisms of unital algebras of operators having a
cyclic separating vector. This general notion unifies the analytic and measure-
theoretic approaches, and it leads naturally to the study of a large collection
of interesting new classes of operators. The project also includes attacks on
Kadison's similarity problem from several different angles: one from a purely
algebraic approach based on Pisier's new ''factorization'' results; another
using invariant operator ranges involving a situation where the definition of
the homomorphism is fixed but where the C*-algebras vary; and a third in terms
of the hyperreflexivity problem for von Neumann algebras. Another part of this
project includes a study of invariant subspaces. Here existence results will be
based on new ideas of Haagerup, and stability results will extend previous joint
work with John B. Conway. The project also includes a study of certain reduced
free products of matrix algebras generating type III factors. Finally, the
project includes further work on reflexivity and hyperreflexivity and
approximate operator theory.

The theory of operators on Hilbert space is a part of mathematics that
generalizes to infinite dimensions the basic ideas of matrix theory and
elementary linear algebra. The growth of this subject was stimulated by and has
applications to the study of integral and differential equations, quantum
mechanics, and control theory. More recently, operator theory has interacted
directly with many other important areas of both pure and applied mathematics.
The general goal of operator theory is to understand the structure of various
classes of operators and collections of operators. The proposer plans to study
this structure theory from various points of view. Since operators are infinite
objects, in some sense it is impossible to understand completely what they are.
It is therefore natural to study "approximations" of operators, just as we
approximate numbers in terms of finitely many decimal places. Unlike the
situation with numbers, where there is only one notion of "distance," there are
many different notions of "closeness" for operators. The principal investigator
plans to continue his extensive work on various approximation schemes, including
certain distance formulas and a recent concept, free entropy, which is a type of
approximation based on finite matrices. Another natural way to study operators
is by breaking them into component parts and studying each of the parts
separately. In finite dimensions this amounts to considering various
decompositions of matrices, most notably the century-old Jordan canonical form.
Unfortunately, it is very difficult to show that infinite-dimensional operators
can always be broken into appropriate smaller parts. Indeed, this is the famous
"invariant subspace problem," one of the most intriguing unsolved problems in
all of mathematics. The proposer has new ideas for attacking this problem as
well as the related problem of determining, given that an operator can be
decomposed into smaller pieces, the extent to which every nearby operator is
similarly decomposable.
