
* 9970352
* Multiparameter Hardy Space, CR-Yamabe Problems and Nonisotropic Sobolev spaces on the Heisenberg and stratified groups, L^p estimates, unique continuation and covering lemmas
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,05/08/1999
* Guozhen Lu,OH,Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 72,958.00

Proposal: DMS-9970352 Principal Investigator: Guozhen Lu

Abstract: Research will be conducted on a variety of questions concerning
harmonic analysis and subelliptic partial differential equations on the
Heisenberg and stratified groups, and numerous questions lying in the
intersection between classical harmonic analysis and partial differential
equations. Among the principal topics to be investigated are: (1) multiparameter
Hardy spaces within the Heisenberg group and stratified groups; (2) CR-Yamabe
problems on the Heisenberg group and Sobolev inequalities with optimal
constants, including the classification of positive solutions and symmetry
problems; (3) nonisotropic Sobolev spaces on the Heisenberg group and stratified
groups and their generalizations to metric spaces (high order Sobolev spaces on
metric spaces are fundamental to doing potential theory in non-Euclidean
settings such as Riemannian manifolds and fractals); (4) Calderon-Zygmund
estimates for Schrodinger operators and their applications to nonlinear partial
differential equations; (5) covering lemmas and their applications to partial
differential equations and geometric analysis.

Projects conducted here cover many topics of current interest, most of them
falling under the broad umbrella of "harmonic analysis" and approachable using
modern variants of the classical tools of that subject. The quantitative and
qualitative study of partial differential equations, one of the principal focal
points of the project, constitutes a large part of the mathematical modeling of
the physical world. Solutions of such equations have important applications in
the physical sciences, the life sciences, engineering, and economics. In
particular, they have applications to control theory and dynamical systems
(e.g., the motion of objects in space under the influence of gravitational and
other forces). Results obtained through the research proposed here could help to
uncover new properties of solutions of partial differential equations,
ultimately leading to a better understanding of the physical processes with
which these equations are associated.


