
* 9970439
* Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,04/28/1999
* Xiaojun Huang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2002
* USD 77,730.00

Proposal: DMS-9970493 Principal Investigator: Xiaojun Huang

Abstract: The Principal Investigator proposes in this project to work on a
number of problems in the area of several complex variables and Cauchy-Riemann
geometry. These problems are interesting and important not just from the point
of view of complex analysis, but also from the perspective of differential
geometry, nonlinear analysis and PDEs, classical dynamics, and mechanics. More
specifically, Huang wishes to further the present understanding of various
rigidity phenomena in several complex variables. This includes the
classification of holomorphic mappings between balls in different complex
spaces. He would like to understand the local holomorphic invariants of a
certain class of real submanifolds of complex spaces, the so-called the Bishop
manifolds. He intends to continue his previous work on the regularity of CR
mappings between real analytic hypersurfaces and his investigation of invariant
metrics, including their applications to the study of dynamical properties of
holomorphic mappings.

Complex numbers and functions of complex variables have become, since the 19th
century, indispensable tools in many areas of mathematics and in its application
to other areas of science and engineering. Indeed, the solutions of many
problems in the applied sciences could ultimately depend on an improvement in
these complex analytic tools and a better understanding of their basic
properties. For instance, engineers working in planar aerodynamics must contend
with the interplay between vertical and horizontal speeds. It is now well
understood that if one takes the simple step of combining these two speeds into
a vector and then representing that vector as a complex number, many aspects of
the aerodynamic flow become much easier to visualize, with the result that many
problems become easier to solve. Similarly, in materials science the standard
method for treating multidirectional stresses in a uniform way is to represent
them as complex numbers or, in more complicated situations, as complex
functions. It then turns out, for instance, that the direction of the
propagation of cracks in materials is mysteriously related to the properties of
certain equations associated with these complex numbers or functions. Results of
the research to be carried out in this project could lead to the discovery of
new properties of solutions of these very equations, which would then translate
to a deeper understanding of the related mechanical properties of materials.
