
* 9970486
* Project in Operator Algebra
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,04/29/1999
* Florin Radulescu,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2002
* USD 97,699.00

Abstract Radulescu

The aim of this project is to investigate a range of problems in the structure
theory of von Neumann algebras, concerning the harmonic analysis of such
algebras arising in connection with discrete groups and in deformation
quantization theory and on the convex analysis of these von Neumann algebras.
The goal is to determine the structure of the von Neumann algebras that reflect
the properties of (quantum) non commutative probability, and to relate this
structure to the representation theory of Lie groups and their discrete
subgroups. An invariant for such von Neumann algebras, which will be
investigated in this project, comes from the analysis of the structure of convex
sets, consisting of noncommutative moments associated with these von Neumann
algebras. This approach is related to Voiculescu's free entropy, where the
(renormalized) asymptotic measure of such sets plays an essential role.

The operator algebras studied in this project are related to the atom model
introduced by Wigner. His approach, while philosophically relying on
Heisenberg's Uncertaneity Principle, was based on the theory of random matrices.
The random matrices have also numerous other applications in prediction theory
or atmospheric science. A surprising, recent, discovery, by Voiculescu, shows
that the random matrices are, the asymptotic generators for the von Neumann
algebras associated to quantum probability. The aim of this project is to
develop a conceptual relation between the random matrices in von Neumann
algebras and the quantization theory. Such a development would probably explain
the complementarity between the two theories (random matrices versus infinite
matrices) and hence would hopefully give new tools to solve a number of long-
standing problems in these areas.
