
* 9970395
* Calderon-Zygmund Operators in Non-Classical Situations: Weighted Norm Inequalities with Matrix Weights, Operators on Non-Homogeneous Spaces and Analytic Capacity
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,05/16/2003
* Fedor Nazarov,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 297,948.00

Proposal: DMS-9970395 Principal Investigators: Fedor Nazarov, Serguei Treil,
Alexandre Volberg

Abstract: The first part of the project deals with the theory of matrix weights;
the second is concerned with the theory of Calderon -Zygmund operators on
nonhomogeneous spaces. The primary motivations for and applications of the first
part stem from the theory of stationary random processes; namely, from the study
of multivariate processes, which dates back to work of Kolmogoroff and Wiener.
The theory of matrix weights has many connections with both finite dimensional
geometry and noncommutative harmonic analysis. The second part of the project is
closely related to problems of geometric measure theory, analytic capacity,
partial differential equations, and image processing. The PIs have managed to
free the theory of Calderon-Zygmund operators of an unnecessary homogeneity
assumption, historically one of the cornerstones of that theory. So far their
research has led to many new results in the theory of regularity of multivariate
random processes. It has had an impact on geometric measure theory as well. For
example, their methods yield an alternative (and rather more streamlined)
approach to Guy David's solution of the famous Vitushkin's conjecture that
unrectifiable one-dimesional sets have zero analytic capacity.

A central part of modern harmonic analysis deals with "singular operators" of
one type or another. Such operators are pervasive in the scientific landscape:
they turn up in mathematical physics, probability, engineering, image
processing, etc. The expression "singular operator" can take many different
meanings, but whatever its precise meaning within a given context, the term
almost always reflects the fact that only subtle tools can be applied to the
investigation of such operators. They are resistant to probing by "brute force"
methods. In particular, one needs to employ techniques that are sensitive to
certain intrinsic cancellations in order to gain control over the singular
behavior. So-called Calderon-Zygmund theory appeared in the early 1950s as a
first means of coping with singular operators of the type under scrutiny in this
project. The PIs broaden this theory in two directions. First, they allow the
number of degrees of freedom enjoyed by the operators to increase, thus exposing
a whole new kind of cancellation. Second, they make a rather bold move by
disgarding one of the basic and, it was earlier thought, indispensible
assumptions of the theory. In light of discoveries by the PIs, this assumption
(known technically as the homogeneity of the underlying space) seems now to be
completely superflous. The PIs' approach has already had several significant
consequences: solutions to several long-standing problems, streamlined proofs
for other important but difficult results, and the general feature of making
complicated arguments much shorter and more lucid.


