
* 9970687
* Partial Differential Equations related to the p-Laplacian
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1999,07/19/2000
* Juan Manfredi,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 50,442.00

DMS-9970687 ABSTRACT

In this proposal, the PI considers problems in the theory of partial
differential equations suggested by the interplay of ideas in nonlinear
elasticity, image interpolation, control theory and classical function theory.
Recent developments in image interpolation and nonlinear elasticity can be
formulated as extension problems for functions that have bounded derivatives.
Typically, a function is known only on a subset of its domain of definition. The
problem is to interpolate or extend it to the whole domain maintaining the
maximum possible regularity. This extension is obtained by solving an elliptic
boundary value problem. The solution of these problems by standard elliptic
partial differential equations, including the Laplacian, always results in a
loss of regularity at the boundary. To preserve the boundedness of the
derivatives it is necessary to use nonlinear elliptic equations that are highly
degenerate, whose mathematical theory has just begun to be understood. The
prototype of these operators is the so called "infinite-Laplacian".

In many problems in physics and engineering one has to minimize the average of a
quadratic energy. The equations so obtained are linear and are useful to
describe small perturbations in many cases. To describe large deviations, often
one has to consider nonlinear equations corresponding to non-quadratic energies.
If we try to minimize the maximum of the energy, say to find out where is the
maximum voltage or stress, the resulting equations are of a very nonlinear
nature that requires a different mathematical treatment than in the traditional
linear theory. The PI proposes to continue the development of the basic theory
of these equations. Among the possible applications we have image interpolation,
one of the basic operation in image processing, and non-linear elasticity.
