
* 9970376
* Operator Theory and Complex Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,05/08/1999
* Nathan Feldman,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 10/05/1999
* USD 52,475.00

Proposal: DMS-9970376 Principal Investigator: Nathan S. Feldman

Abstract: Feldman will conduct research in operator theory and its interplay
with complex analysis. Primary emphasis will be placed on studying special
classes of linear operators that are close to normal operators, such as
subnormal, hyponormal, and essentially subnormal operators. Questions regarding
various forms of cyclicity for cosubnormal and cohyponormal operators will be
investigated, as will the relationship between cyclicity and the existence of
intertwining maps. Other topics to be explored include: the existence of
hyperinvariant subspaces for subnormal operators; "generalized eigenvectors" for
adjoints of subnormal operators; the principal function for a subnormal
operator, and its relations with such classes of operators as Toeplitz
operators, Hankel operators, and self-commutators.

Operator theory is a natural extension of the ideas of matrices and linear
algebra to infinite dimensions. In simple terms, an operator is just an infinite
array or matrix of numbers and is used in linear problems involving infinitely
many unknown variables. Although many intractable real world problems are not
linear, one can frequently "linearize" a given problem to produce a new problem
that is both linear and solvable and that has a solution which closely
approximates -- hence provides valuable information about -- the solution of the
original physical problem. Perhaps the simplest example of this is the idea of
the derivative from calculus, which is used to approximate a curve by a straight
line (something that is linear). In a multivariable setting, the precise
analogue of the derivative is a linear operator. Recognizing how useful and
powerful a tool the derivative of even a single variable function has become in
all areas of science, one can readily appreciate how important it is to
understand fully the structure of linear operators. While some operators can be
rather "pathological" in character, the subnormal operators that are the objects
of study in this project have a great deal of structure: they are very natural
themselves, and they arise in natural ways. Operator theory and linear algebra
have had a profound impact on all branches of mathematics, physics, and
engineering. It is hoped that Feldman's research will likewise exert an
influence not only on pure mathematics but on the applied sciences as well.
