
* 9970330
* Properties of solutions of linear and non-linear hyperbolic equations, singular Fourier integral operators, averages over curves
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1999,08/05/1999
* Andrew Comech,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 11/30/2001
* USD 66,162.00

Singular integral operators is a vast modern branch of Analysis, which now
attracts many strong analysts. Particularly intense development for the last
several years has been in the field of averaging operators and Fourier integral
operators associated to singular canonical relations. Andrew Comech obtained
several general results in this field; in particular, the classification of
singular canonical relations and regularity properties of the associated Fourier
integral operators in the Sobolev spaces. The approach was based on
incorporating certain curvature assumptions into the modern tools of Harmonic
Analysis. Among the applications of these results are the regularity properties
of the Radon Transform of Melrose-Taylor and smoothness of restrictions of
solutions to hyperbolic equations. In both cases Andrew's methods lead to the
optimal conclusions. The future research is aimed at the properties of solutions
to non-linear hyperbolic equations, such as long-time behavior and soliton
asymptotics of solutions to nonlinear hyperbolic equations. Questions from the
very foundations of Harmonic Analysis, which are related to the proposed
research, include the regularity properties of the averages taken over lower-
dimensional varieties (most importantly, averaging operators over curves).

Andrew Comech is going to continue his research on the wedge of the two
fundamental mathematical fields: Harmonic Analysis and the Theory of Hyperbolic
Equations. The research grows far into the modern development of the
mathematics, being intimately related to nonlinear differential equations,
attractors, and solitons. On the other hand, the research has its roots deep in
the natural sciences and technology. Particular interests of Andrew Comech are
related to the properties of nonlinear wave equations of relativistic Quantum
Physics, which are now widely investigated both in Physics and in Mathematics.
Not less interesting are the opportunities open due to applications to
Tomography, as well as aspects of numerical computations involving Fourier
Analysis. These are active and promising areas of today's scientific research.
