
* 9970367
* A Priori Estimates for Linear and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,03/20/2001
* Yu Yuan,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 02/28/2002
* USD 60,000.00

DMS-9970367 Yuan

This project concentrates on some estimates for linear and nonlinear partial
differential equations and their applications. It consists of three main areas
of research activity. In part one, the objective is to investigate some
applications and generalizations of doubling property for parabolic equations.
The emphasis is on the behavior near the boundary of positive solutions of
second order parabolic equations. In part two, the goal is to derive some
regularity estimates for fully nonlinear equations with weaker (than concavity)
condition. The a priori estimate for fully nonlinear equations with concavity
assumption is well developed. The understanding of former would give some
applications to stochastic game theory, calibrated geometry, and nonlinear
elasticity theory. In part three, the aim is to study the best constant in an
isoperimetric inequality. There is a sharp isoperimetric inequality in the
Euclidean space with the standard flat metric. An interesting question is the
corresponding one in negatively curved space. An affirmative answer would also
give the sharp Sobolev inequality in the negatively curved space.

The motivation of this project is to have some qualitative and quantative
information about our nature and society. Since partial differential equations
model and even describe many phenomena in our world. Estimates for solutions of
partial differential equations are what we need. Studying the equations posed in
this project is important for both practical and theoretical purposes, and has
broad applications in many fields, such as heat transfer problems, chemical
reaction, porous media, traffic flows, biology, and economics.
