
* 9970725
* Symbolic Dynamics of Cocyclic Subshifts
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/15/1999,05/16/2003
* Jaroslaw Kwapisz,MT,Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2003
* USD 69,082.00

Abstract Kwapisz

Cocyclic subshifts are the supports of locally constant matrix cocycles on the
full shift over a finite alphabet. Despite the simple definition, they contain
all sofic subshifts and are much more intricate. The PI proposes their
comprehensive study based on an original approach rooted in the Wedderburn-Artin
theory of algebras. In particular, the goal is to explain topological structure
of cocyclic subshifts via a Morse decomposition and their probabilistic behavior
via the ergodic theory of the maximal measure. The functional analysis of
thermodynamical formalism will be deployed to compute the entropy and the
occurrence probabilities of specific words. The PI also plans to explore the
impact of cocyclic subshifts on coding theory, probabilistic automata, theory of
formal languages, finite dimensional algebras, and the general theory of
dynamical systems. The last connection, perhaps less obvious, is the main
motivation of this project. Topological methods of the Conley index may be
applied to real-life dynamical systems (differential equations) to perceive them
as generators of certain cocyclic subshifts --- which can be used then to detect
orbits of the orginal system. One application is rigorous verification of
chaotic behavior, and the PI intends to write computer programs for chaos
detection based on the theory.

From a more general perspective, this project explores new ideas in symbolic
dynamics, a branch of mathematics that deals with infinite sequences of zeroes
and ones and is largely motivated by problems of telecommunication, where
routinely data is encoded by such sequences and the volume is large enough to
justify the idealization to infinite sequences. One mainly studies the sets of
all possible sequences --- termed subshifts --- that can be generated (or
recognized) by a particular type of device. To give a classical example, sofic
subshifts are recognized by automata capable of assuming only finitely many
states, which are widely implemented in digital electronics (e.g. modems, hard
drive controllers, etc). Cocyclic subshifts, in turn, require more sophisticated
automata that are abstractly specified by two (or more) square matrices A_0 and
A_1. An infinite binary sequence belongs to the subshift if, after putting the
matrices in the place of symbols, we get a matrix product that never equals
zero. (For instance, 0110101...is rejected if for some initial segment, say
0110, we have A_0A_1A_1A_0=0; otherwise, it is accepted.) This scheme can be
satisfactorily implemented on a computer; however, it cannot compete with the
existing technology without thorough theoretical research of the kind proposed
by the PI. Finally, the relevance of cocyclic subshifts transcends the narrow
context chosen here to explain the PI's ideas: cocyclic subshifts embody a
fundamental aspect of (random) matrix products which are ubiquitous in
mathematics, science, and engineering. For instance, detection of chaos in
dynamics (e.g. population dynamics in biology and medicine) is one area in which
the methods developed by the PI can be implemented.


