
* 9970956
* Research in Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,07/03/1999
* Hongming Ding,MO,Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2003
* USD 57,150.00

Abstract Ding

The project consists of several major components of research in harmonic
analysis. First, the Principal Investigator will study the spherical transform
of functions on symmetric spaces, in particular, he will define and study the
spherical multipliers and spherical multiplier transformations. Secondly, the
Principal Investigator will study heat kernels of bounded symmetric domains. He
will find a uniform, explicit formula for heat kernels of all bounded symmetric
domains. Next, the Principal Investigator will continue his investigation on the
N-widths of spaces of holomorphic functions on bounded symmetric domains.
Finally, the Principal Investigator will continue to study analytic continuation
of Bessel functions and holomorphic discrete series representations of
automorphism groups of Hermitian symmetric spaces.

In summary, all of these four projects are parts of ANALYSIS ON SYMMETRIC
SPACES, a growing area of mathematical research. Calculus and classical
mathematical analysis, developed in the seventeenth century, have been
foundations of modern mathematics, physics, science, engineering and advanced
technology. Because of its importance, analysis on symmetric spaces has
applications in such disciplines as multivariate statistics, quantum mechanics,
and even molecular chemistry. In last ten years, the Principal Investigator has
been woking on this area, and has obtained some important results. Base on
results of previous research and new developments in this area, more results are
expected to come.


