
* 9970607
* Many-Body Scattering
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,02/26/1999
* Maciej Zworski,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2003
* USD 80,566.00

The object of the proposed research by Andras Vasy is the study of many-body
scattering. The data from a scattering experiment are mathematically represented
by the scattering matrices, or S-matrices. The central issue in many-body
scattering is understanding the structure of these operators. A new method is
now available for the analysis; it adopts techniques used for the study of
hyperbolic equations. This project will employ these microlocal techniques to
analyze the wave front relation of the free-cluster to free-cluster scattering
matrix in many-body scattering, involving arbitrarily many particles, when the
subsystems have no bound states. This S-matrix represents scattering data when
both the incoming and the outgoing particles are asymptotically free, i.e. they
are not bound together. Its wave front relation describes the singularities of
the outgoing data in terms of those of the incoming ones. More precisely, the
main goal of the present project is to prove that if the subsystems of a many-
body system have no bound states, e.g. if all potentials are non-negative, then
the wave front relation of the free-cluster to free-cluster S-matrix is given by
the broken geodesic flow to distance pi on the sphere. The absence of bound
states simplifies the phase space structure of the problem and hence provides an
ideal first step towards the understanding of the S-matrices in general. In
addition, in this situation the problem is geometrically analogous to the wave
equation in domains with corners. Thus, the completion of the project will
demonstrate that scattering is in many respects a hyperbolic problem, similar to
the wave equation. The next step will be to analyze what happens if there are
bound states in some subsystems; in this case one has to combine the behavior of
bound states with the classical dynamics to understand the propagation of
singularities.

Indeed, many people are familiar with the following two descriptions of the
propagation of light. First, in geometric optics, light propagates in straight
lines, reflecting from surfaces according to Snell's law. That is, the angles of
incidence and of reflection are the same, as if light consisted of little
billiard balls. Second, light can be described by the wave equation, its
propagation thus being similar to that of water waves. There are many ways in
this particular example in which the first picture gives a rough description of
the second, but the following connection has particularly wide-ranging
generalizations: singularities of the amplitude of the wave (`sharp signals' or
`jumps in signals') propagate along light rays. The purpose of the current
proposal is to investigate the analogous relationship between classical and
quantum mechanical particles, that is, to analyze in what ways does the motion
of classical particles, considered as little billiard balls colliding with each
other, describe the motion of quantum mechanical particles. In more concrete
terms, how well does the motion of four billiard balls describe how four
electrons collide with each other? Since it is easier to analyze the
corresponding properties of classical systems than those of quantum ones, just
as it is easier to describe light moving in straight lines than to solve the
wave equation, the answer to this question significantly improves our
understanding of quantum mechanics.
