
* 9970613
* Some Problems in Orthogonal Polynomials and Wavelets
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1999,05/12/2003
* Jeffrey Geronimo,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David Drasin
* 12/31/2003
* USD 78,747.00

Proposal: DMS-9970613 Principal Investigator: Jeffrey S. Geronimo

Abstract: Geronimo will study polynomials orthogonal on several subarcs of the
unit circle in order to determine the analog in that context of the Toda flow
associated with polynomials orthogonal on finite segments of the real line. He
will continue to investigate the properties of two-dimensional pseudopolynomials
orthogonal on the bi-circle and their connection to two-dimensional extension
problems. This will be related to the factorization of trigonometric polynomials
in two variables, a topic that has important applications in wavelet theory.
Geronimo also plans to use intertwining analysis to investigate the theory and
construction of orthogonal wavelet bases in one and higher dimensions. He will
use the results obtained to help study orthogonal multiresolution analyses for
quasicrystals.

Wavelets and orthogonal polynomials have proven themselves to be important tools
in attacking complex, real-world problems such as the analysis and compression
of images and signals (like those found on the internet), forecasting on the
basis of fragmentary data, and speech modeling. This is because these
mathematical objects either have a simple structure (in the case of wavelets)
and/or possess special properties (as orthogonal polynomials do) that can be
exploited to decompose complex problems of the types just mentioned into
simpler, more manageable ones. For instance, a family of wavelets is obtained by
scaling and shifting one particular carefully chosen function, which makes it
extremely useful for studying images at various resolutions. Taking advantage of
orthogonality, on the other hand, is the most practical way to retrieve
information that has a "prescribed direction." In order for wavelets and
orthogonal polynomials to be truly useful, however, one must know how to build
these functions and must understand their properties as fully as possible. The
object of the basic research described above is to contribute to the achievement
of both these goals.


