
* 9970576
* Complex Dynamics, Parameter Space, and Immersive Visualization
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1999,08/09/1999
* Estela Gavosto,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2002
* USD 98,668.00

The main mathematical goal of this proposal is the study of parameter space for
polynomial diffeomorphisms in the complex domain. In particular, the PI will
consider the complex Henon map. The Henon map is the simplest model of
sophisticated dynamics in two higher dimension dynamics. With the aid of the
holomorphic structure, complex dynamics can help bridge the separation existing
between theoretical real dynamical systems and experimental dynamical systems.
The proposer plans to continue studying the structure of attracting orbits. She
will also study the analytical and geometrical properties of the dynamics that
occur in the vicinity of certain types of bifurcations for complex maps. The
dynamics close to some types of bifurcations is rich and varied. Strange
attractors, infinitely many basins, and cascade of horseshoes are coexisting and
they are still not well-understood. Gavosto will study these issues using a
combination of analytic tools from several complex variables and immersive
mathematical visualization techniques. The PI and collaborators will continue to
develop computer visualization tools based on structured sets of textured
surfaces. These tools allow real time interaction with complicated sets of
higher dimensional data. The PI will incorporate undergraduate and high school
students as research assistants in the visualization of data from research
projects in complex dynamics, mathematical biological models, and crystal
engineering.

The subject of dynamical systems models the evolution of phenomena that change
over time. Numerous algebraic equations which have no solutions on the real
numbers can be easily solved in the complex numbers. Along the same lines, the
study of dynamical systems using complex numbers adds degrees of freedom (space
dimensions) and permits the visualization of hidden structures. Theoretical and
computational progress in dynamical systems will permit the decoding of
intricate patterns and chaotic behavior in a variety of applications. The
development of technology in the last decade has produced an explosion of data.
The accurate and relevant visualization of large sets of data presents many
challenges in the mathematical and physical sciences. New visualization tools
will be very useful to help bridge the gap between disciplines. The outreach
activities involving high school students and teachers in this project will
provide a way to integrate the community into the development of science and in
the understanding of its consequences. As used in this project, technology is an
exceptional medium for introducing students early in their studies to new areas
of research in math and science. For these reasons, the project is expected to
have a broad multidisciplinary impact not only in the sciences but also possibly
in the way the sciences are taught at the High School level and above. This
project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences of the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.




