
* 9970299
* Meromorphic Solutions of Differential Equations and Algebro-Geometric Differential Operators
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,06/22/1999
* Rudi Weikard,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Peter Polyakov
* 06/30/2001
* USD 38,257.00

A recent discovery by F. Gesztesy and the PI reveals a relationship between the
KdV equation and the condition that the associated ordinary linear differential
equations have only meromorphic solutions. The same relationship exists also for
the AKNS system. Both, the KdV equation and the AKNS system, are completely
integrable Hamiltonian systems. It is anticipated that the relationship pertains
to more general integrable systems and the major object of the project is to
establish this. An important role in this respect is played by so called
algebro-geometric solutions of the integrable system under consideration which
assume the role of potentials of the associated linear equations. The PI plans
an expansion of abelian function theory to include functions on singular
algebraic curves since this is required for a complete characterization of
algebro-geometric potentials. Algebro-geometric potentials associated with the
KdV equation give also the first tractable examples of quasi-periodic, non-
selfadjoint differential operators. It is planned to investigate such operators
and their spectrum and to develop an inverse spectral theory for them.

Integrable systems and, in particular, the KdV equation play an important role
in mathematical physics were they are used as models for various phenomena,
e.g., in mechanics, hydrodynamics, and nonlinear optics. Even for systems which
are not integrable it is often fruitful to consider them as perturbations of
integrable systems. Likewise, inverse spectral theory is a central part of
applied mathematics since it is fundamental in areas ranging from quantum theory
to computer tomography. Therefore this line of research has enjoyed an enormous
amount of attention in the past and will so in the future. This project is part
of that endeavor.
