
* 9970024
* Complex Variables Analogues of Hilbert's Seventeenth Problem
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,06/24/2003
* John D'Angelo,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 78,615.00

Proposal: DMS-9970024 Principal Investigator: John P. D'Angelo

Abstract: D'Angelo's project will continue his investigation of a complex
variables version of Hilbert's seventeenth problem (due to Catlin and D'Angelo)
and give applications of it to complex geometry, analysis, and algebra. He
proposes to derive corollaries of the Catlin-D'Angelo isometric imbedding
theorem for holomorphic bundles, and to extend the result to certain degenerate
metrics. This work bears directly on the problem of classifying proper
holomorphic mappings between balls in different dimensions. The complex
variables version of Hilbert's seventeenth problem already proved has the
following consequence. Suppose one is given a polynomial on complex Euclidean
space that does not vanish on the closed unit ball. This polynomial must then be
the denominator of a rational proper mapping (reduced to lowest terms) between
balls, but the target dimension needs to be chosen sufficiently large. Thus
restricting the target dimension constrains the complexity of a proper map
between balls. Work of Faran gives further evidence of this. D'Angelo seeks to
prove a general theorem providing a sharp bound for the degree of a proper
rational mapping between unit balls in different dimensions. This will provide
evidence for a more general conjecture about CR mappings between CR manifolds of
different dimensions.

In his famous address to the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900,
David Hilbert posed a series of research problems that have greatly influenced
the development of mathematics in this century. Artin solved Hilbert's original
Seventeenth Problem around 1925 by proving that a polynomial in several real
variables whose values are nonnegative must be a sum of squares of rational
functions. The natural analogue of this result for polynomials of several
complex variables does not hold. Given the importance of complex variable theory
in physics, engineering, and pure mathematics, it is natural to consider other
facsimiles of Hilbert's problem for complex polynomials. In recent years,
D'Angelo discovered that such analogues play a crucial role in the study of
objects known as "proper mappings" between balls in different complex
dimensions. D'Angelo and Catlin later established a version of Artin's theorem
in the complex setting. Its application to proper mappings enables one to
understand the role of the unit sphere in higher dimensions and thus furnishes a
multidimensional tool for the study of electrostatics, diffusion, and fluid
flow. More recently, Catlin and D'Angelo have proved a major result that
generalizes their earlier theorems by casting them in an abstract framework, the
framework of so-called holomorphic vector bundles. The proof gives an unexpected
application of the Bergman kernel function (a part of analysis) to a problem in
algebra, as well as a geometric reinterpretation of Hilbert's problem. The
result may have considerable significance for the parts of modern mathematical
physics (such as string theory and supersymmetry) where holomorphic vector
bundles play a large role. D'Angelo is the 1999 winner of the Bergman Prize, and
this work is mentioned in the citation. D'Angelo's current proposal suggests
various extensions of and applications for these ideas.
