
* 9970328
* Riemann-Hilbert Problems in Random Matrix Theory, Approximation Theory, and Integrable Systems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/1999,07/25/2001
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2003
* USD 79,764.00

Proposal: DMS-9970328 Principal Investigator: Kenneth D. T.-R. McLaughlin

Abstract: The proposed research concerns applications of Riemann-Hilbert
problems and new techniques developed for their asymptotic analysis to classical
problems in (1) random matrix theory, (2) approximation theory and orthogonal
polynomials, and (3) integrable systems. In random matrix theory, McLaughlin
proposes to study eigenvalue statistics in situations when the limiting density
of states exhibits "atypical" behavior in order to illustrate explicitly
nonuniversal behavior in local statistics of random matrices. He further
proposes to study coupled families of random matrices, which appear in the study
of the planar appoximation to quantum field theory as well as in graph coloring
problems that arise in statistical mechanics. Other directions include new
asymptotic problems pertaining to the bulk scaling limit. In approximation
theory, McLaughlin proposes to continue work on support properties of
equilibrium measures, to gain further understanding of the relationship between
the external field V and the support of the associated equilibrium measure. In
addition, an investigation of pointwise convergence of polynomials orthogonal
with respect to Freud weights is proposed. The proposed research is to study the
generalization of Gibbs's phenomenon to Freud weights and to obtain a rate of
convergence of approximation by such polynomials. In integrable systems,
McLaughlin proposes (with A. Kuijlaars) to combine knowledge from approximation
theory and singular limits of integrable systems, to investigate the onset of
infinite genus oscillations in the small dispersion limit of the Korteweg-de
Vries equation. Another project (with S. Kamvissis and P. Miller) looks at a
special class of initial data for the semi-classical limit of the focusing
nonlinear Schrodinger equation.

Random matrix theory has recently been the meeting ground for many areas of
mathematics and physics. One reason for the subject's importance is the famous
claim of Eugene Wigner who, in the 1950s, proposed that "neutron resonance
levels" could be modeled by the "eigenvalues of a random matrix." Neutron
resonance levels are special numerical values for the velocities of neutrons:
when physicists fired neutrons at a large quantity of atoms with heavy nuclei,
they observed that the neutrons were "trapped" by the bulk of atoms only for
these special velocities. Wigner's conjecture asserts: the statistical
distribution of the distance between these resonance levels is a universal
quantity, just as the speed of light in a vacuum is, according to Einstein's
theory of relativity, a universal constant. Over the years, Wigner's conjecture
became a fundamental issue in mathematics as well as physics: Can this universal
behavior be modeled by thinking of the resonance levels as "typical" eigenvalues
of matrices chosen at random by some simple mathematical rules? For a large
class of random matrix models, McLaughlin and his collaborators discovered a
mathematically precise description of the statistics of eigenvalues of random
matrices, thus providing a proof of Wigner's conjecture. A part of McLaughlin's
current research is devoted to a deeper understanding of this fundamental
universal behavior. In other directions, McLaughlin is working to develop
further the techniques mentioned above, because of their application to many
different areas of mathematical analysis and physics. This award is jointly
funded by the Analysis Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Mathematical Physics Program in the Division of Physics.
