
* 9970281
* Covering Surfaces and Painleve Equations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1999,06/04/2001
* Aimo Hinkkanen,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 06/30/2003
* USD 89,601.00

Proposal: DMS-9970281 Principal Investigator: Aimo Hinkkanen

Abstract: This project has two main objectives. The first is to develop a more
general and flexible form of the Ahlfors theory of covering surfaces, one that
applies to variable domains. This will be done with particular emphasis on
applications to complex dynamics and shared-value problems. The idea of the
Ahlfors theory is to find a modified form of the Riemann-Hurwitz formula for a
map which is not a proper covering map onto its image, using the length of the
relative boundary. Unfortunately, the conclusions of this theory as presently
formulated are only valid for fixed base domains. Hinkkanen plans to consider
domains that are variable in a suitable sense, incorporating assumptions that
arise from specific applications. The project's second objective deals with
solutions to the Painleve differential equations. The aim is to create new
methods to establish, in a proper setting, the single-valuedness of such
solutions and to investigate their growth.

Complex analysis, which is the general area of mathematics related to this
proposal, provides technical and conceptual foundations for several fields of
applications of mathematics, including many in physics and engineering. Specific
examples include electrical engineering, and the two-dimensional study of the
motion of fluids and gases (to which many three-dimensional problems reduce, due
to symmetries). Complex dynamics contains, as a very special case, the study of
the dynamical behavior modeled by quadratic polynomials, which both directly and
via approximation surface as fundamental building blocks in the investigation of
numerous dynamical systems in physics, biology, and economics. The specific work
involved in this project is expected to explain how the possible ways of
arranging the geometric shapes of regions can have a significant impact on the
behavior of certain complex dynamical systems. In addition, this research
addresses global existence and growth properties of solutions to a well-known
class of differential equations, the Painleve equations, which have applications
in a wide number of areas, differential geometry and mathematical physics
prominent among them. Particularly notable among such connections is the recent
discovery of the usefulness of Painleve equations in string theory, a branch of
physics that seeks to explain the structure of space and matter at a more
fundamental level than present-day quantum physics.
