
* 9971311
* Application of Harmonic Analysis and Geometry of Sets
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1999,07/05/2001
* Peter Jones,CT,Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2003
* USD 390,699.00

Proposal: DMS-9971311 Principal Investigators: Peter W. Jones, Ronald R. Coifman

Abstract: Professors Coifman and Jones will continue their work on the analysis
and geometry of sets in Euclidean space. The research is centered on methods to
classify sets or functions and to provide efficient descriptions of these
objects. On the level of sets, this involves descriptions of, for example, the
Julia set associated with a rational mapping or the limit set of a Kleinian
group in terms of its Hausdorff dimension or related geometric concepts. Another
example relates to potential theoretic aspects of sets, including algorithms
that allow for fast computations. For functions, the relevant objective is to
find short descriptions with prescribed error. A common aspect of the analysis
of both sets and functions is the search for methods of reducing dimensionality
(with prescribed error) so as to bring the problem into a regime where more
classical methods apply.

The problems on which Jones and Coifman intend to work are those that now
confront mathematicians who are forced to deal with massive quantities of data.
While the modern computer has been very useful in treating many computational
problems, severe limitations occur when the amount of data becomes too large.
Instead of treating the full set of data, one therefore seeks to reduce
significantly the amount of information being handled, at the same time ensuring
that only small errors occur in the process. After such a reduction has been
made, more classical methods can then be used to analyse the reduced data.
Harmonic analysis is a field that has been developed over the past century to
accomplish precisely this kind of reduction, albeit for problems in the realm of
pure mathematics. The projected research centers on exploiting these older
methods and developing new ones in order to acquire efficient tools for treating
a wide array of concrete data sets. One example of how useful this technique
might be in a practical, everyday situation arises in the telephone industry,
where it would be highly desirable to send only a small percentage of the sounds
produced by one person, yet still have the message understood by the person
listening at the other end of the line. The development of an effective method
for compressing data in this instance would allow a large increase in the number
of calls that could be sent on a single telephone line.
