
* 9971031
* Weyl-Titchmarsh-Levinson Spectral Analysis of Sturm-Liouville Expressions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/1999,04/30/2002
* Dominic Clemence,NC,North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2002
* USD 51,046.00

DMS-9971031 ABSTRACT

This research will extend the Weyl-Titchmarsh-Levinson methodology in several
directions. The first area of focus will be the construction and analysis of the
m-function to understand spectral behavior, particularly of systems with
interior singularities and quasi-periodic systems. Further, analysis involving
analytic continuation of the m-function across spectral bands will be pursued to
understand resonance phenomena. The next goal will be the exploitation of the
m-function to understand scattering behavior subject to various spectral
behavior, with particular regard for coexisting absolutely continuous, singular
continuous, and point continuous spectrum, as well as their perturbations. The
final focus will involve using the m-function to obtain various estimates, such
as Greens' function estimates, which are expected to be employed to develop an
m-function based potential recovery scheme from scattering data.

Since they are the basis for the modeling and subsequent study of many natural
systems, the study of differential equations is the foundation for the
scientific analysis and understanding of a variety of physical phenomena. The
problems addressed in this project are couched in the spectral and scattering
theory of Sturm-Liouville equations, which arise in a variety of settings such
as quantum mechanics, fluid wave mechanics, crystal structures, acoustics,
quantum chaos, optic fiber design, photodissociation, shell structure
deformation, and biological population modeling; the results obtained are in
particular expected to significantly impact these areas. The theory facilitates
probing deeply into the mathematical foundations upon which these physical
systems are based, thereby increasing our scientific understanding of the
various systems. The involvement of undergraduate students in this research
further ensures a continued knowledge base, which is the essential foundation
for developments in advanced technology, and hence the advancement of
civilization.








