
* 9971587
* Dynamics of Semi-Dispersing Billiards; Geometry of Operator Symmetric Spaces; Rigidity of Higher-Rank Anosov Actions
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/1999,04/02/1999
* Serge Ferleger,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2002
* USD 69,702.00

Abstract Ferleger

The proposer will continue his research in the following three directions:
applications of non-regular Riemannian geometry to the dynamics of billiard
systems, rigidity of Anosov actions of higher rank abelian groups and Banach
geometry of non-commutative symmetric spaces. Specifically, in his study of
dynamics of semi-dispersing billiards on Riemannian manifolds, the proposer plan
to address the following questions: Is it possible to give any estimate for the
topological entropy of the first return map of a non-degenerate semi-dispersing
billiard with a ``finite horizon''? What can be said about the topological
entropy of the billiards on manifolds without the non-positive curvature
restriction? Most fundamental is the question about existence of universal
unfolding space for arbitrary non-degenerate semi-dispersing billiards on non-
positively curved manifolds of dimension greater than three, that the proposer
plans to attack using the machinery he (jointly with D.Burago and B.Kleiner) has
developed recently. Continuing his (joint with A.Katok) study of cohomological
rigidity of Anosov actions of higher-rank Abelian groups, the proposer will
attempt to establish cohomological rigidity of standard Anosov actions different
from Weyl chamber flow; to obtain infinitesimal tensor rigidity of lattice
actions on Furstenberg boundaries and differentiable rigidity of the projective
actions of cocompact lattices. Central for proposer's program of studying the
geometry of noncommutative operator spaces is certain generalization of Hilbert
transformation and upper triangular projection at the same time, a spectral
projection associated with a strongly continuous representation of a compact
Abelian group on an arbitrary (UMD)-space.

The prevalent theme and tool in the proposal is the theory of dynamical systems.
The theory in general investigates the evolution of a physical or mathematical
system over time. Theory of dynamical systems is intertwined closely with most
of the major areas of mathematics and it often takes its basic examples from and
applies its results to such different fields as physics, engineering, biology or
sociology. Theory of billiard systems, for instance, lies at the interface of
geometry on one hand and dynamics and theoretical mechanics on the other.
Classical thermodynamics is essentially nothing else but mechanics of huge
billiard systems. This is why a number of problems of the theory were first
posed by physicists in their attempt to "justify" thermodynamics. Such
justifications still is just a dream; but the proposer believes that his
research brings us a little closer to its realization. One of these problems
that has been open for almost half of the century (about existence of an
estimate on the number of collisions between molecule of a gas) recently was
solved with help of geometry of somewhat pathological spaces. Discovery of such
an unexpected connection opened up several opportunities in the area that the
proposer would like to pursue as outlined above.
