
* 9987777
* Operator Algebras, Representations, and Wavelets
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2000,07/31/2003
* Palle Jorgensen,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 133,200.00

ABSTRACT DMS-9987777

OPERATOR ALGEBRAS, REPRESENTATIONS AND WAVELETS PALLE E.T. JORGENSEN

Jorgensen's proposal research will involve several areas of mathematics and
will be focussed on applications, spectral and tiling duality, and fractal
iteration processes. The basic methods derive from operator algebras and
representation theory, and the connection to the applications is threefold:
wavelet theory, operators, and relations between operations in the discrete and
continuos domains. Wavelet theory concerns the mathematical tools involved in
digitizing continuous data with view to storage, and the synthesis process,
recreating the desired picture (or time signal) from the stored data. The
algorithms involved go under the name of filter banks, and their spectacular
efficiency derives in part from the use of (hidden) self-similarity in the data
which is analyzed. Observations or time signals are functions, and classes of
functions make up spaces. Numerical correlations add structure to the spaces at
hand, Hilbert spaces. There are operators in the spaces deriving from the
discrete data and others from the spaces of continuous signals. The first ones
are good for computations, while the second reflect the real world. The
operators between the two are the focus of Jorgensen's research.

Relations between operations in the discrete and continuous domains are studied
as symbols, because symbols are programmable. The mathematics involved in
assigning operators to the symbolic relations is called representation theory.
The combination of the three areas opens up exciting new opportunities at the
interface of mathematics and engineering. A main point in the proposal is the
study of intertwining operators between, on one side, the "discrete world" of
high-pass/low-pass filters of signal processing , and on the other side, the
"continuous world" of wavelets. There are significant operator-algebraic and
representation-theoretic issues on both sides of the "divide", and the
intertwining operators throw light on central issues for wavelets in higher
dimensions. The proposal describes how the tool from diverse areas of analysis,
as well as from dynamical systems and operator algebra, merge into the proposed
project on wavelet analysis. The diversity of techniques is also a charm of the
subject, which continues to generate new graduate student activity. Jorgensen
had several recent students complete theses in the subject.


