
* 9988774
* Ergodic Theory, Groups, and Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2000,05/13/2004
* Kevin Corlette,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 294,729.00

Abstract Zimmer

This research will investigate actions of Lie groups and related questions of
dynamics, topology, and geometry. A focus will be on the actions of non-compact
semisimple Lie groups on manifolds, and the relationship between the group,
geometric structures invariant under the action, and the topology of the
manifold, in particular the fundamental group. Use of ergodic theory, i.e., the
measure theoretic structure and behavior of group actions, will be extensive. In
particular, the structure of stationary measures and invariant measures for
these actions, and the extent to which such general measures are similar to
standard arithmetic or projective models, will play a major role.

The study of symmetry has played a major role in science and mathematics, and is
a fundamental, often indispensable, tool for understanding many phenomena. The
connections to science and technology span the gamut from elementary particle
physics, to crystal structure of materials, to network design, to dynamical
systems. The underlying mathematics for studying symmetry is group theory. This
research will focus on fundamental mathematical questions concerning large
symmetry groups, i.e. situations in which the structure under consideration has
many symmetries. It is anticipated that this work will contribute to the fabric
of fundamental understanding of symmetry, thereby increasing the power of its
potential application across science.


