* 9300508
* Collaborative Research: Temporal Evolution of Hydrothermal, Volcanic, and Geologic Properties of the EPR 9-10 Degrees   N, Following the 1991 Eruption
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1998
* Karen Von Damm, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 07/31/1998
* USD 527,900.00

Von Damm 9300508 This project involves a time-series study of the hydrothermal
and magmatic activities on EPR. The 1989 ARG0 survey (Haymon/Fornari) revealed
an active hydrothermal field on EPR axis between 9016' and 9054' N "Tube Worm
BBQ area" . AdVenture I "Alvin diving on the Venture Hydrothermal Fields" in
April 1991 and AdVenture II in Feb/Mar'92 noted that eruptions are rapid one
eruption took place within two weeks (dated in by 210Po/210Pb diseq.-Rubin)
prior to AdVenture II and hydrothermal vents are irregularly distributed. The
P.I.s surmised that this system has not yet reached steady-state. They propose
to go back to this area with Alvin in an effort to monitor the evolution of the
volcanic-hydrothermal system. The work will include CCD imaging, CTD
measurements of water column and plume, biological activity monitoring, volcanic
rock sampling,on EPR axis between 9016' and 9054' N. Scientific Justification---
The P.I.s feel that by documenting the changes in volcanic and hydrothermal
activities they will be able to obtain broad constraints over the period during
which the system goes steady-state, and mesurement of fluxes during-steady state
would give a better handle on the hydrothermal input into the chemical
composition of sea-water. They will also know more about how these systems
evolve through time.