* 9300482
* Perceptual Speed, Switching, and Temporal Acuity Factors
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Kennedy, Essex Corporation Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1995
* USD 281,412.00

Over and above fine-spatial acuity, a substantial number of visual capabilities
exist on which persons can be expected to differ reliably. One such capability
which has received insufficient attention is temporal acuity, the capability to
resolve stimuli which are presented over time. Results of the Phase I Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish the technical basis for a
new human performance measurement product that has as its purpose the
measurement of visual temporal acuity with a battery of tests. The research
objectives of the Phase II study focus on collecting data necessary to bring
laboratory demonstrations of temporal phenomena in vision to a level useful
outside the laboratory by moving the temporal acuity measures from the present
battery to the new and faster computer hardware; developing and testing new
candidate measures of temporal visual acuity; developing the synthetic
performance task (a task with substantial visual components, requiring vigilance
and quick response to fine visual detail embedded in a large and variable visual
field); collecting data relating Temporal Acuity Battery (TAB) measures to
performance on the synthetic task; developing reliability vs. time trade-off
functions and establishing guidelines for practice until stability and long-term
reliability; collecting data from other laboratory spatial and temporal visual
tests (e.g., static and dynamic contrast sensitivity) to serve as correlates of
the TAB; conducting studies assessing the effects of alcohol and aging on
temporal acuity; pooling the data collected from all studies to perform Factor
Analysis of the battery; and establishing the prototype battery. The project
aims to produce an assessment system that provides test administrators with
useful data interpretations and prediction on field studies and in the
workplace. Such a system can contribute to our understanding of how to improve
temporal visual acuity performance to the extent that such abilities are
required for jobs, tasks, leisure activities and how to identify temporal
aspects of visual displays so as to advance understanding in engineering design.