* 9300966
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear PDEs and Viscosity         Solutions: Variational Problems and Control Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Robert Jensen, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 35,010.00

9300966 Jensen This project will examine mathematical problems arising from both
the calculus of variations and control theory. A common feature of the problems
is their affinity for the framework of viscosity solutions. The development of
new techniques and methods necessary to resolve these problems will both advance
the theory of viscosity solutions and provide new examples of their
applicability. Viscosity solutions of differential equations were introduced in
1981 to characterize uniquely the value functions of optimal control and
differential games. Part of the project will continue the study of such
applications. Two other problem areas come from the calculus of variations. The
first is based on the strategy of finding functions with prescribed boundary
values on a domain which has minimal L-1 norm. These problems have been
successfully studied using viscosity solutions. The current work will use
viscosity solutions to analyze specific solutions of problems of motion by mean
curvature to help understand the level sets of these functions. The second line
of investigation is to study the same sets of functions as before with the goal
of minimizing the maximal norm. This gives rise to fourth order homogeneous
partial differential equations. Some work has already been done on the analysis
of such questions but much more remains. Partial differential equations form a
basis for mathematical modeling of the physical world. The role of mathematical
analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to provide qualitative
and quantitative information about the solutions. This may include answers to
questions about uniqueness, smoothness and growth. In addition, analysis often
develops methods for approximation of solutions and estimates on the accuracy of
these approximations. ***