* 9300710
* A Symposium on Nanofabrication and Biosystems:  Frontiers   and Challenges, January 16-21, 1994; Kona, Hawaii
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Harold Craighead, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1995
* USD 26,000.00

9300710 Hoch This award provides partial support for a conference
"Nanofabrication and Biosystems: Frontiers and Challenges" to be held on January
16-21, 1994 in Hawaii. The conference is designed to address the current status
and future possibilities of nano- and microfabrication technologies and biology.
Scientists from such disparate disciplines as material science and engineering,
and various subdisciplines of biological sciences will participate. The
objective of the conference is to explore contemporary and emerging approaches
of nano- and microfabrication as they apply to biology. The intent of the
conference is to bring together engineers/physical scientists and biologists
including biophysicists, cell biologists, neuroscientists, and plant biologists.
The conference will address the materials science and engineering aspects of
nano- and microfabrication, how biologists have implemented such fabricated
devices in their research endeavors, and where the opportunities are for
fruitful collaboration between biologists and engineers. An important aspect of
this objective will be to inform young scientists. The proceedings of the
conference will be published by the Engineering Foundation. European and
Japanese scientists will participate in this conference, making it an
international meeting. ***