* 9300057
* REU Site Proposal for Blandy Experimental Farm
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1994
* Edward Connor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 04/30/1994
* USD 32,201.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Environmental Sciences at the
University of Virginia to continue a successful REU SITE. The 10 week research
program for undergraduates will teach basic principles of ecology, and the
methods by which scientists increase our understanding of the natural world will
be detailed. The program will be comprised of three phases: I--Two weeks of
formal lectures detailing the scientific method, hypothesis testing and
experimental design; II-- 6-1/2 weeks of data collection and experimentation;
and III--1-1/2 weeks of data analysis, interpretation and communication of
results. The goal is show students how to "do" science and then give them an
opportunity to conduct original and independent field research. Students are
sought from a diversity of backgrounds, interests and home institutions. The
focus of the program will be on testing hypotheses related to plant- animal
interactions and/or population dynamics--topics that are felt to have
considerable basic/applied interest, and high heuristic value. Students will
conduct research in a field-station setting at the Blandy Experimental Farm, a
biological field station of the University of Virginia, and will be immersed in
a community of 15-20 graduate/post- doctoral researchers. Field trips will focus
on issues related to conservation; a weekly seminar series at the Farm will also
add to the research experience. A bio-ethics component is also included in the
program consisting of weekly lectures/discussions lead by Mr. David Bosco,
Instructor of Philosophy and Religious Studies at James Madison University.
Faculty wages, and fees for laboratory space and dorm rooms are contributed as
cost share items.