* 9300137
* Mathematical Sciences:  Polya Trees for Nonparametric       Bayesian Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Michael Lavine, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Polya trees are a class of probability models intermediate between the more
specific Dirichlet processes and the more general tailfree distributions. The
proposed research project will investigate whether Polya trees provide workable
solutions in some problems where Dirichlet processes are unsatisfactory. The
hope is that the generality of Polya trees can be used to create models that
reflect prior and posterior opinions more accurately while avoiding the
computational complexity of the full class of tailfree distributions. The
proposed research concentrates in four areas: 1. Modelling opinions of
smoothness, monotonicity and unimodality through the joint distributions of the
components of the Polya tree, 2. Modelling predictive distributions through
mixtures of Polya trees, 3. Assessing the robustness of parametric models by
exploring nonparametric models concentrating around parametric ones; assessing
the consistency of the nonparametric models and 4. Generalizing the Dirichlet
process to yield more flexible priors for the sizes of the point masses in the
random distribution. A constant problem in statistics is constructing
mathematical models for real world phenomena. To be useful the models must be
sufficiently sophisticated to represent essential features of the phenomena
accurately but must also be computationally tractable. The proposed research
project investigates a class of models called "Polya trees" that generalize the
well known, tractable, but somewhat limited class of models called "Dirichlet
processes." The hope is that Polya trees can represent real world phenomena more
accurately than Dirichlet processes while remaining tractable. The work will
proceed partly through theoretical calculation, partly through computer
simulation and partly through examples of Polya trees applied to real data.