* 9300583
* Surface Thermometry Using Laser-Induced Second              Harmonic Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Normand Laurendeau, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 05/31/1995
* USD 49,999.00

An experimental study for assessment of the applicability of laser- induced
second harmonic generation (SHG) for measurement of temperatures of hot metallic
surfaces will be carried out. The immediate goal of this research is to obtain
sufficient data to either eliminate SHG as a candidate diagnostic or create
further interest in the development of SHG thermometry. In this study, the main
surface of interest will be platinum (rough and polished surfaces) deposited on
a tantalum or ceramic substrate. Three separate research tasks will be
performmed. First, a repeatable calibration plot of SHG signal versus
temperature at surface temperatures from 300 to 1000 K will be sought using
samples heated in an electric furnace, with (hopefully) demonstration that the
relative SHG signal is independent of surface roughness. Next, the calibration
plot will be extended to 1800 K in either a high- temperature furnace or a
combustion environment. Finally, dynamic response of the SHG measurement
technique will be investigated. The ultimate goal of the proposed research
direction is development of SHG thermometry for practical high-temperature
applications in the fields of combustion, heat transfer, and materials
processing, with particular application to on-line control of manufacturing
facilities.