* 9300414
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in       Experimental, Theoretical, and Computational Fluid          Dynamics
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1995
* Edward Bogucz, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 10/31/1995
* USD 60,000.00

The Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Manufacturing Engineering at
Syracuse University is establishing a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program focused on fluid dynamics, including experimental, theoretical, and
computational projects. The program will be conducted during a 12 week period in
the summer. Six participants will be chosen, with at least four from schools
other than Syracuse University. A strong commitment will be made to recruit
students from groups that have traditionally been underrepresented in
engineering. Six faculty are involved in the proposed work; their research
expertise ranges from the generation of parallel algorithms for boundary layer
calculations to measurements in supersonic flows. Before starting individual
projects each student will attend an intensive one week training program that
will address basic research techniques. In addition to one-on-one interaction
with a faculty mentor, a complementary program of activities is planned to
enhance the professional development of each participant. Among scheduled
activities are a workshop on professional writing, a discussion of ethics and
professional responsibility, a lecture on public speaking, and presentations on
the role of fluid dynamics research in industry by invited speakers.
Participants also will prepare a written research proposal, a final written
report and make oral presentations of proposed work and final results.