* 9300017
* RUI:  Collaborative Research on Regional Assessments of     Environmental Change in Mountainous Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* David Zurick, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 07/31/1996
* USD 94,962.00

Ongoing research by geographers and scientists from many other disciplines has
highlighted the complexity of the processes through which demographics,
economics, and other dynamic aspects of human activity induce changes in natural
systems as well as in the ways that humans respond to changes in the natural
environment. Mountainous regions have been locales where human- environment
interactions have been especially significant. The the Himalayas have been the
site of some of the most pronounced interactions, because population levels and
physical relief both are at relatively high levels. This collaborative research
project will be conducted by P.P. Karan of the University of Kentucky and David
Zurick of Eastern Kentucky University, both of whom are geographers with
considerable experience in the analysis of human-environment interactions in the
Himalayas. They will conduct an historical study that focuses on land use and
vegetative cover at different geographic scales. In the first part of the study,
they will analyze data on population, economic activities, land use, and land
cover gathered over the last century at the district level in Pakistan, India,
Nepal, and Bhutan. These analyses will identify general trends and permit
identification of areas where relationships between key factors, especially
population growth and forest cover, indicate that local case studies are likely
to yield greater insights into crucial processes. During the second part of the
study, rigorous local analyses will be undertaken in the case-study areas using
intensive field observation techniques, surveys and interviews, and air-photo
interpretation. Special emphasis in this part of the inquiry will be placed on
analysis of land-use, socio- economic, and population trends. Through these
regional and local studies, the investigators will provide valuable new insights
about the processes through which humans impact on natural systems and respond
to changes in natural conditions in regions where stresses on both human and
natural systems are great. They will assemble a useful century- long database,
and they will provide external assessments of the viability of a number of
different types of economic development regimes.