* 9300635
* Neotropical Montane Forests:  Biodiversity and Conservation Symposium; Bronx, New York
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1995
* James Luteyn, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 05/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

This award will support the travel costs of 22 Latin American botanists and
ecologists to a symposium at the New York Botanical Garden on "Neotropical
Montane Forests: Biodiversity and Conservation". The symposium participants will
address and discuss the origin and composition of Andean montane plant
diversity, and the conservation and sustainable use of these forests. A
symposium synthesis of peer-reviewed papers will comprise a "state of the Andes"
report. Latin American participants will represent institutions and research in
Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Argentina, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Bolivia and Mexico.
Because of the number of Latin American botanists involved, the symposium will
be a major impetus for assessing the state of knowledge of biodiversity and
conservation research in Latin America and for promoting these activities. New
York is also a logical venue for such a symposium, given the history of the
Andean botanical collections and research activity at the New York Botanical
Garden, and the opportunity provided the Latin American botanists to acquaint
themselves with and study these collections first hand. NYBG will organize the
symposium and assemble the final symposium report. %%% Much of the biodiversity
of the Andean montane forests are threatened by human activity. This award will
support the participation of 22 Latin American botanists and ecologists in a
symposium at the New York Botanical Garden on "Neotropical Montane Forests:
Biodiversity and Conservation". New York Botanical Garden has a long history of
Andean botanical collecting and research activity. The symposium participants
will treat the origin and composition of Andean montane plant diversity, and the
conservation and sustainable use of these forests. A symposium synthesis of
peer-reviewed papers will comprise a "state of the Andes" report. Latin American
participants will represent institutions and research in Colombia, Venezuela,
Peru, Argentina, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Bolivia and Mexico. As such, the symposium
will be a major impetus for assessing the state of knowledge of biodiversity and
conservation research in Latin America and for promoting these activities.