* 9300770
* Survey and Study of Late Cretaceous Terrestrial Vertebrates from the Gobi Desert of Mongolia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* James Clark, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 12/31/1997
* USD 103,010.00

This project will continue a survey and inventory of the famous Late Cretaceous
Flaming Cliffs deposits in the Gobi Desert, Mongolia, site of the Central
Asiatic Expeditions in the 1920s. Three previous expeditions by the AMNH has
succeeded in recovering a wealth of well-preserved tetrapod vertebrates,
especially theropod dinosaurs, mammals, and a new lineage of extraordinary
flightless birds with mole-like adaptations for digging. These expeditions have
also mapped old and new localities using GPS. Specimen and locality/geological
information for the 10,000 specimens will be entered in a computer database.
Cooperation with Mongolian authorities and scientists is excellent and includes
field work in Mongolia and long-term study visits of Mongolian scientists to the
AMNH. %%% This project will continue a survey of the fossil mammals, reptiles,
amphibians and birds from the famous Late Cretaceous dinosaur beds in the Gobi
Desert, Mongolia. This survey is revisiting the sites of the Central Asiatic
Expeditions in the 1920s, which first discovered dinosaur egg nests and other
important fossils. Three previous expeditions by this current survey team has
succeeded in recovering a wealth of well-preserved fossil vertebrates,
especially theropod dinosaurs, mammals, and a new lineage of extraordinary
flightless birds with mole-like adaptations for digging. Cooperation with
Mongolian authorities and scientists is excellent and includes field work in
Mongolia and long-term study visits of Mongolian scientists at the American
Museum in New York. Study of the fossils recovered by these expeditions will
help elucidate the nature of dinosaur extinctions and climate change 65 million
years ago.