* 9300285
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Rice         Quantum Institute
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Ken Smith, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 01/31/1996
* USD 150,000.00

This action will establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
at the Rice Quantum Institute (RQI) of Rice University. The main objectives are
to provide eight (8) undergraduate students with an opportunity to work during
the summer in an intense, interdisciplinary, collaborative research environment
and to involve them in a program of discussions and interactions with faculty
and graduate students that will show them both the relationships among atomic,
molecular, optical, and surface sciences and the technological ramifications of
fundamental research in this area. Further objectives are to give these
undergraduates an understanding of how atomic, molecular, optical, and surface
science relates to many important technologies and to convey to them a sense of
the real intellectual excitement of this research and the future for its
technological applications. Each undergraduate will join a research group,
undertake a project that can be completed within the summer, attend special
seminars and group discussions for REU participants, make a formal report of the
project, and participate in the RQI Research Colloquium at summer's end. The 32
faculty fellows of RQI and their groups have considerable undergraduate
involvement in research now; however, this program will provide additional
research opportunities, will create a coherent educational structure for these
students during the summer, and will allow for tracking the educational progress
and careers of all undergraduates who work with RQI groups.