* 9300903
* REU Site:  Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1996
* Ruth Buskirk, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1996
* USD 145,284.00

This award provides funds to the Microbiology Department of the University of
Texas at Austin to continue their successful REU Site program designed to
introduce gifted undergraduates to productive molecular biology laboratory
research. A ten-week summer program, involving ten students each year, will
provide to each participant a stipend, room &amp; board and tuition for an
independent research course. Participants will be actively recruited nationwide,
but emphasis in recruitment and selection will be given to undergraduates who
would not otherwise have the opportunity for original research, especially
minority students. Students will work in well-funded and equipped labs in which
the research covers both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems and deals with
membrane transport, DNA replication and recombination, gene expression and
developmental control, immunological mechanisms, and viral transformation.
Participants will work individually with faculty mentors but have access to all
faculty through seminars and informal discussions, in a format similar to that
of our successful earlier programs. New aspects in this year's program include
discussion of scientific ethics issues and emphasis on opportunities in
biotechnology. Follow-up activities will promote interest in research careers
and encourage students to apply to graduate schools in molecular biology. UT
Austin makes a strong commitment to this program, including support for a
dedicated program coordinator.