* 9300474
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Scaling and Models of    Sediment Biogeochemical Nutrient Transformations in the     Baltic Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Daniel Conley, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1997
* USD 16,250.00

9300474 Conley This three-year award supports U.S.- Sweden cooperative research
in marine ecology between Daniel J. Conley of the University of Maryland's
Center for Environmental and Estuarine Studies and Fredrik Wulff of the
Department of Systems Ecology, Stockholm University. The objective of the
research is to determine the processes controlling the net exchange of nutrients
from sediments of the Baltic Sea. Using theoretical analyses, field and
laboratory experimental studies and model verifications, the investigators will
work together on determining biogeochemical control mechanisms in varying
geographical areas of the Baltic Sea. Annual cruises are planned with
researchers from Sweden, Poland and Russia. Biogeochemical cycles and processes
in a marine system are of prime concern for local coastal zone and shallow seas.
The Baltic Sea offers excellent opportunities to study these processes since it
is a well-defined and intensively studied estuary that has experienced large-
scale environmental changes from eutrophication and human activity. Both
eutrophying substances and toxic substances (nitrogen and phosphorus) are
increasing in the Baltic, which in turn give rise to storage of silica in the
sediments and low levels of dissolved silicate. These low levels may have future
consequences on species composition and the food web. In order to reverse the
current trends in eutrophication, not only found in the Baltic Sea, but also in
other estuaries, the investigators will take sediment cores from the study sites
and characterize them in terms of their physico-chemical features, and the flux
rates for silicate, dissolved nitrogen species, and phosphorus. These data will
be used to develop a process oriented model describing the exchanges of
nutrients. The research will complement and enhance the present data and advance
understanding of the mechanism underlying changes in the Baltic Sea. Dr. Conley
brings to this collaboration expertise in the bi ogeochemical cycling of silica.
This is complemented by the Swedish investigator's expertise in biogeochemical
modeling of fluxes of nitrogen, phosphorus and silica between water and
sediments. ***