* 9300742
* Machine Learning in Engineering Design:  A                  Constructive Induction Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Ryszard Michalski, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 02/28/1995
* USD 82,247.00

This interdisciplinary research aims at determining the feasibility and
practicality of recently developed machine learning methods to the acquisition
and/or creation of conceptual design knowledge. Specifically, this research
investigates, enhances and adapts to the design problems new methods of
constructive induction that are capable of automatically inventing new problem-
oriented attributes, in contrast to the conventional machine learning methods
that use only the attributes given in advance by the user. Two novel approaches
are investigated-DCI (data-driven constructive induction) and HCI (hypothesis-
driven constructive induction). The first part of this research studies, adapts,
and experimentally tests the methods on the problems of learning decision rules
for conceptual design of wind bracing in tall buildings. The primary training
data is a collection of optimal (minimum weight) designs produced by a design
and optimization computer system. In the second part, the methodological
experience gained will be used to suggest and implement improvement to the
methods, and to synergistically integrate them into a single system,
specifically oriented toward problems of conceptual design. This experience will
be also utilized to develop a method for applying constructive induction-based
learning systems in design knowledge acquisition. The resulting system and
method will be tested in an industrial environment. The research has a potential
to significantly improve conceptual design by developing a new powerful tool for
the designers, as well as to make contributions to the field of machine learning
by conducting the study in the context of practical and important real-world
problems.