* 9300995
* Fundamental and Applied Studies of Activated Nucleation and Growth of Thin Metal Films by Chemical Vapor Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Ralph Nuzzo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 10/31/1996
* USD 360,000.00

In this project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
Professor Nuzzo will carry out a comprehensive study of the activated adsorption
and decomposition of organometallic CVD precursors. The early stages of
metallization in CVD will be explored, with emphasis on the reactive chemistry
of organoaluminum reagents on oxidized and elemental silicon surfaces, and the
nucleation of metal overlayers on these surfaces. Molecular beam and surface
spectroscopic methods will be combined to probe the detailed mechanisms of these
technologically important reactions. In addition, a generalized method for
directly depositing patterned metal films will be developed using self assembled
monolayer chemistry. The results of this research project will be very useful in
developing an understanding of important electronic materials process chemistry.
%%% The initial stages of metal thin film deposition on important electronic
materials will be examined in this research project in the Nuzzo laboratory at
the University of Illinois-Urbana Champaign. Detailed examination of the
mechanism of organometallic precursors for chemical vapor deposition of metal
layers will be carried out. Patterned film deposition will also be explored
using self assembled monolayer chemistry developed in the Nuzzo laboratory.