* 9300517
* Identification Manual for the New World Genera of the       Family Braconidae (Hymenoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Robert Wharton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 09/30/1998
* USD 326,604.00

WPC 2 M B P V ` Courier 10cpi | x ? x x x , k x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ Leonard
Krishtalka # 2 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 4 &lt; D L ! 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 '
3 ' 3 ' 3 ' X 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' X X X 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' " 4 &lt; D L ! ` h p x (# #
x \ P C X P# 9300517 Wharton Braconid wasps are the second largest family of
wasps (more than 10,000 species) and are widely used in the biological control
of insect pests. Although they are a significant component of neotropical
ecosystems, little is known of their biodiversity in Latin American habitats.
This three year project will compile a complete guide to the New World braconid
parasitic wasps and will be issued in three languages (English, Spanish,
Portuguese). The manual will be used primarily by Latin American
conservationists, land managers, agriculturalists and scientists who are not
specialists in wasp systematics, and will include parasitoid biologies,
behavior, geographic distribution , patterns of host utilization and relevant
literature. %%% This three year project will compile a complete guide to a New
World group of parasitic wasps that are widely used in the biological control of
insect pests. Although these wasps are a significant component of neotropical
ecosystems, little is known of their biodiversity in Latin American habitats a
gap that this project aims to fill. This collaborative effort involves eight
specialists in the US and South America, including the training of students from
Latin American countries (Mexico, Costa Rica) and four training workshops to be
held in Mexico, Costa Rica, and Venezuela in wasp systematics and biodiversity.
The identification manual to be issued in three languages (English, Spanish,
Portuguese) will be used primarily by Latin American conservationists, land
managers, agriculturalists and scientists who are not specialists in wasp
systematics. ***