* 9300453
* Wyoming Infrared Observatory's Undergraduate Research       Assistantship Program
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1998
* Ronald Canterna, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 03/31/1998
* USD 189,577.00

A summer research program for undergraduate students will be carried out at the
Wyoming Infrared Observatory (WIRO) for the summers of 1994, 1995, and 1996. The
program will be available to undergraduates throughout the nation and a strong
consideration will be made for women, under-represented minorities, and
sophomore students. This program is a continuation of the Wyoming Infrared
Observatory's Summer Undergraduate Research Assistantship Program (SURAP). A
concurrent seminar/laboratory course will accompany this program to provide
direction and a coherent focus on the role this research experience plays toward
the student's formal undergraduate education. All participants will be required
to participate in a group observational project, assist their advisors at the
2.3 meter telescope, encouraged to complete their research within the summer,
and participate in the program's objectives to produce publishable results. A
science ethics course will also be required of all participants. The Principal
Investigator plans to gradually expand SURAP with an "astronomy semester at
Wyoming" program to further enhance the total research experience. The WIRO
tutorial in research has met these goals over the past six years and intends to
continue our standard of excellence in the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program.