* 9300973
* Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inferences, Decision     Theory, and Asymptotics of Eigenvalues and Eigenprojections
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Morris Eaton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Research is proposed on a variety of problems in statistical decision theory.
The main focus of this research is the evaluation of inferential methods with
admissibility as one evaluative criterion. The connection between the
admissibility of formal Bayes rules and the recurrence of symmetric Markov
chains forms an important portion of the theoretical background for this work.
In a nonparametric setting an alternative method of inducing inferences is
proposed. This alternative is easily implemented numerically and has connections
with both frequentist and Bayesian bootstrap procedures. Another area of
proposed research concerns questions related to the asymptotic distribution of
eigenvalues, eigenprojections, and singular values. Previous work contains new
techniques which provide a unified treatment of eigenalues and singular values.
Applications of these results to concrete examples and extension of the basic
results to eigenprojection problems is proposed. Statistics deals with the
activity of making statements about populations on the basis of available
samples or data. Since information is most often incomplete, such statements are
typically in error. The quantification of this error is a standard statistical
activity and is often expressed in terms of probability. The research supported
by this grant concerns various methods for quantifying statistical errors and
the properties of such methods. The ultimate goal of the research is the
development of new statistical methods for obtaining probabilistic
quantification of errors in inferential statements.