* 9300274
* Southern Hemisphere Mid-Latitude Ground-Based               Investigations of the Dynamics and Thermodynamics of the    Mesosphere and Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Gonzalo Hernandez, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 01/31/1998
* USD 269,656.00

9300274 The study of the dynamics and thermodynamics of the upper atmospheric
regions including the mesosphere and the thermosphere must be done on a global
scale because of the central importance of horizontal transport and coupling of
the dynamics and thermodynamics of these regions. Most of the investigations of
these regions of the upper atmosphere have been made in the Northern Hemisphere
while investigations in the Southern Hemisphere are most recent. Because of the
geographical constraints, the studies of the austral upper atmosphere
necessitate international cooperation. This proposal specifically requests
support for the operation of an optical high-resolution spectrometer at the
University of Canterbury's Mount John Astronomical Observatory (45oS, South
Island, New Zealand) in conjunction with the University of Canterbury's
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MALT) partial- reflection radar located
nearby. This station is part of a Southern Hemisphere collaborative
international program to investigate the austral upper atmosphere, and includes
optical and radar stations in New Zealand (Mount John and Birdlings Flat),
Australia (Beveridge and Adelaide) and Antarctica (South Pole, Scott Base,
Mawson and Halley Bay). Mount John, operated by the Universities of Canterbury,
Washington and Alaska under the US/NZ Cooperative Science Program auspices, is
strategically located to study the upper atmosphere dynamics and thermodynamics
of the transition region between mid and high latitudes in the Southern
Hemisphere. The observations obtained will be interpreted with the aid from
simulations provided from the time-dependent NCAR coupled thermosphere and
ionosphere global circulation model (TIGCM). ***