* 9300827
* Electrorheological-Fluid Dampers: Testing Modeling and Application in Vibration and Seismic Protection of Buildingsand Bridges
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Nicos Makris, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/1997
* USD 180,000.00

9300827 Makris Seismic response of buildings and bridges can be substantially
improved when additional dissipative units (dampers) are used. The energy
dissipation ability of most dampers is based on the shearing action of some
viscous or viscoelastic fluid that they contain. So far, it has been used mainly
in a passive manner. Herein it is proposed to combine the concepts of passive
control with the benefits of active control, to produce an optimal, yet stable
and reliable damping system. This combination is feasible when the fluid within
the dampers is replaced with electrorheological fluid. Electrorheological (ER)
fluids can quickly undergo a drastic change in their viscosity and dynamic shear
modulus when an electric field is applied. In this study it is proposed: (1) To
manufacture in laboratory stable electrorheological fluids, adequate for civil
engineering applications. (Several of the existing ER fluids consist of particle
suspensions within a dispersant phase. After long inactive periods settling of
the suspension occurs which results to loss of the fluid ER activity. (2) To
develop realistic phenomenological models for the rheological behavior of the
developed ER fluid, which will be experimentally calibrated. (3) To develop
analytical and numerical tools to predict the damper response based on the
constitutive models developed for the material behavior. These tools will lead
to realistic macroscopic force displacement models for the damper unit, and
possibly to the design of optimal damper geometries. (4) To extend and develop
algorithms that will actively control the structural response by modifying the
physical and mechanical properties of ER h) 0*0*0* fluid dampers for linear
viscoelastic and nonlinear viscoplastic behavior. (5) To experimentally verify
the developed models and algorithms with shake table tests on simple model
structures. ***