* 9300627
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Pollutant Dry Deposition to Snow and Vegetation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Cliff Davidson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1998
* USD 15,330.00

9300627 Davidson This three-year award supports U.S.-Sweden cooperative research
between Cliff I. Davidson, of Carnegie-Mellon University and Mats Oblad of the
Chalmers University of Technology. The objectives of the research are (1) to
measure and model dry deposition of atmospheric acids and trace elements in the
Gardsjon Lake forest canopy in central Sweden as part of a large international
watershed study; and (2) to develop models and interpret data on dry deposition
in the Artic region. The investigators will study sulfate and nitrate acidic
compounds known to cause ecosystem damage, and certain trace elements that are
known to neutralize acids. The proposed work will focus on field measurements
and computer modeling of dry deposition processes. Atmospheric acids are
transported to surfaces by wet and dry deposition. Dry deposition is an
important mechanism of removal of acidic compounds from the atmosphere; however,
its processes are not well understood. The forest deposition work and the work
in the Artic will provide better estimates and understanding of the physical and
chemical processes by which atmospheric particles interact with vegetated and
snow surfaces. The researchers at Carnegie Mellon have developed unique,
symmetric airfoil devices for measuring dry deposition. These will be set up in
the forest canopy at Gardsjon Lake. The models on dry deposition in the Artic,
also developed by the Carnegie-Mellon group, will be tested utilizing new
datasets available at Chalmers University. The proposed collaboration takes
advantage of Swedish expertise in modeling methods and experience in monitoring
the deposition of acidic compounds in a forest canopy. It also allows
comparision of results at American sites with those from Swedish sites. ***