* 9300956
* SGER:  Young Children's Reaction to a Natural Disaster:     Memory and Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Janat Parker, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1996
* USD 49,521.00

This research will investigate memory in young children and their mothers for
events related to a major hurricane as a function of stress, operationalized as
level of hurricane exposure. Ninety-six three- and four-year-old children and
their mothers will be interviewed two months and again one year following the
devastation of Hurricane Andrew in Miami, Florida. Thirty-six additional three
and four year olds and their mothers will be interviewed at the one-year
interval only, as a control group. Participants will be selected so as to
represent equally low, moderate, and severe hurricane exposure conditions,
defined by the extent of damage to their homes. All participants will be asked
to recount events that fall into three time periods, 1) the prehurricane
preparations, 2) the hurricane itself, and 3) the posthurricane recovery period.
The memory interview will consist of open-ended questions, followed by specific
category prompts for each period. The research will assess the amount of
rehearsal of the information from the period before, during, and after the
hurricane, as well as the degree of child and adult well being. Accuracy,
amount, and content of recall will be coded, using a propositional analysis. Of
primary concern is how these retention measures differ as a function of stress
level and retention interval. The research will assess the effects of the first
interview on retention at one year, using comparisons against the control group
for the three stress levels. The research will also explore relations between
content and amount of recall for children and adults. Of secondary concern will
be relations between measures of memory and well being, and between adult and
child well being. Findings of this study may improve our understanding of the
relation between memory and stress in children and provide us with important
information about the amount, accuracy and nature of recall for a traumatic
event. In contrast with most research on traumatic events (e.g., physical,
emotional, or sexual child abuse), this research is unique in that stress is so
easily operationalized and memories can be corroborated.