* 9300326
* Optimal Design of Topology and Microstructure of Discrete   Parts in Project MAXWELL
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1993,12/31/1997
* Debasish Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1997
* USD 250,810.00

Kikuchi 9300326 Project MAXWELL aims at bringing together two research efforts
under way at the University of Michigan (U-M) and at Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) in the area of discrete part design and manufacturing. The U-M team has
developed a strategy for designing the form and material composition of
structures and structural components based only on a description of loading
conditions and packaging requirements. The CMU team has developed a method for
free-form fabrication of parts from single or composite materials by thermal
spray shape deposition. Under project MAXWELL, structural parts will be designed
(both for form and material composition), fabricated, and tested in an
integrated manner. This project is concerned primarily with the design phase of
project MAXWELL. In particular, the previously developed, mathematically
rigorous procedure for the concurrent design of material composition and
topology of 2D structures to include 3D components. This involves two major
tasks: (1) extending the 2D domain of the homogenization method to include the
realization of novel mechanical parts that possess superior structural and
thermo- mechanical properties, and satisfy downstream manufacturing
requirements. The project address proof of concept through design, manufacture,
and testing of actual parts.