* 9300204
* Summer Research Program for Minority Undergraduates in      Cellular and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1994
* Jill Patterson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 03/31/1994
* USD 43,775.00

This award provides funds to The Center for Biology at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison to support a summer program which provides research
opportunities to talented minority undergraduates in cellular and molecular
biology. Ten students will be recruited nationwide in order to encourage and
prepare them for graduate studies.. UW-Madison will sponsor 4 additional
students, bringing the total involvement to 14. Building on expertise gained
from three previous summer programs for minority undergraduates, prospective
faculty mentors and program staff will provide an environment designed to foster
critical thinking, creative problem solving, and productive research skills.
Twenty-four committed faculty (18 having mentored in previous summers) will lead
in the design, planning, implementation and evaluation of the summer program.
The core of the program lies in individual, independent research experiences
under the mentorship of faculty members with shared research interests in
cellular and molecular biology. Research experiences will be augmented by a
seminar/workshop series to promote growth as independent researchers and prepare
students for graduate study. The capstone experience will be a symposium in
which students formally present research results to colleagues and faculty. The
program will integrate multicultural and social activities, which are vital for
providing the students with a productive, enjoyable and satisfying summer
research experience.