* 9300466
* REU: Biology of Endophytic Fungi: An Integrative Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Thomas Bultman, Truman State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1995
* USD 65,876.00

This award provides funds to the Northeast Missouri State University (NMSU)
Science Division to continue a successful NSF-REU program . During the summers
of 1993 and 1994 seven undergraduate students will be given financial support to
allow them to participate in and intensive, full-time research experience. As
demonstration of its strong commitment to undergraduate research, NMSU will make
several contributions, including: clerical support, free on-campus room and
board and a waiver of tuition and fees for 3 college credits to student
participants. Students, 3 from NMSU and 4 from off-campus, and 7 faculty mentors
will form a research team, focusing on the study of a single system: grass/fungi
endosymbioses. Students will be selected based on their independence and
motivation, research potential, and professional goals. Discussions between
student and mentor will form the basis for matching students to specific
research areas. Students will work in research areas that range widely from
chemical analysis of fungal alkaloids, to ecological and physiological
implications for grasses of harboring a fungus, to effects of fungal alkaloids
on insect and mammalian consumers of the fungus. The central focus will
integrate study at different levels of biological organization and will help
foster unity and community among group members. The program includes several
opportunities for students to communicate their work to others, including a
required oral presentation of their findings, and is aimed to develop project
ownership by the student.