* 9300433
* Space Science and Instrumentation at UAH
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Gordon Emslie, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,450.00

This project is a continuation of an REU site, which involves approximately ten
undergraduate students per year in a summer internship program. The fields of
study are all thrust areas within the Department of Physics at UAH, and include
space plasma physics, optics, and materials science. These related topics are
presented under the unified theme of "Space Physics and Instrumentation".
Students will be involved in the study of materials used in the construction of,
and optical characteristics of, space instrumentation, as well as in the
scientific return from spacecraft and ground-based instruments studying the
Earth, the Sun, and astronomical objects. The students, and their advising
faculty, will meet weekly as a group to discuss progress. The proposed topics
constitute genuine research endeavors, yet, as our experience shows, can
realistically be completed in one summer. Recruitment is primarily targeted as
students outside the local area, but within the Southeast region. Women and
minorities will be especially targeted; indeed over 70% of the students funded
the previous award were women. The research environment is outstanding, and
students will have many opportunities to interact with scientists and facilities
both in local industry and at the nearby NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. #