* 9300935
* Mathematical Sciences: The Topology of Generalized Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1996
* John Bryant, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1996
* USD 130,200.00

Frank Quinn has shown that, for n &gt;= 5, a connected generalized n-manifold
(n-gm) X has an associated resolution obstruction, given by a "local index"
i(X), which is an integer congruent to 1 mod 8. X is resolvable if and only if
i(X)=1. This result, combined with a theorem of R. D. Edwards, implies that an
n-gm X, n &gt;= 5, is a topological manifold iff X has the disjoint disks
property (DDP) and i(X) = 1. Left open in the results of Quinn was the question
of whether nonresolvable generalized manifolds exist. Recently, the
investigators, together with Steve Ferry and Shmuel Weinberger, have shown that,
given any simply connected, closed n-manifold X, n &gt;= 6, and any integer m =
1(mod 8), there is an n-gm X, homotopy equivalent to M, with i(X) = m. The
discovery of these examples raises several questions about the topology of
generalized manifolds and these questions form the basis of this project. The
ultimate purpose is to understand the general classification scheme of
generalized manifolds in high dimensions with the immediate goal of discovering
to what extent these spaces behave like real manifolds. A topological manifold
of dimension n, or n-manifold, is a geometric object that looks locally like
euclidean space of dimension n. Thus, scientific phenomena modeled on these
spaces can be expressed and analyzed, using local coordinate systems. One of the
central problems of geometric topology has been to prescribe a "topological
characterization" of (locally) euclidean spaces. By this we mean a list of
properties that a topologist could use to check whether or not a given space is
a manifold. Characterizations of manifolds of dimension one or two have been
known for a long time, but higher dimensional characterization schemes have
proved to be elusive to formulate and verify. A characterization of manifolds of
dimension greater than four was conjectured by James Cannon in an address to the
1978 International Congress of Mathematicians in Helsinki. Frank Quinn
discovered that Cannon's criteria would yield a solution to the problem,
provided that an additional integer invariant is zero. Recently, the proposers,
along with Steve Ferry and Shmuel Weinberger, found a large class of geometric
objects of dimension greater than five that satisfy Cannon's criteria, but have
non-zero Quinn invariant. There is evidence that these new spaces should be
incorporated in the class of manifolds and a common theory developed. The
investigators intend to study the foundational aspects of the theory and its
potential applications. As an example, among other things, they plan to relate
these "generalized manifolds" to the study of dynamics on manifolds by showing
that they may play the role of axis of symmetry of motions in space.