* 9300025
* Concept Database:  A Design Information System for          Concurrent Engineering with Application to Mechatronics     Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1997
* USD 238,311.00

This is a program of research, development and technology transfer of a
multimedia conceptual design aid, the Concept Database. The Concept Database
provides design teams with easy access to information with regard to life cycle
design issues for competing design concepts and access to relevant past designs
and other information databases of the engineering enterprise. The Concept
Database methodology provides "smart navigation" through a hypermedia database
of linked design concepts. Such a system expands the amount of information
available to the designer and other members of the product development team in a
manner that is selective, using search techniques that are based on heuristic,
deterministic, and decision-analytic methods. Normative design methodologies are
used to develop the structure of the search in order to guarantee that the full
range of life cycle issues are considered and provides a framework for making
design decisions that take account of multiple and often conflicting life cycle
objectives. Mechatronic design is the domain of the first prototype system.
Mechatronic design is an area of key strategic importance, playing an important
role in the design of consumer products, computer peripherals, automation
systems, and aerospace and defense systems. It is also an area where off-the-
shelf component selection is essential, and one in which the expertise crosses
departmental boundaries; electronic design, mechanical design, interface design,
supplier coordination, packaging, logistics and support are all involved in the
realization of a good mechatronic system design.