* 9300560
* Model Based Tomography: A Comprehensive Approach to Iterative Image Reconstruction
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1998
* Ken Sauer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/1998
* USD 237,496.00

Low dosage transmission medical imaging, emission medical imaging, and
nondestructive testing of materials are all examples of tomographic
reconstruction problems which can benefit greatly from improved reconstruction
techniques. This research introduces a strategy for the development of
computationally efficient reconstruction algorithms which directly search for
the statistically optimal fit to measured data. This approach exploits the wide
availability of digital computation and storage to substantially improve
reconstruction in demanding applications. The research has three essential
components: 1) A general measurement system model is being proposed which
characterizes the physical measurement apparatus for both the transmission and
emission problems, and can be extended to include nonlinear effects such as
scattering. 2) A new class of computationally tractable image cross section
models is being proposed which preserves image detail while suppressing noise
artifacts. 3) A fast numerical algorithm, known as Gauss-Seidel, is proposed as
a basis for efficient and accurate multiscale reconstruction methods.
Algorithmic techniques are being evaluated using data collected from the
Nondestructive Evaluation Section at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratories.