* 9300253
* Feature-Based Manufacturing Evaluation Using Statistical    Process Control Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Chell Roberts, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/1997
* USD 251,788.00

9300253 Henderson The increasing demand for high-quality, diversified products
is requiring the design engineer to deliver new and better designs faster and
cheaper. Central to this goal is the need to evaluate the manufacturability of
proposed design features during the design process. Although researchers have
begun work in evaluation designs, many important links between the design and
manufacturing process remain undeveloped. This interdisciplinary research
addresses the following goals: (1) a feedback system that provides designers
with understandable redesign help based on manufacturing considerations, (2) a
legitimate, pragmatic way of converting a design-related product model into an
appropriate manufacturing- related, feature-based model used for manufacturing
evaluation, (3) a parochial factory model and key knowledge-based assistants to
match features with factory capability, (4) algorithms for forecasting the
statistical process performance for proposed product features and manufacturing
processes, and (5) a manufacturing evaluation methodology that incorporates
statistical process performance, time and cost. This research improves the
concurrent engineering environment by providing fast, efficient help to the
designer. The system evaluates a product for manufacturability and feed back
information to the designer in terms of the original design variables that may
cause problems in cost and quality.