* 9300238
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Correlation betweenthe Nonmetal to Metal Transition in Clusters and at Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Peter Dowben, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/1998
* USD 19,870.00

9300238 Plummer This award supports Professors E. Ward Plummer of the University
of Tennessee, Peter Dowben of Syracuse University, and N. John DiNardo of Drexel
University to collaborate in condensed matter physics with three German
counterparts: Professor Klaus Rademann and Dr. Ourania Rademann of the
University of Marburg and Dr. Eckart Ruhl of the Free University of Berlin. The
purpose of their cooperative research is to develop a picture of the fundamental
mechanisms for the nonmetal to metal transition in the simple metals. The
collaborative plan brings together three U.S. experimentalists who have done
substantial research on the nonmetal transition in two dimensions and at solid
surfaces to work with three German experimentalists who have done complementary
research on the transition in clusters. The research requires substantial
experimental work at a synchrotron light source, as well as access to other very
specialized analytical equipment. The German collaborators are able to provide
access to the German facility known as BESSY, in Berlin, while the U.S.
collaborators will arrange for joint work at the U.S. National Synchrotron Light
Source and other U.S. facilities suitable for the very complicated
characterizations of alkali metal in surface islands and surface aggregates.
Both U.S. and German postdoctoral associates and graduate students will be
involved in the collaborative research. Transition metal clusters and aggregates
exhibit a nonmetal to metal transition with increasing cluster size. Similar
transitions have been observed for transition metal layers on solid surfaces. So
far, the in-depth study needed to demonstrate a direct connection between metal
to nonmetal transition in clusters and at surfaces has been done successfully
only for one metal, mercury. These investigators propose to expand that base of
knowledge by undertaking the necessary comparative research on transition in
alkali metals. Since data already exist on alkali b ehavior in surface layers,
the joint research will focus principally on the transition in clusters. Results
from this research will contribute to understanding the basis for the difference
in behavior between metals and non-metals. ***