* 9300065
* CRB:  Genetics of Captive and Natural Populations of        Endangered Lake Victoria Cichlids
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Leslie Kaufman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9300065 FUERST The introduction of Nile perch, Lates niloticus, into Lake
Victoria in 1960 caused a catastrophic disruption of the lake's endemic fish
community. Over 300 species of haplochromine cichlids and other fishes were
affected, with many species going extinct. Attempts to ameliorate extinction
processes in this aquatic community center upon restoration of the environment,
accurate survey of surviving taxa, and capture and captive maintenance of a
sample of the community. To develop general strategies for preservation of
endangered fish, we propose a study of genetic variability in several species of
Lake Victoria cichlids. The work will be conducted with the cooperation of
fisheries biologists of the Uganda Freshwater Fisheries Research Organization.
Genetic variability in several species of Lake Victoria haplochromine cichlids
will be characterized, and observed levels of genetic variation will be compared
in species that: (a) have successfully adapted to environmental changes, (b) are
endangered but for which adaptation is questionable. A small set of molecular
markers, including randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers and markers
from the ribosomal RNA gene region, will be used in this study to estimate
levels of genetic variability within populations. %%% Results can potentially
guide management strategies for preserving fish genetic variation, inform
species conservation decisions, and contribute to assess ing the likelihood of
successfully reintroducing captively managed endangered fish populations into
nature. ***