* 9300259
* Undergraduate Research Projects on the Geology of a         Deformed Continental Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1995
* Constance Soja, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 10/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

We seek funding for a two-year summer research program to enhance research
opportunities in the field and laboratory for geology undergraduate students
from Colgate University and other colleges. Our goals are to better prepare
undergraduate students for graduate education in geology and to encourage
pursuit of future careers in the geosciences and related fields by involving
junior and senior undergraduates in a supportive research environment. Minority
students enrolled in Colgate University`s pre-college summer program and in the
geology department's field- based seminar for first-year students and students
from other colleges will be strongly encouraged to participate in our summer
program. Research topics provide undergraduates interested in geology with
tractable study problems that will make significant contributions to our
understanding of the geologic history of a classic deformed continental margin.
Research topics in New York and New England will focus primarily on the Taconic
fold/thrust belt, Adirondack massif, and Cortlandt Complex. Additional research
opportunities will be available at Colgate on topics related to aqueous
geochemistry, clay mineralogy, and geomorphology and in Alaska on the
paleontology and sedimentology of Paleozoic carbonates. Student participants
will begin our summer geology program by attending a six-week orientation field
exercise where they will learn the fundamentals of field-based research and
undertake independent mapping exercises in a variety of geographical and
geological contexts. For seven weeks following the field program, students will
work on research projects in close partnership with geology faculty at Colgate.
Students will continue their research as independent study projects or as senior
Honors theses during the academic year. We will teach students how to use
analytical instrumentation in geologic research and will encourage them to
incorporate departmental equipment (SEM/EDS, XRF, XRD, AA, ion chromatograph,
magnetometer, gravity meter, resistivity meter, and exploration seismograph)
into their studies. Students will present the results of their projects in a
research symposium at Colgate and (or) in coordination with faculty at regional
geology meetings.