* 9300213
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the   Pennsylvania State University Department of Astronomy and   Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1999
* Margaret Chester, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Terry D. Oswalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 169,693.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will be at the Department
of Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics at Penn State during 1993- 1994. The REU site
will involve at least nine, and possibly twelve or more, students in research
projects each summer, six funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), three
or more from other research sources within the department. Students will be
involved in a wide range of frontier research projects in ground- and space-
based observations and theory, and instrumentation. As a REU site, the
Department will engage in an aggressive recruiting program for students in a
large geographical area covering Pennsylvania, the surrounding mid-Atlantic
states and Appalachia, and southeastern states, including large rural areas for
which Penn State is one of the nearest major research institutions. Minority
participation will be encouraged through the use of contacts with predominantly
minority universities and colleges in the region. Seminars and special tutorials
will broaden students' knowledge of astronomy and astrophysics, ensure
interaction with faculty, and teach valuable skills including laboratory,
observational and data analysis. Extra-curricular activities will encourage
informal interaction with faculty and graduate students. The program will focus
on encouraging students' interest in careers in astronomy and astrophysics.