* 9300832
* GEM: Model of Electron and Ion Distribution in the Open     Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* J. Perez, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 137,677.00

9300832 Onsager The goal of this research is to develop a quantitative, 3-D
model of electron and ion distribution functions in the open magnetic field
regions of the magnetosphere. This research will contain two main components: 1)
a comparison of the model results with spacecraft data, and 2) the extension of
our current model to three spatial dimensions using more realistic electric
fields. By comparing the model with data, we will evaluate its predictive
capabilities and identify additional physical processes that could be added.
This GEM model will be ideally suited for detailed comparisons of multiple
spacecraft data, as will be obtained later this decade with the launch of FREJA,
WIND, POLAR, FAST, CLUSTER, etc. The model will also be designed to interface
with 3-D global models. These global models will provide magnetic and electric
fields used for our particle mapping in the magnetosphere, while the
distribution functions obtained from our model will augment the global modelling
results. Our mode will provide an important link between the detailed particle
measurements made by spacecraft and the global magnetospheric/solar wind
properties. As such, it will serve as an important component of the Geospace
Global Circulation Model envisioned by the GEM research community. ***