* 9300295
* Provenance History of Upper Cenozoic Sandstones of the      Bengal Basin, Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Neil Lundberg, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/1996
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This dissertation improvement grant supports travel and provides
field expenses for Dr. Neil Lundberg and his doctoral candidate, Ashraf Uddin of
Bangladesh. In addition, a U.S. undergraduate student will participate in the
research and gain experience in working with Bangladesh geologists. The project
will be carried out in collaboration with Dr. Monirul Hoque of the Department of
Geology, University of Dhaka in Bangladesh. It seeks to study the quaternary
sequences of the Bengal basin for petrographic, mineralogic and geochronologic
evidence of the tectonic history of the adjacent mountain belts. Sample
collection and sedimentologic observations in the field will be followed by
detailed analysis of sediment composition and fission-track geochronology. Modal
analysis of sandstones and heavy-metal studies, complemented by fission-track
analysis of detrital apatite and zircon, will be used to evaluate changes in
source-area composition, to determine unroofing trends and rates, and to test
hypothesized episodes of uplift. These data will be compared to existing data
sets for equivalent deposits of the Sub-Himalayan Siwalik sequence and the
Bengal fan. Scope: This project is likely to provide detailed quantitative data
on the stratigraphic record of the Himalayan collision. It will provide research
opportunity in an excellent natural laboratory for a graduate and undergraduate
students in a U.S. university. It can also help the host country by provding an
improved understanding of the regional geological framework and basin history,
important in developing petroleum resources of the Bengal basin.