* 9300372
* REU: Molecular and Organismal Evolution:  A Comparative     Focus
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Marshall Sundberg, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides support to Louisiana State University to continue a
successful Research Experiences for Undergraduates SITE. The primary activity
will involve eight week summer sessions of independent research in evolutionary
biology. A select group of ten students, (at least six non-LSU students) of
junior or senior standing, will be invited to participate in the program. Each
student will be under the direct supervision of an LSU faculty member who will
serve as the research mentor and be directly responsible for the student' s
progress. Faculty participants have been chosen on the basis of their experience
working with undergraduates in the laboratory, suitability of research projects
and general research productivity. Additional components of the summer program
will be an intense library orientation, communication skills workshop, and an
honor and ethics in science seminar. The program will also involve a weekly
seminar series for all participants, including the faculty advisors and members
of their research laboratories. The latter activities will be coordinated by the
P. I.. Upon completion of the summer research program, each REU investigator
will present his/her research results as an oral paper at an undergraduate
research symposium, and a written paper in a form suitable for publication.
Students will be encouraged to present the results of their completed work to a
scientific audience at regional or national professional meetings. This program
targets students in the South Central region of the United States, with three
schools, Centenary College, Jackson State University and the University of Texas
- Pan American to receive focused recruiting.