* 9300545
* REU Site: Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience (SAGE)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1996
* George Jiracek, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 03/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

SAGE (Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience) has permitted undergraduate
students to take part in hands-on, research scale geophysical exploration.
Students first complete the four-week field segment of SAGE in the Rio Grande
rift of New Mexico. Here they do research using seismic reflection and
refraction, gravity, magnetism, electrical resistivity, electromagnetics, and
magnetotellurics. They are involved in every phase of the field research from
the collection and processing of the data to its interpretation culminating with
both an oral and written report. After the field segment the students return to
their campuses where the research continues provided the required supervision
exists. This is closely monitored by a SAGE faculty member and is augmented by a
visit to a SAGE faculty's campus and attendance at a scientific meeting. SAGE is
sponsored by Los Alamos National Laboratory and 5 schools who furnish faculty
and geophysical equipment. Additional equipment is provided by industry, e.g.,
ARCO and Kennecott, among others, assisted SAGE in 1992. This proposal seeks
support for 13 undergraduate students to attend the SAGE research program for
each of the next three years. Students are accepted from any school. Strategies
to recruit underrepresented students successfully brought four women, one
Hispanic, and one Navajo to SAGE 1992 as part of the 13 REU students.