* 9300568
* A Framework for Integrated Production Planning and          Scheduling in a Hybrid Assembly Job Shop Environment        Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Adedeji Badiru, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 02/28/1997
* USD 157,700.00

9300568 Foote The advancement in computer technology and the competition among
computer companies have resulted in an increase in the application of computer
aided design (CAD), computer aided process planning and computer aided
manufacturing (CAM). Although the development of new technologies is necessary
for the advancement of science, lack of integration of these technologies will
prove detrimental to the system and hence may result in the desertion of such
technologies. Today, there is greater need for efficient production management
techniques than ever. Current methods of improving production management focus
on several approaches as independent methods of improvement. The goal of this
research is to develop in some sense a 'maximal' production management
methodology. A 'maximal' methodology is one that takes advantages of the major
variable sources of flexibility and response available to a manager: choosing
lot size,process plan (which part feature to process), process used to create
feature, sequence at each process, inventory created, shortage accepted or
subcontract awarded. The methodology applies to a hybrid assembly job shop,
which manufactures components some of which go to an assembly line. This
approach is now possible due to advances in modeling and computational
methodologies, increased computer power, and advances in data base organization.
The individual data fields (time standards, process plans, holding costs,
reliability and defect rate data, etc.) are limited to those currently available
in actual manufacturing systems known and explored by the researchers. The
individual choices must be coordinated since optimizing an individual variable
such as lot size may overload a bottleneck resource, optimizing flow time by
shortest processing time may increase tardiness and again overload a temporary
bottleneck. The integration of fast simulation process planning, multiple
criteria optimization, stochastic programming with recourse techniques with the
scheduling and sequencing techniques is original and shows promise of
improvements over the current theory.