* 9300358
* REU Site in Minority Group Demography
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1997
* Teresa Sullivan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 04/30/1997
* USD 144,000.00

This award provides funds to continue an REU Site at the Population Research
Center at the University of Texas, Austin. Demography is a technical field
within sociology in which minorities are underrepresented. This
underrepresentation may stem from weaknesses in the typical undergraduate
curriculum, combined with low enrollment of minority students at colleges with
strong demography programs. The University of Texas, Austin supports a strong,
active research program in minority group demography, which has had notable
success in training minority demographers, especially Mexican-Americans. In the
past four years, the REU Site summer training program has brought these skills
to a mix of undergraduate students from the University and other smaller, non-
research oriented schools in the Southwest. As before, this REU Site has three
specific objectives: (1) to provide undergraduate sociology students with more
intense technical demographic training than is currently available in most
undergraduate sociology curricula; (2) to provide "hands-on" experience with
faculty-led research teams conducting externally- funded research projects on
topics related to minority-group demography; and (3) to encourage undergraduate
participants to develop a scholarly paper based on their summer research
experience and to present it at a regional demography group meeting after their
summer program. Although issues regarding the ethics of the scientific research
enterprise have been routinely covered in previous years, they will be
incorporated in a more deliberate manner in the upcoming years. The ethics
component will include: (a) issues regarding the use of human subjects,
confidentiality of data, and privacy in the execution of social-demographic
research; (b) issues regarding the publication of scientific research; and (c)
issues involved in grant applications and grant reviewing procedures. This award
contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences.