* 9300644
* Photodissociation-Photoionization Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Murray Johnston, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 09/30/1998
* USD 365,000.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of mass spectrometry. During the tenure of this three-year
continuing grant, Professor Johnston and his students will use the recently
developed technique of photodissociation-photoionization mass spectrometry
(PDPI/MS) to investigate mechanisms of photochemical reactions of organic
molecules in the gas phase. In PDPI/MS, neutral molecules are photodissociated
with an ultraviolet pulsed laser beam. A second pulsed laser generates coherent
vacuum ultraviolet radiation which then ionizes the parent molecules and neutral
photoproducts from the initial laser pulse. The resulting ions are then detected
with a quadrupole mass spectrometer. The two primary goals of this research,
which builds upon accomplishments of the Johnston group under NSF grant
CHE-9096266, are the (1) development of improved experimental methods for making
innovative photochemical measurements by PDPI/MS and (2) fundamental studies of
mechanisms of decomposition of large organic molecules. %%% The successful
attainment of the goals of this project will provide a rational framework for
understanding how large organic molecules undergo gas phase photofragmentation.
This knowledge will facilitate the rapid and reliable determination of the
structures of technologically important complex molecules.