* 9300812
* Acquisition of Ultra-High Angular and Energy Resolution     Photoemission System
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* William Spicer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1994
* USD 86,000.00

The novel design of this new ultra-high resolution photoemission system will
give an energy and angular resolution of better than 5 meV and 0.2 degrees,
respectively. The 5 meV resolution is about a factor of 4-5 times better than
most current state of the art spectrometers. The 0.2 degrees angular resolution
is about a factor of 10 times better than the typical angle- resolved
photoemission spectrometer. Most importantly, the analyzer enables one to
simultaneously acquire 80 spectra at different angles in the time it would
normally take to acquire one spectrum with a conventional spectrometer. In
addition, the large analyzer size also dramatically enhances the efficiency of
the spectrometer. This means that the new spectrometer will have a total
counting rate at least 100 times better than the best spectrometer in the field
now. This equipment will be used for a variety or research programs at Stanford
University. It will also be made available to researchers from other
institutions. The successful implementation of this system will have a very
positive impact on many exciting areas of research on advanced materials. This
includes the high-temperature superconductors, semiconductors, the fullerenes
and their derivatives, magnetic materials, the Mott insulators, and heavy
fermion and mixed valence compounds. Some of the key issues in contemporary
physics will be very effectively addressed by the extremely high energy and
angular resolution made available by the new spectrometer. Examples include the
superconducting gap in cuprates and the Kondo resonance in heavy fermions.
Acquisition of this system will greatly enhance ongoing and future research, as
well as the educational environment at Stanford University and other
institutions.