* 9300194
* Knowledge-Based Analysis of Speech Mixed with Steady and    Sporadic Environmental Sounds
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* S. Hamid Nawab, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Garcia
* 08/31/1994
* USD 29,905.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project. The project
investigates the feasibility of using knowledge from the steady and sporadic
background noise sources that occur in arbitrary environments not conditioned
for speech recognition to isolate them from speaker-independent articulation of
telephone numbers in a recognition task. The environmental noisy background
could be found in home, offices, and automobiles; the types of steady-state
noise include those originating from an air conditioner or from a car engine,
while the sporadic noise sources are discrete events such as a person walking, a
door slammed, a ringing telephone, or an appliance being switched on. The
problem is addressed on the basis of a signal-understanding architecture with
context-dependent reconfiguration for the feature extraction process. The
results from an initial round of feature extraction are analyzed for time-
frequency regions consistent with the system's knowledge regarding the
correlates of various speech and non-speech sources. Those regions of higher
certainty - or islands of certainty - are considered in the prediction of
potentially masked speech by non-speech sources that may occur in other parts of
the utterance. Those regions are used also as a basis in the reconfiguration of
the feature-extraction process which is used in analyzing the masked region as
well as in verifying, pruning, and refining hypotheses in all regions. In
summary, while the goal of the system is to recognize speech, it must also
perform the recognition on non-speech sounds to help the speech recognition
process. //