* 9300848
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems Arising in the Stability Analysis of Traveling Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1998
* Robert Gardner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 10/31/1998
* USD 127,710.00

This award supports continuing research on the stability of travelling waves.
Several application areas such as fluid mechanics (a modified Burgers equation),
reaction-diffusion systems, the Murray-Oster mechanochemical theory of pattern
bifurcation and competing population models. Much work has been done on wave
solutions of most of these equations. This project is concerned with the
stability of such wave solutions, a topic which has received very little
attention. The project gives a very important framework of stability analysis
for travelling waves by using topological invariants. It is a conceptually new
idea; very robust to perturbations because of its topological character. The
basic idea of 'stability index' has been developed recently. It shows great
potential as a new tool which can be used to explore many examples of wave
phenomena occurring in both theoretical mathematics and the physical world. The
travelling wave is the most basic object used to understand dynamic pattern
formation such as shock waves, crystal growth, and flame propagation, since the
phase change occurs only through the motion of interfacial boundaries and such a
motion takes the form of travelling waves. The important issue is knowing
whether such waves are observable or not, which is the same thing as asking
whether they are stable. It is, in general, quite difficult to determine their
stability properties, since travelling waves are large amplitude solutions
connecting two different stable states and usually contain sharp transition
layers. The new topological machinery used in this project to detect stability
is not a perturbative one, and hence has the potential for broad applicability.