* 9300391
* Astronomical Research for Undergraduates at the Maria       Mitchell Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1993,03/31/1999
* Alberto Noriega-Crespo, Nantucket Maria Mitchell Association
* Continuing Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 03/31/1999
* USD 284,881.00

The Maria Mitchell Observatory employs undergraduate students in astronomical
research in the topics of Galactic structure, Galactic chemical evolution,
stellar evolution, and variable stars. Projects take advantage of current
observational data, including the resources of the Maria Mitchell Observatory's
photographic plate collection, and are generally related to the research
interests and activities of scientists on the permanent staff and visiting
scientists supervising research. Ongoing research will focus on photometry of
star clusters to determine the ages and the morphology of cluster evolutionary
sequences and medium and high resolution spectroscopy of stars in both clusters
and the Galactic field to study the chemical structure and evolution of the
Galactic disk. The research will also include investigations of variable stars
of particular current interest. The 80 year time-line provided by the
Observatory's plate collection will be used. The program may expand to include
theoretical astrophysics and other observational fields as the program
diversifies. The Observatory intends to bring six students to participate in the
REU program held in the summer and up to four students to carry out research in
the autumn. Research projects are designed to introduce students to varied
aspects of data reduction and analysis, using recently acquired as well as
archival data, and to involve students in all aspects of a research work. The
students are encouraged to view the projects as their own independent work, to
take responsibility for all aspects of its execution and completion, and as a
result, to obtain recognition through authorship of the scientific results.