* 9300778
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and   Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Eugene Fabes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1996
* USD 175,986.00

Research in three areas of mathematical analysis will be supported by this
award. The theme of the work revolves around partial differential equations
defined on domains with nonsmooth boundaries and inverse problems related to
such equations. The first areas concerns computational algorithms for
approximating the inverse of classical layer potentials on nonsmooth domains.
One is interested in determining mathematically justified numerical schemes for
approximating inverses of boundary integral operators arising from layer
potentials. These potentials are associated with boundary value problems for
second order partial differential equations and systems. A second line of study
concerns Fatou theory and potential theory for nonlinear elliptic equations and
linear parabolic equations with nonsmooth coefficients. The goal is to determine
exactly how solutions, defined on the interior of a domain, change as the
boundary is approached in a nontangential direction. The final goal is to
establish sharp boundedness estimates for classes of functions on nonsmooth
domains in the form of multiplicative norm inequalities involving a second or
higher order elliptic operator on the functions of involving the Stokes operator
in the case of a vector=valued function.The analysis of partial differential
equations on nonsmooth domains is an subject of intense recent activity in
mathematical research. It has been possible to make steady headway on problems
once thought to be out of reach. Aside from their intellectual challenge, these
problems have a practical side -most phenomena in the physical world which can
be modeled by differential equations are burdened with rough boundary
conditions. This type of research validates information only obtained
intuitively or through computation.