* 9300418
* REU: Stable Isotopic Applications to Great Plains Ecology,  Paleoecology, Archeology, and Physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1994
* Larry Tieszen, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1994
* USD 51,000.00

This award provides funds to continue REU support for another year in the
Department of Biology at Augustana College. The program will support
undergraduate participation in a focused research program which integrates the
research activities of ten investigators from Augustana College (6), Univ. Neb.
(1), The Nature Conservancy (1), S.D. State Univ. (1), and Black Hills State
Univ. (1). The projects are integrated at the scientific level because of the
common interests in prairie ecology and paleoecology, and because each project
benefits from the applications of the stable isotopes of C and N to the
methodology. A coherent group and a unique methodology will be used to continue
ecological and archeological reconstructions in a geographic area of rich
ecological resources and to encompass growing interest in diets and physiology.
The REU students will be active participants as Augustana College hosts the
International Conference. on Bone Modifications in 1993. Four high school
teachers will participate, funded in total by the S. Dakota-NSF State Systemic
Initiative. Ten students (half women, half from off-campus) will study field and
laboratory problems with a common focus. They will be expected to gain some
mastery of the theoretical basis for their study as well as the experimental
design and ultimate interpretation. Weekly seminars and workshops will review
each project's theoretical basis and research design; enhance the students'
library, laboratory, data handling, and scientific writing skills; and broaden
their understanding of the related projects. The ten-week summer program and
academic year independent study will culminate in an REU Symposium in which each
student will present his/her results and conclusions and help develop the
hypotheses for next summer's projects. Outstanding women will be selected again
as seminar speakers and to serve as role models. Twenty high schools will be
invited to select an outstanding woman student to attend the REU Symposium and
return for one day in summer. A major ethics conference will be hosted and a
report disseminated dealing with reburial of museum specimens and animal
research.