* 9300828
* Material Modelling and Computational Methods for River      Valley Projects, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1997
* A Varadarajan, Indian Institute of Technology New Delhi
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/1997
* USD 57,611.00

Description: The proposed research project is in the earth sciences and its
objective is to develop knowledge that will lead to improved analysis of
geological materials and realistic constitutive models for systems that will be
used in river valley projects. Realistic constitutive models will allow
incorporation of many factors such as nonlinear material behavior, insitu
stresses, and discontinuities very often ignored or highly simplified in the
past. Together with modern computational methods the resulting procedures will
permit solutions of highly complex problems which are difficult to solve using
conventional methods. A unique aspect of the research is the integration of
basic mathematical modelling for realistic characterization of the behavior of
materials, implementation of models in non- linear computational procedures, and
verification of field behavior of typical structures. The collaboration is
between Drs. C.S. Desai, University of Arizona and A. Varadarajan, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi. Scope: Results of the research will benefit
applications of advanced constitutive models and computer procedures for the
development of rational structures for river valley projects both in India and
the U.S. This type of research is particularly relevant in the U.S. as
significant research work is in progress in constitutive modelling of geologic
materials and discontinuities, development of new laboratory devices,
implementation of constitutive models in computer methods and verification
through laboratory/field studies. A formal collaboration will be of mutual
benefit.