* 9300288
* "Undergraduate Research Participation:  Collaborative Cross Disciplinary Research in Biology"
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1994
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1994
* USD 51,250.00

This award provides funds to establish an NSF-REU Sites project in the
Department of Biology at Boston University for ten students. Past experience has
shown that NSF awards for undergraduate research have stimulated many previous
participants to become productive scholars. Six cross- disciplinary, team-
oriented projects will provide each group of two students with the opportunity
to work closely with two experienced faculty mentors on a common project. The
emphasis on the REU site project is to promote research interactions between
students and research biologists whose disciplines are traditionally focused on
different sub- disciplines in Biology. Collaborative research topics include:
the effects of heavy metal uptake on reproduction in dogfish shark, regulation
of neurotransmitters during development, intensity of selection in
environmentally induced mutations, establishment of cell lines from endangered
species, adrenocortical activity in captive bats, and mechanisms of gene
induction in retinal cells. Faculty mentors have been carefully selected on the
basis of their experience in the classroom, research contacts with
undergraduates, and their own research contributions. The participating faculty
mentors have a broad spectrum of research interests and are represented by both
beginning and establish investigators. Qualified undergraduates will be
recruited mostly form regional four-year colleges that do not provide
significant opportunities for research and from Boston University. The Program
will recruit five students from local and regional colleges and five from Boston
University. Recruitment efforts will specifically target minority, women, and
physically challenged students. Selection procedures will be based on scholarly
aptitude, research potential, and previous experience. Students will be expected
to live on the university campus and to participate in the full range of
research opportunities, weekly discussions, and social gatherings to foster a
sense of community among students and faculty mentors. A special ethics
component will focus on issues such as standards of scientific integrity,
authorship responsibility, information privacy and protection, ethical treatment
of animals, alternative animal models, conflict of interest, and plagiarism.