* 9300679
* Stimulating and Facilitating Collaborative Long-Term        Ecological Research:  A Proposal for Continuing Support of  the LTER Network Office
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1998
* John Vande Castle, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1998
* USD 4,046,204.00

The Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program has transformed itself from a
loosely affiliated collection of sites to an integrated network. Recent
accomplishments include: development of an effective electronic communication
system; creation of data catalogs and shared data sets, including comprehensive
satellite imagery for the network of sites; stimulation of cross-site syntheses
and experiments; and linking with other scientific centers and federal agencies.
Collectively, the LTER Network has expanded its focus to include larger spatial
dimensions (regional and global) and has assumed a leadership role in ecological
research involving long-term experimentation and observation and multi-site
synthesis. The networked activities of LTER had allowed scientific collaboration
far beyond the formal LTER Network. Initial collaborations with the general
ecological community and other research organizations and agencies have involved
research planning and electronic communication. During the next two years LTER
expects to forge new linkages with such diverse entities as the NSF-funded
supercomputer and GIS centers, NASA, and LTER-like programs in other countries.
This project will presents the continuation of activities which facilitate
collaborative research in the LTER Network and provide the linkages to other
long-term research networks (domestic and international), agency programs, and
scientists. Most of the resources will be used to support the infrastructure of
the organized, electronically-linked group of scientists working on multi-site
research and synthesis within and beyond the formal LTER Program. Support of
Network communication, information and data exchange continues as a primary
focus for the Network Office. A major element is electronic access and
information exchange, ranging from electronic mail services to on-line databases
and data sharing. A special project during this proposal period (1993) is the
third LTER All Scientists meeting and an associated international LTER summit.
The major strategic emphasis in the next two years is building working linkages
with other agencies, institutions, research programs, and scientists with
interests in long-term ecological research, including other NSF-funded science
centers. Proposed activities include: (1) Expansion of the existing
communication network, data catalog, and on-line databases and development of a
bibliographic database; (2) Acquisition, archiving, and analysis of an array of
remotely sensed data from collaboration with NASA and the Supercomputer Centers;
(3) Maintenance of the facilitating structure and publication program associated
with the Coordinating Committee and LTER Network; and (4) Increased involvement
with other long- term research programs both domestically (e.g., sponsored by
USGS, USDA, and NPS) and internationally. Research and development efforts by
the network staff will occur in areas of database management, remotely sensed
data, geographic information analysis, and intersite comparisons.