* 9300974
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems in Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Hal Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1998
* USD 135,000.00

9300974 Smith Ordinary differential equations, equations with time delays,
reaction-diffusion systems containing time delays, and hyperbolic partial
differential equations with nonlocal boundary conditions arise naturally in
population biology, epidemiology, and in neural modeling. They are commonly used
in the biological modeling of populations. The focus of this project is on means
of determining the long-term behavior of solutions of this wide variety of
differential equations. From the dynamical systems point of view, the
investigator aims to find and exploit common features of the dynamics exhibited
by this wide class of systems in order to determine asymptotic behavior.
Monotonicity, the preservation of a partial order relation on the space of
initial states by the dynamics, is one such feature shared by many systems that
model competing populations of organisms, neurons, etc. More realistic models
often take the form of complex hyperbolic systems modeling the time-evolution of
densities of populations structured by size, age, stored nutrient, etc. Often,
in their original form, these systems are mathematically intractable and means
must be found to transform them to simpler, more well-understood, dynamical
systems. Finding transformations of these complicated systems to simpler ones is
an aim of the present study. Mathematical modeling of interacting populations of
organisms, neurons, etc., is an important area of current interest. The goal is
to try to explain observations of complex behavior in real populations by
ignoring all but the "essential" features of the interactions and constructing
simplified models of these systems that are amenable to mathematical analysis.
If too much biology is ignored in the modeling then the models do not mirror the
interactions of real populations; if too little is ignored, the models become so
complicated that present knowledge does not permit successful analysis. Progress
in applying the rapidly d eveloping field of dynamical systems to biological
systems has steadily pushed this fine line between biologically irrelevant
models and mathematically intractable ones forward, so that ever more biology
can be incorporated into the models, making them more realistic to biologists,
better mirrors of real populations, while yet remaining tractable. Essentially,
the aim of this project is to push further in this direction. ***