* 9300930
* Mathematical Sciences: Approximation in Stochastic          Programming and Other Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Roger Wets, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 96,000.00

9300930 Wets The unifying theme of this research is the epi-convergence of
integral functionals as they arise in variational problems, in particular
stochastic optimization, i.e., problems involving random integral functionals.
The P.I. has identified the following questions that will be investigated: the
preservation of epi-convergence under addition and epi-addition, the epi-
convergence of integral functions with discontinuous integrands, the development
of a quantitative theory for the convergence of integral functionals. In the
case of random integral functionals, the P.I. will develop epi-consistency
results for random lower semicontinuous functions with and without the epi- iid
assumption, design implementable procedures to estimate the reliability level of
approximate solutions and exploit the theory of large deviations to obtain
convergence rates. %%% Optimization problems (such as the allocation of scare
resources, optimal engineering design, planning of logistic support operations,
etc.) cannot be solved without resorting to approximations. To validate an
approximation scheme one should demonstrate that a refinement of the
approximation yields a better solution (convergence questions) and, whenever
possible, allows for the calculation of error bounds so that one can have an
estimate of the error that may occur (convergence rate). The P.I. plans to
investigate such questions, in particular in connection with so-called
stochastic optimization problems (that model decision making under uncertainty)
a class of problems that is very difficult to solve, but are very important as
far as applications are concerned. ***