* 9300131
* San Jose State/IBM Almaden Research Center-Analytical and Surface Chemistry of Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 461,250.00

9300131 Pesek This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project which is
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program focuses on the
analytical chemistry of materials and surfaces. During the tenure of this
thirty-six month standard grant, Professor Pesek and his colleagues at San Jose
State University (SJSU) will join with their counterpart staff scientists at the
IBM Almaden Research Center (IBM/ARC) to develop a unique academic/industrial
research and training program. This activity will bring together graduate
students, undergraduate students, small college faculty, and high school
teachers to participate in cooperative research projects which are co-directed
by SJSU and IBM/ARC scientists. The focus of each of the projects is the
chemistry and characterization of surfaces and materials. Each of the
participants will spend time working in laboratories both at SJSU and IBM/ARC,
thereby enabling them to gain a perspective on academic as well as industrial
research and how cooperation can work to the benefit of the two organizations.
%%% Participants in this cooperative research activity are expected to gain an
enhanced appreciation of basic and applied research which should encourage the
students to continue on for advanced degrees, the small college faculty to begin
or more actively pursue projects at their home institutions thereby sharing the
excitement of research and discovery with their students, and the high school
teachers to motivate more of their own students to consider science as a career.
***