* 9300890
* Quantitative Characterization of Terrestrially-derived      Organic Matter in Recent and Ancient Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Timothy Eglinton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 04/30/1997
* USD 394,365.00

Quantitative Characterization of Terrestrially-derived Organic Matter in Recent
and Ancient Marine Sediments Specific Objectives of this research are: (i) To
improve and expand methods to recognize and characterize terrestrial (and
marine) sedimentary organic matter, with special emphasis placed upon
macromolecular components; (ii) to develop and refine mixing models, based on
mass balance calculations using coupled concentration-isotope composition
measurements on discrete components, which more accurately describe the
contributions from river systems to shelf or basin sediments and to delineate
these contributions as a function of distance from source. The approach builds
upon previous studies. A detailed comparison of two established methods for
characterizing OC, namely CuO oxidation and analytical pyrolysis will be
performed. A side-by-side quantitative evaluation of the scope and limitations
will provide useful quantitative geochemical information including a mass
balance of the major constituents with respect to TOC for selected "end-member"
samples. This task will be facilitated by bulk and compound specific isotopic
measurements on representative components. This information will then be
collated and will form the basis for mixing models developed to describe
contributions from terrestrial (and marine) sources to sedimentary OC. The
validity of these models will be appraised in investigations of sedimentary
environments for which abundant supplementary geochemical information exists
(Gulf of Mexico, Washington margin). Subsequently the models will be applied to
key environments in which present understanding of terrestrial organic matter
influences is more limited (Black Sea, Amazon shelf).