* 9300936
* Synthesizing Energy Efficient Circuits and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Alexander Albicki, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paul T. Hulina
* 02/29/1996
* USD 137,473.00

Most of the work in the field of logic synthesis has concentrated on the topics
of logic minimization and synthesis for testability. While both of these issues
are of great importance, it seems natural to go beyond these applications. This
effort aims to expand the current applications of logic synthesis to include the
domain of synthesis for reduced power dissipation. The work here is based on the
assumption that switching activity, the number of internal nodes that are
charged or discharged when a new set of inputs is applied to the system, is a
strong indicator of power dissipation in static CMOS structures. The proposal
builds on some novel results obtained in the synthesis of two level logic
circuits, such that they exhibit, optimal switching activities. The research
advocated utilizes these results to explore procedures for the energy efficient
synthesis of arbitrary combinational logic functions. The methodology employed
in the study is based on a rigorous analytical approach, with simulation results
and measurements on actual fabricated circuits being used for model verification
and refinement. It is widely known that clocking frequency seriously effects the
power dissipated in a system. The utilization of double-edge- triggered flip-
flops, which trade area for clock frequencies operating at half the value,
represent a relatively inexpensive way to reduce energy dissipation and
naturally complements research in low-power logic synthesis. This work advocates
studying techniques to ensure that the systems built are fully testable. The
methods of Boolean space expansion, and modified input storing elements, are
being explored to obtain full testability. The goal of this research is the
development of a new synthesis tool which will enable users to easily implement
digital functions with reduced energy dissipation, while maintaining full
testability. When an integrated circuit is operating in the testing mode, the
energy consumption may be far gr eater than during normal operation as many
internal nodes which do not usually switch are being tested. The proposed
research will ensure that under testing conditions the energy consumption of the
system is minimal thus avoiding damage to the circuit.