* 9300374
* Chemical Engineering Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Wayne Curtis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lucy Morse
* 11/30/1994
* USD 50,750.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates program at Penn State directly
addresses the challenge of increasing enrollment of women and minorities in
graduate engineering study. The key aspects of the program are: 1) the active
recruitment of minorities and women by visiting selected target schools, and ,
2) a student oriented research program that contains social as well as
instructional aspects designed for successful integration of the participants
into an exciting research environment. Faculty members from the Department of
Chemical Engineering at Penn State have volunteered to support recruitment,
instruction, and research supervision. The projects offered span a wide range of
research, from plant tissue culture, to thermodynamics - held together by common
chemical engineering principles. REU participants will be matched with projects
prior to selection to maximize mutual interests and capabilities. The
participants enroll for three credits of Chemical Engineering Undergraduate
Research during the summer semester. An instructional program is integrated
throughout the summer which initially focuses on logistics such as the library
system and laboratory safety to give the students a quick start on research.
Subsequent instruction covers research practice such as experimental design,
statistics, and "keeping a laboratory notebook". To stress the importance of
communication, an introductory and final oral presentation, as well as a final
written report will be required of each student.