* 9301706
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Specific       Recognition of Proteins with Ligand Lipids Using a Fiber    Optic Sensor
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Thomas Bohanon, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 42,000.00

9301706 Bohanon This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows
Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve
months of research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Thomas M. Bohanon to
work with Dr. Helmut Ringsdorf at Johannes Gutenberg Universitaet in Mainz,
Germany. Dr. Bohanon and Dr. Ringsdorf will quantitatively study the specific
recognition of proteins with ligand lipids using a fiber optic sensor. An
evanescent wave from the optical fiber excites fluorescent molecules only within
tens of nanometers from the optical fiber; the optical fiber collects a fraction
of this fluorescence. This technique is highly selective and very versatile.
They will study the specific binding of streptavidin to biotin, the effect of
spacers on the binding, and the possibility of docking a second protein layer to
streptavidin. They also will study the specific binding of antiflourescyl IgG
and Fab to fluorescein lipids, and the effects of spacers on this binding and
perform kinetic measurements. Finally, they will perform the same experiments
using a quartz crystal microbalance; the combination of these two techniques
will provide insight into specific binding that could not otherwise be achieved.
***