* 9301328
* Regional Networking in New England Proposal N0. 4
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* James Bruce, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 12/31/1995
* USD 132,000.00

Massachusetts Institute of Technology requests support from NSF for connection
of the Vermont State Colleges which includes: Castleton State College, Johnson
State College, Lyndon State College, Vermont Technical College, and the
Community College of Vermont; the University of New Haven; New Hampshire College
and the Graduate School of Business; University of New England, and Salve Regina
University to the New England Academic Research Network (Nearnet) which is the
NSF mid-level network that serves the New England area. A primary goal of
NEARnet is to facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of resources between
institution, including those outside the state. NEARnet will provide operations
management and information services and it will give the universities and
colleges a connection to the NSFNET, a high speed (1.5 - 45 million bits per
second) National Backbone network. The each of the universities has written a
description of its organization and a statement of the benefits of Internet
access that it expects including: greater functionality and network speed to be
able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with
being able to implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty
research will benefit from the links. This is also a unique opportunity for the
schools to explore innovative educational resources. Their diversity will expose
NEARnet to a broader range of user requirements. Nearnet will use the
information obtained by serving this diverse group for the benefit of New
England's academic and research community.