* 9301778
* Development and Performance Evaluation of Low Power         Intelligent Structural Control Systems (Collaborative       Research)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Rahmatallah Shoureshi, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/1994
* USD 44,505.00

9301778 Shoureshi Advances in the area of automatic control, artificial
intelligence, smart materials, sensors, and actuators have made the development
of intelligent structures feasible. Such structures would have the ability to
identify their dynamical state, including parameter variations; identify
functional descriptions of external stimuli, e.g. earthquake loads, high winds,
traffic; and adaptively generate the required actuation forces in the presence
of major stimuli. In order to develop such an intelligent structure several
research issues have to be studied. This investigation focuses on the
formulation and development of a neural-based control scheme, with emphasis on
learning of structural parameter variations, and design and construction of a
new low-powered adaptive actuation system for structures. The resulting
intelligent structural control system will have a fuzzy based uncertainty
compensator. The overall research objective is to evaluate and compare
performances of intelligent and conventional control systems. A prototype
structure, namely a small scaled cable bridge will be constructed for
experimental purposes. The proposed actuators and control systems will be
integrated and implemented on this experimental structure, and the effects of
soil - structure interaction will be emulated and considered. ***