* 9301342
* U.S.-Argentina:  Theoretical and Computer Studies of        Physical Adsorption on Heterogeneous Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* William Steele, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1997
* USD 9,578.00

9301342 Steele This U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science award will support the
collaboration of William Steele of Pennsylvania State University and Eduardo
Bottani of the Instituto de Investigaciones Fisicoquimicas Theoricas y Aplicadas
in La Plata, Argentina, and Giorgio Zgrablich of the University of San Luis in
Argentina. The project aims to investigate physical adsorption on heterogeneous
surfaces. Computer simulations provide detailed information which facilitates
the testing and improvement of theoretical studies of complex systems, such as
the adsorption and diffusion of interacting molecules on heterogeneous
substrates. In this project, the researchers will select both theoretical and
simulation projects that will yield results relevant to each other and to
experiment. Models for theoretical study will be clearly related to those used
in simulations; conversely, models used in simulations will be relevant to
theory. The U.S. group will conduct computer simulations of the thermodynamic,
structural, and dynamical properties of simple gases adsorbed on realistic model
heterogeneous solids. The Argentine group will develop theoretical and
experimental treatments for related systems. Both sides will benefit from the
opportunity to make quantitative comparisons between the two sets of results.
***