* 9301051
* GEM: Global MHD Simulations of Dayside Magnetospheric       Processes and Their Mapping to the Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* John Lyon, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 166,000.00

9301051 Lyon Global MHD simulations of the interaction of the solar wind with
the magnetosphere and ionosphere will be performed as an aid to interpreting and
analyzing low altitude and ground-based observations done in conjunction with
the GEM program. The calculations will use solar wind data for the actual period
of the GEM observing campaigns to produce as accurate a representation of
mangetospheric conditions as possible for those times. The results from the
simulations will be mapped from the mangetopause and cusp regions to near earth
space and to the ionosphere where they may be compared with observations. The
primary quanities to be mapped will be magnetic field topology, field-aligned
currents and particle distributions. Experience and theoretical considerations
show that these mappings can provide useful information on the scales seen in
the ground-based radar observations, for example, even though the calculation
grid is relatively more coarse. The magnetic field model used for this mapping
is determined self- consistently from the MHD solution for the magnetosphere.
This model will also be used to map the ionospheric observations back out to the
region of the magnetopause, and the field models will be provided to GEM
participants. These comparison will lead to a better appreciation for the
strengths and weaknesses of the global MHD model and what additional physics
must be included. Studies will also be conducted with varying solar wind input
data to cover a wide range of possible conditions. These simulations will then
be used to provide a parametric representation of the normal field and the
tangential velocity at the magnetopause. This representation is an important
input to a modular magnetospheric circulation model. The time varying solar wind
cases used for the observational campaigns will also be analyzed in this fashion
to find how much of the actual magnetopause tangential eletric field can be
prescribed by a static model. ***