* 9301081
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  The            Dependence of Probability Judgement on Working Memory
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,09/30/1994
* Derek Koehler, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1994
* USD 34,150.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Derek J. Koehler to
the Medical Research Council - Applied Psychology Unit, Cambridge, to work with
Dr. Alan Baddeley. Their research topic is the relationship between the active
set of hypotheses in working memory and the judged probability of these
hypotheses. They will investigate how the processes of hypothesis generation and
probability judgement fit into the well- established framework of working memory
developed by Dr. Baddeley and his colleagues. Recent studies show that people's
probability judgements are nonextensional, not constrained by rules of set
inclusion. This implies that any descriptive model of subjective probability
must account for such judgements in terms of the individual's representation of
the events or possibilities under consideration. Dr. Baddeley's working memory
model suggests a potential research program for the empirical study of
subjective probability and provides a larger context in which to frame the
problem. Such research will allow empirical testing of the theory that people
normalize or adjust their probability estimates only with respect to the
evidential support received by those hypotheses that are active in working
memory. This approach should also yield insight into the more general issue of
how people generate and evaluate novel hypotheses under conditions of
uncertainty. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international
travel and a stipend for twelve months.