* 9301038
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Polyphosphate            Accumulation in Bloom-forming Cyanobacteria:Effects of      Irradiance and Cell Carbohydrate
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* G-Yull Rhee, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1996
* USD 27,330.00

9301038 Rhee This award provides funds to permit Dr. G-Yull Rhee, New York
State Department of Health and School of Public Health, State University of New
York at Albany, to pursue with Dr. Jueson Maeng, Department of Biology, Sogang
University, Seoul, and Dr. B.C. Kim, Kangwon University, Choonchun, Korea, for a
period of 24 months, research on polyphosphate accumulation in bloom- forming
cyanobacteria: effects of irradiance and cell carbohydrate. Specifically, the
project will involve the study of (1) the effects of irradiance and cellular
carbohydrates on polyphosphate accumulation in bloom-forming cyanobacteria, (2)
the carbon flow from photosynthesis during polyphosphate accumulation, (3)
competition for energy by polyphosphate accumulation and nitrogen fixation, and
(4) any temporal and spatial distribution of polyphosphate synthesis in the
water column during vertical migration. This study will include both laboratory
experiments and field investigations. Buoyancy regulation by cyanobacteria is a
unique physiological characteristic which contributes to their dominance in
eutrophic waters. Although the physiological mechanism of its regulation appears
to be complex and not yet completely understood, this ability can place them at
depths that may offer optimal photic and nutritional conditions. Studies will be
conducted at Lake Soyang, Korea, and, in the laboratory, on bloom-forming
species from Lake Soyang and other Korean waters. The PI and his Korean
collaborators are experienced investigators in the field of this research. Under
their work plan, the PI will be responsible for tasks number 1 and 2, above; the
Korean collaborators will conduct task number 4; and the PI and his
collaborators will jointly investigate task number 3. This project is relevant
to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of sci entific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest and benefit.
Participation of the Korean collaborators in the project is supported by the
Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***