* 9301433
* Theoretical Studies of the Quantum Hall Effect and NonlinearMesoscopic Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Michael Johnson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 180,000.00

9301433 Johnson This theoretical research will study fundamental transport and
microscopic properties in the integer and fractional quantum Hall effects (IQHE
and FQHE). A novel approach to transport in the IQHE has been developed and will
be adapted to nonlinear mesoscopic transport and applied to the study of
nonlinear time-independent and time-dependent effects in devices. In the IQHE
this approach will be used to study current distributions and the breakdown of
dissipationless IQHE, fundamental properties which are not presently well
understood. The possibility of developing a novel tunable phonon or photon
laser, based on the breakdown, will be studied. The FQHE research will include a
detailed study of the properties and experimental consequences of edge
excitations at complicated fractions, and an investigation of the appropriate
description of bulk quasiparticle excitations. These are important to understand
the microscopics of the FQHE. Finally, a method based on density functional
theory will be developed which will provide a powerful numerical tool to study
the properties of an inhomogeneous electron gas in a strong magnetic field. %%%
The research conducted on this grant deals with one of the most important
current problems in modern condensed matter physics. The research focuses on the
properties of a new state of matter which is formed in a strong magnetic field
at a semiconductor interface under certain conditions. This "two-dimensional
electron gas" has many unusual properties. Besides being of fundamental
interest, these properties may have application to new and novel electronic
devices. The work will concentrate on nonlinear transport phenomena and a
density functional formulation of the problem. These are topics which have not
received a great deal of attention. ***