* 9301204
* Controls on the Isotopic Compositions of Individual Compoundin Photosynthethetic Autotrophs
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Brian Popp, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 11/30/1996
* USD 382,820.00

The goal of this proposal is to investigate the importance of environmental
variables on the isotopic composition of major component biochemicals in
phytoplankton. Specifically, the objective is to better understand how nutrient
and light- limitations affects distributions and isotopic compositions of
individual organic compounds in photosynthetic autotrophs. The study will assess
the affects of nutrient limitation and representative species of the major algal
biomarkers. To accomplish this, representative species of the major algal
classes (i.e., Bacillariophyceace, Prymnesiophyceae, Cyanophyceae and
Dinophyceae) will live chemostat growth chambers under a variety of conditions
and their isotopic is to determine the effect of zooplankton grazing on the
structure and isotopic compositions of lipids and pigments. This will be
accomplished by allowing phytoplankton feedstock from one chemostat growth
chamber to flow under controlled conditions into a second chamber containing
zooplankton. Composition of algal biochemical will be compared with those of the
zooplankton to investigate microbial chain interactions. The study includes
degradation effects on isotopic compositions of algal biomarkers. Since
herbivory is the most important 'sink' for autotrophic production, knowledge of
structural/isotopic alterations during this process is critical for interpreting
the distributions and isotopic compositions of algal degradation products in
sinking and sedimentary organic matter. The baseline information provided by
this research is needed to better interpret distributions of isotopic
composition of lipids and pigments in particulate and sedimentary organic
matter. Such information will ultimately make it possible to determine the
source organisms for numerous biochemicals and to make significant advances in
identifying processes driving recycling of organic carbon in the ocean.