* 9301381
* Inter- and Intramolecular Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Frederick Lewis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 02/28/1998
* USD 634,000.00

The photochemistry and photophysics of inter- and intra-molecular reactions of
amines with styrenes and stilbenes will be studied in order to determine the
mechanistic details of these reactions. The intramolecular addition reactions
will also provide an attractive synthetic route to medium-ring nitrogen-
containing heterocyclic molecules. The structure of the products in these
reactions are dependent upon both the structure of the reactant(s) and the
method of photochemical excitation (direct vs. electron-transfer sensitized
irradiation). In order to understand the mechanism of these reactions, the
reactants, intermediates, and products will be characterized by modern
spectroscopic and computational methods. The study will include a
characterization of styrene photoisomerization processes, intermolecular
styrene-amine exciplexes, both styrene and stilbene intramolecular exciplexes,
and electron-transfer sensitized intramolecular photoamination. %%% This grant
from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of Professor
Frederick D. Lewis at Northwestern University. Amines, which are one of the
important classes of nitrogen-containing organic molecules, undergo diverse
reactions with compounds containing a carbon-carbon double bond by irradiation
with ultraviolet light. This study will unravel the details of these reactions,
where the amine is part of the molecule which contains the carbon-carbon double
bond and where the amine is a separate molecule. In the former reaction, the
potential for the synthesis of cyclic compounds containing nitrogen will be
evaluated. There is considerable interest in these nitrogen heterocycles, since
they are prevalent in biological systems and in plants.