* 9301767
* Determination of Sources of Atmospheric Organic Acids in    Southern California by Carbon Isotope Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Isaac Kaplan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1996
* USD 181,372.00

9301767 Kaplan Atmospheric organic acids play an important role in acidification
of rain and clouds. They are ubiquitous constituents of urban smog and haze and
are present in the atmosphere of rural and largely uninhabited areas (e.g. the
Amazon Rain Forest Basin). Organic acids not only contribute to lowering pH,
they may contribute to visibility reduction by being adsorbed to "black carbon"
and they may play an important role in corrosion due to their chelating ability.
It has been shown that organic acids such as formic, acetic, and oxalic acids
are emitted into the atmosphere by automobiles through incomplete combustion.
Additionally, combustion of biomass and industrial products may also generate
organic acids and their release from vascular plants may be an important
biogenic source. Little information is, however, currently available on the
emission rates of organic acids from these various anthropogenic and biogenic
sources. This research project will attempt to characterize the sources of
atmospheric organic acids in urban and rural areas of southern California by
measurements of their carbon isotopic ratios, such as carbon- 14/carbon-12 and
carbon-13/carbon-12. The carbon-14/carbon-12 measurements by accelerator mass
spectrometry can differentiate fossil fuel-origin carbons form natural biogenic
carbons. The measurements of carbon-13/carbon-12 can identify various
anthropogenic and natural sources as well as kinetic processes in the formation
of atmospheric organic acids. To accomplish this project these researchers have
developed methodologies using ion exclusion chromatography to extract, separate,
and isolate milligram quantities of individual organic acids form atmospheric
wet samples. During Fall 19993 to Winter 1995, atmospheric wet samples such as
rain, clouds, fog and dew as well as gas and aerosol simples will be collected
in Los Angeles and its surrounding rural vicinity. Various organic acid-emitting
sources will also be sampled in this study to determine their specific isotopic
ratios. These source-specific isotopic ratio data will be compared to the
isotopic data of atmospheric samples, in order to identify the different sources
of the organic acids in there samples. The identification of specific sources
for these atmospheric organic acids will contribute to future control strategies
for acidic deposition and air pollution problems in Los Angeles and elsewhere as
proposed by the National Clean Air Act.