* 9301715
* Studies of the Decomposition of Organic Matter in the       Marine Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 12/31/1996
* USD 285,385.00

This study continues research on the decomposition of organic matter, which
comprises a major fraction of carbon in the ocean. The study is directed toward
further defining pathways and rates of organic matter decomposition in the
oceanic water column, from production in surface waters, through the zones of
remineralization in the water column, to preservation in the underlying
sediments. The decomposition of organic matter is one of the major processes
controlling the chemical composition of seawater and sediments. On a global
scale, oxic decomposition is the major pathway of degradation in marine
sediments, with anaerobic processes consuming much less organic matter. However,
the majority of carbon preservation occurs in anoxic systems, typically coastal
marine sediments where organic matter sedimentation rates are highest.
Understanding the controls on organic matter decomposition and carbon
preservation is a key to interpreting changes in sedimentary carbon content, and
thus paleoproductivity of the oceans. The major goals of this research are to
investigate the formation of methane from, methylamines in particulate matter,
to measure the effects of adsorption and desorption of organic compounds on
their decomposition rates and mechanisms, to determine the influence of oxic vs
anoxic conditions on decomposition, and to explore the use of cell-surface
enzymes in the decomposition of amino acids and amines by phytoplankton and
bacteria.