* 9301576
* Dissertation Research:  Taking Care of Our Own:  A          Comparison of Amish and "English" Approaches to Eldercare   in Rural Western New York
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Ann Mc Elroy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 07/31/1994
* USD 8,850.00

McElroy/Hewner 9301576 This project investigates eldercare from the perspective
of household members most involved in health care in two communities in rural
western New York. The Amish are a group that has preserved traditional values in
the midst of modern America. In the course of ethnographic fieldwork, Amish
families will be compared to a matched set of "English" (non-Amish, as the Amish
use the word) families. Comparative ethnographic interviewing in the two
neighboring communities under natural conditions will serve to evaluate the
contribution of a number of variables on eldercare. A sample of informants who
have experience in eldercare will be identified through a census of twenty-five
Amish and twenty-five "English" households. Data collected will include
genealogies, a grid of significant household members, information on aging and
its impact, and ratings (by the researcher) of overall household health and
individual functional ability. A nested sample will be selected for in-depth
interview and participant/observation of current and past experiences in
caregiving. Quantitative analysis of demographic data and health rating will
complement qualitative analysis of life history of caregiving. The results will
identify household practices which contribute to improved care of the elderly,
with application in intervention strategies for policy-makers. *** s( t( ! ! f ?
x x L Times New Roman Symbol & Arial & Lucida Sans Bookman Old Style v v v " h r
j mcelroy hewner abstract abstract thesis mcelroy hewner abstract Raymond Hames
Raymond Hames