* 9301588
* U.S.-Argentina:  Fundamental Studies of NOx Control in      Catalytic Combustion
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1996
* George Marcelin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 9,576.00

9301588 Marcelin This U.S.-Argentina Science Program award will support the
collaboration of George Marcelin of the University of Pittsburgh and Eduardo
Lombardo of the School of Chemical Engineering in Santa Fe, Argentina. The
project aims to study the catalytic combustion of methane and the formation and
destruction of NO using perovskite-type oxide catalysts. Natural gas is an
important fuel for stationary energy generation. However, Nox emissions from
natural gas combustors, particularly those that operate at high temperatures,
are of increasing environmental concern. Development of a successful NOx control
process requires a fundamental understanding of the principles of NOx formation
and of the chemical interaction of oxygen and nitrogen species with the
catalytic surface. This project will combine catalytic combustion and NOx
destruction in one catalyst formulation, in order to explore the role of the
catalytic surface in forming and destroying NOx and to identify intermediate
species. In addition to classical techniques of catalysis research, steady state
isotopic transient kinetic analysis will be used to study the reaction pathways,
intermediates, and active catalytic surface. IR and NMR spectroscopic studies of
adsorbed species will help identify the intermediates on the catalyst surface
and the reaction paths that form them. The Argentine group has expertise in
perovskite preparation and characterization. The U.S. group has expertise in NMR
characterization and isotopic transient kinetic analysis. ***