* 9301091
* Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants, Oxnard, California, February 1 - 5, 1993
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1993
* Peter Steponkus, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 06/30/1993
* USD 5,600.00

This award provides partial support for the 1993 Gordon Research Conference on
Temperature Stress in Plants, which will be held at the Casa Sirena MarinaHotel,
Oxnard, California on February 1-5, 1993. Funds will be used to partially defray
the travel expenses of invited speakers, session chairs, and junior scientists
(graduate students and postdoctoral researchers). This is the fifth meeting of
the Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants, which began in
1984 and has met biennially since 1989. Sessions are scheduled in the areas of
freezing, chilling and high temperature stress and will include presentations
ranging from whole plant responses to gene regulation. In addition, a session on
global climate change will be featured at the 1993 Conference. A goal of these
sessions will be to delineate the crucial interations of temperature stress and
other environmental variables that are needed to predict likely responses of
natural ecosystems and crop species at regional/global scales and to identify
realistic goals that can be achieved in modifying plant species to improve their
tolerance to temperature stresses. Such assessments, which require input of
scientists working at all levels within thecontinuum of research on temperature
stress, are crucial to policy-makers who seek information about the future of
natural ecosystems and agricultural productivity.