* 9301183
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  In Vitro Study of the Role of Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin on the Enhanced      Protein Production of Escherichia coli(Travel Award)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Claire Komives, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1994
* USD 38,250.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Claire Komives of the
University of Pittsburgh to work with Professor Dr. J. E. Bailey at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, Switzerland. The objective of this
project is to elucidate the mechanism of Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin (VHb) in vitro,
and to study its function in a synthetic cell environment. Two mechanisms for
the protein action have been suggested which provide the basis of this study.
The capacity of VHb for improving oxygen uptake to the cell, and its potential
role in affecting the efficiency of oxygen utilization by specific cell
components will be explored. Because VHb both associates with the cell membrane
and resides within the cell, its function cannot be properly understood by
merely studying it in solution. Reversed micelles offer a novel approach to
creating a cell-like environment for carrying out the in vitro mechanistic
studies. The surfactant or phospholipid layer encapsulating water pools within
an apolar solvent is analogous to a cell membrane. Thus, the action of VHb is to
be studied in a well characterized medium that mocks some important features of
cell make-up, but which lacks the complexity of interconnected chemical pathways
necessary to the function of a living cell. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover international travel to Switzerland and a stipend for twelve
months.