* 9301926
* Workshop Session Within the 8th International Meeting on    Ferroelectrics; Washington, D.C.; August 8-13, 1993
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1994
* Manfred Wuttig, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1994
* USD 6,000.00

A Conference session on Domains in Ferroelectrics will be held in conjunction
with the 8th International Conference on Ferroelectrics during the Summer, 1993
at NIST to address current research topics such as systems of domain walls and
their interactions with each other, the thermodynamics and kinetics of domain
wall configurations and domain walls that are both fer- roelectric as well as
ferroelastic. There are many materials, such as relaxors, and devices, such as
integrated ferroelectric thin film memories, in which these aspects are of
central importance. Since these topics are usually not taught as such in
graduate programs the conference organization is making a special effort to have
a large student participation. Arrangements were made to expand the Conference
session into an evening Workshop session to allow for in-depth discussions on
critical subject areas. It is expected that top scientists in the field will
attend, and that the Conference and Workshop sessions will provide an effective
forum to discuss and delineate critical scientific issues, and to consider and
define the approaches and techniques needed to address them. %%% An evaluation
of the status of domains in ferroelectrics, and recommendations by the session
participants for the emphasis of future work, and their assessment of the most
important contem- porary research issues will be of great value to the
understanding and development of ferroelectric and related materials, and for
their subsequent utilization in fields such as microelectronics.