* 9301962
* Implications of Recorded Data from the 1992 Southern        California Earthquakes for Earthquake-Resistant Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Vitelmo Bertero, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 96,000.00

9301962 Bertero The Landers EQ of June 28 was the largest EQ in California since
1952, with a magnitude of 7.4 and a significant set of strong motion recordings
both in the free field and in buildings. It was preceded by the Joshua Tree and
Big Bear earthquakes in April. The data recorded from these earthquakes present
an excellent opportunity to study the effect of long duration multiple
occurrence of strong ground motions on structural response. More specifically
the objectives of this study is to: (1) evaluate the damage potential of these
recently recorded recent Southern California earthquakes, (2) evaluate the
effects of multiple EQs on the mechanical characteristics of different
instrumented structures whose responses were recorded, (3) evaluate the effects
of long duration strong ground motion on various structural systems and to
correlate this with the response to long duration ground motions recorded
outside of the U.S., (4) assess the implications of the results obtained with
respect to the present state of the practice regarding the seismic design
coefficient, Cd, and the structural system coefficient, Rw, as currently used by
building codes, (5) attempt to formulate a better procedure for establishing the
design EQ than is currently being used, (6) compare the analytically predicted
building characteristics and performance to both the recorded and the observed
behavior in order to calibrate: the actual stiffness, the strength (particularly
the resulting overstrength to that required by present codes), the torsional
effects, the soil structure interaction effects, the deformational response
parameters, the probable energy dissipation capacity of these structures and
their damage indices, (7) evaluate h) 0*0*0* further the application of
inelastic response spectra and energy considerations for earthquake resistant
design of building structures, and to quantify the concepts of yield resistance,
seismic coefficient and design ductility for application to building code
requirements, (8) evaluate the reliability and practical application of a
nonlinear static loading procedure to earthquake resistance design, (9)
formulate an equivalent SDOF model of the actual multi degree of freedom system
that can be used to analyze the performance of the structure under earthquake
motions at all levels, (10) attempt to formulate guidelines for the selection of
efficient strategies and techniques for the seismic upgrading of buildings that
the conducted studies have shown to be potentially hazardous in case of future
severe EQGMs. ***