* 9301961
* CRB:  Tropical Forest Regeneration:  Influence of Animal    Seed-dispersers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1998
* Timothy Moermond, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9301961 Moermond This research will investigate the consequences of seed-
dispersal by different animal fruit-eaters on tree regeneration dynamics at two
sites within the Nyungwe forest, an African montane tropical forest in Rwanda.
The process of natural regeneration of forest trees depends on a basic set of
processes: seed production, seed dispersal, seedling establishment, and survival
of seedlings to reproductive adults. This research will focus particularly on
two of these processes: seed dispersal and seedling establishment. The
consequences of differences among disperser species will be investigated in
terms of tree species replacement patterns. This will be done 1) by describing
and modeling the pattern of seed dispersion generated by selected animal
disperser species for a representative series of tree species, and 2) by
assessing the relative success of seedling establishment of those trees among
the principal vegetation patch types of the forest(closed forest, secondary
forest, and openings). %%% Comparison of survival and establishment of seedlings
under the parent tree and away from the parent in different forest patch types
will be used to evaluate the relative importance of dispersal. Predictions
generated by the study at a site with full complement of animal dispersers
(Uwinka site) will be tested against measures of seed rain and tree replacement
estimates. The observed patterns of seed rain, tree replacement estimates, and
forest composition will then be compared to those at a forest-edge with an
impoverished suite of dispersers (Kitabi site). This site will not only provide
and assessment of the apparent consequences of loss of dispersers, but will
provide a critical case in which to test the applicability and the power of the
predictive model. The proposed research relates both to the theory of
conservation biology and its application to tropical forest management. is
problematical however, depending upon whose system is being used although Fries
(1874) considers the Polyporaceae to be one of two families within the order
Aphyllophorales (fungi with non lamellate hymenophores), more recent workers ! !
! F ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial " h e e ! - Gayle Edmonds Gayle Edmonds