* 9301655
* Temperature-Dependent Kinetics of Toxic Metals in Waste     Incinerators
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Arthur Fontijn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/31/1996
* USD 345,882.00

The goal of this program is determination of chemical kinetic data for
reactions of metals involved in toxic emissions associated with incineration of
waste materials. Reactions of nickel, lead, cadmium, chromium, and antimony,
with HCl, O2, CO2, and Cl2 as oxidants, will be studied; atomic metals as well
as metal oxides and halides will be included in this investigation. A uniyue set
of facilities (high-temperature fast-flow and pseudo-static metals high-
temperature photochemistry reactors) will be used to provide rate coefficient
and mechanistic data on individual isolated reactions over a 300-1800K
temperature range at pressures from 0.01 to 1.0 atmospheres. Laser-induced
fluorescence and other optical and mass spectroscopic techniques will be
employed for rate coefficient and product identification measurements.
Information obtained from the experiments will be used to aid in estimation of
kinetics for reactions of metal species other than those addressed in the
experiments. This work is a logical continuation/extension of current studies
being conducted by the PI under NSF and Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR) funding. The presence of many metallic species in municipal, hazardous,
and biomedical waste incinerators can lead to emissions of toxic gaseous
molecules and fly ash, as well as production of toxic components in bottom ash
and slag. The combustion process influences the distribution of the metals among
these various "products" and their particle size and oxidation state, as well as
the ease of leaching of the residual solids. This work is also relevant to
combustion processes used to decontaminate soils, since these can lead to
similar gaseous and particle emissions, and to emissions from high-temperature
industrial devices such as glass smelters, calciners, aluminum furnaces, and
lead smelters.