* 9301402
* Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Patrick Taylor, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1994
* USD 80,000.00

Sixteen UI engineering and physical science research faculty and their
coworkers, united under the interdisciplinary research umbrella of the Institute
for Materials and Advanced Processes (IMAP), share common interests in the
preparation, characterization, and behavior of metallic and ceramic materials.
Reliable, rapid and locally available analyses for the identification and
structural characterization of experimental products are critical to the
continued success of established research programs. Powder X-ray diffraction
(XRD) is recognized as the most reliable, expeditious analytical method
generally available for the determination of the structures of these
noncrystalline materials. In addition, other details revealed by XRD analyses
often suggest new areas of investigation. Access to this powder X-ray
diffractometer will promote significant competitive research in materials
science, geology, and chemistry. IMAP engineers and scientists and members of
their research groups have been identified as immediate users of the powder XRD.
Additionally, the diffractometer is expected to be used for future collaboration
between these faculty and nearly a dozen of their engineer/scientist colleagues
across campus during multidisciplinary research sponsored by IMAP and by other
UI research institutes/centers and external agencies. Five proposals from six
IMAP investigators follow.