* 9301929
* Mathematical Sciences: Modular Representations of Finite    Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1999
* Jon Carlson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 05/31/1999
* USD 244,894.00

This award is concerned with the representation theory and cohomology of finite
groups over fields of prime characteristic. Of particular interest are the
homological properties of representations which underlie the basic module theory
and the structure of the cohomology ring of the group which acts on the
fundamental homological constructions. The principal investigator plans to study
the prime ideals which are the annihilators of cohomology elements and their
relations to transfers from and restrictions to subgroups of the group.
Categorical techniques, as well as hypercohomology spectral sequences associated
to certain duality complexes and actions of the Steenrod algebra, will be used
for this investigation. Other questions on the structure of modules in the more
general categorical setting will also be examined. In addition, the principal
investigator will continue work on the homological algebra of Hilbert modules
and on computer methods for the computation of cohomology. The research
supported concerns the representation theory of finite groups. A group is an
algebraic object used to study transformations. Because of this, groups are a
fundamental tool in physics, chemistry and computer science as well as
mathematics. Representation theory is an important method for determining the
structure of groups.