* 9301322
* Photophysiological Regulation of Spectral Quantum Yield and Its Linkages to Bio-Optical Properties of Phytoplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Barbara Prezelin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1997
* USD 330,000.00

9301322 PREZELIN This Accomplishment Based Project builds on prior studies which
sought to 1) identify the sources and magnitude of variability in phytoplankton
spectral properties which determine photosynthetic quantum yield, and 2) provide
insights into how phytoplankton utilize radiant energy, influence the spectral
characteristics of water-column optical properties and regulate rates of
photosynthesis and photoinhibition. The major objectives of this accomplishment
based renewal project are to: 1) further define the spectral linkages between
quantum yield for photosynthetic charge separation, oxygen evolution and carbon
fixation in different phytoplankters exposed to altered nutrient status, dynamic
light fields and enhanced ultraviolet radiation; 2) to identify the mechanisms
by which different spectral groups of phytoplankton respond photosynthetically
to environmental change; and 3) to incorporate the findings into bio-optical
models being developed in three independently funded field programs. The three
field programs are: a) a study of algal pond mesocosm experiments in the
Netherlands, b) along the coastal waters of the Palmer Peninsula, Antarctica on
the time scale of years (the Antarctic LTER program), and c) during the austral
spring in diverse phytoplankton biomes under the influence of the Antarctic
ozone hole (Icecolors 93). ***