* 9301801
* Magnetotail Dynamics:  Plasma Wave Turbulence and           Particle Chaos
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Theodore Speiser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 02/29/1996
* USD 325,000.00

9301801 Dusenbery The magnetotail of the Earth's magnetosphere, including the
plasma sheet and its boundary layers, plays a major role in energy storage and
its subsequent release, energizing particles during magnetic substorms. The
current sheet is generally regarded as the primary locus of tail energization.
We propose to carry out four research projects in magnetotail physics: 1)
particle motion in a nonzero y- component of the tail magnetic field at the
current sheet, 2) trigger mechanisms of the current sheet catastroophe model, 3)
neutral line signatures and modeling, and 4) dynamics of the plasma sheet
boundary layer. Project 1 involves tools from nonlinear particle dynamics such
as orbit analysis, Poincare surface-of- section plots, and the underlying
invariants. A 1D hybrid simulation code will be used for Project 2 to
investigate kinetic instabilities as an internal trigger for the current sheet
catastrophe model. A single-particle simulation model will be used to model ion
distributions near a neutral line for Project 3. The last project examines the
equilibrium structure and nonlinear evolution of a sheared, inhomogeneous plasma
sheet boundary layer using a Vlasov model exended to include multi-ion species.
A 2- 1/2D particle simulation model will also be used to study nonlinear
evolution of the boundary with high ion density gradients. The overall theme of
the proposed research is to understand the role of microscopic and mesoscale
processes on the global dynamics of the current sheet and the plasma sheet
boundary layer regions of the Earth's magnetotail. ***