* 9301776
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Study of       Characteristics of Air-Showers Induced by Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays Associated with Astrophysical Point-Sources
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Steven Biller, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1995
* USD 35,700.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Steven D. Biller of
the University of California, Irvine to work with Professor Alan A. Watson at
the University of Leeds. They plan on examining characteristics and detection
techniques associated with ultra-high energy (UHE) cosmic ray interactions. This
study will have direct application to the next generation of cosmic ray
detectors being designed to examine UHE radiation in terms of composition,
primary energy spectrum, and potential point-sources of astrophysical emission.
By doing this project at the University of Leeds, Dr. Biller will have access to
the following: (1) data from four different experiments, spanning over seven
decades in detected particle energies (i.e. the Haverah Park Array - formerly
located at Leeds; GREX - located at Leeds; the Whipple Cerenkov Telescope -
located in Arizona; and SPASE - located at the South Pole), (2) two data sets
containing reported detections of point-sources (Haverah Park - Cygnus X-3;
Whipple - Crab Nebula, Markarian 421, and Hercules X-1; (3) expertise in
computer modeling of air-shower interactions (Michael Hillas). The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for
twelve months, in-country travel, an excess baggage allowance and administrative
costs to his university.