* 9301865
* Commercial Opportunities Exploiting the Diversity of Beetle Luciferase
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Keith Wood, Promega Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 300,000.00

Though radioactivity is widely used in bioassays due to its high sensitivity and
convenience, safety and environmental concerns have accelerated efforts to
eliminate its use. Firefly luciferase accords the most efficient production of
chemical luminescence, which is an effective alternative to radioactivity.
Recent improvements in the enzymatic chemistry which yield greater luminescent
intensity with simper reaction kinetics further improve its commercial utility.
Examining the structure and function of several divergent isozymes of beetles
luciferases is proposed to gain a broader perspective of their properties, and
to develop one or more isozymes which are better suited to commercial
applications. Phase I of this research demonstrated feasibility by successfully
developing efficient methods for a) luciferase expression in E. coli, b)
mutagenesis and selection for novel phenotypes, and c) structural and
enzymological analysis of modified enzymes. Phase II will focus on
characterizing the recombinant luciferases, examining their relative structural
relationships, and employing mutagenesis to enhance their properties and provide
a method for future rational enzyme development in the absence of 3 dimensional
structural information. In Phase III, specific bioassay and other commercial
applications will be developed. %%% Radioactivity is commonly used in
biochemical analysis, such as medical and industrial diagnostics, because it is
convenient and provides high sensitivity. However, alternatives to radioactivity
y are being sough due to concerns for over safety and environmental impact. the
light emitted from fireflies is an extremely efficient signal, and the chemistry
of this system has been recently advanced to accord a viable. In addition to
efficient light production, however, commercial practicality requires that the
components of the system be physically robust. The enzyme isolated from
fireflies, luciferase, is the least stable of these components. Phase II
research is proposed to improve this situation by two approaches: 1) examine
luciferases from other luminous beetles for enzymes with greater structure. The
feasibility of these approaches has been previously established in Phase I
research. It is further hoped that the methods developed in the Phase II
research will be applicable to the commercial development of other enzymes. In
Phase III, the luciferases developed in Phase II will be adapted to novel
biochemical procedures.