* 9301309
* Structural Studies of Alkali Metals on Silicon and Germanium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Piero Pianetta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 04/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

9301309 Pianetta This proposal describes experiments designed to quantitatively
determine the atomic structure of alkali metals on surfaces of silicon and
germanium. Experimentally, emphasis will be placed on the soft x-ray standing
wave (XSW) technique performed in conjunction with surface extended x-ray
adsorption fine structure (SEXAFS). This will be followed with scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) to aid in the final structural determination. XSW
provides the perpendicular distances between the substrate planes and the
overlayer, while SEXAFS allows precise bond length determinations. Together
these techniques can determine adsorption angles and hence interfacial
geometries of complex metal-semiconductor systems. In combination with STM,
these techniques form a very complimentary set of probes for the complete
structural determination at an interface. The main goals of this proposal are to
achieve an in- depth understanding of the interfacial atomic structure alkali
metal overlayers and to correlate the information with their electronic
properties. In addition, this structural and electronic information will test
and further develop state-of-the-art theoretical calculations. %%% Novel
electronic properties of interfaces have enormous commercial applications in
electronics. The simplest such interface, used as a building block of most
practical devices, is a junction between a metal and a semiconductor. In this
proposal, the microscopic (atomic) structure of single layers of alkali metals
(such as sodium, potassium) deposited on silicon and germanium will be studied.
These layers display a unique ability to substantially lower the potential
barrier for election escape from the semiconductor and, because of that, are
used in infrared detectors and photocathodes. This investigation will use
several techniques based on synchrotron radiation. In particular, a newly
developed standing wave method which allows precise location of foreign atoms on
surfa ces will be utilized. The results will be of fundamental interest and have
potential to aid development of new materials for technological applications.
***