* 9301025
* Hydrogen Migration Reaction in Reactive Organic and         Organometallic Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 02/28/1998
* USD 482,445.00

The mechanistic basis underlying intramolecular hydrogen migration reactions in
reactive organic and organometallic intermediates will be studied. Low-
temperature matrix isolation spectroscopy, low- temperature NMR spectroscopy,
and time-resolved absorption spectroscopy will be used to establish
rearrangement pathways and to characterize the reactive species. Organic
carbenes, organic nitrenes, and certain coordinately unsaturated 16-electron
organometallic intermediates comprise an isolobal class of electron-deficient
reactive intermediates that will be studied. In the organometallic studies, low-
temperature NMR will be used to follow the chemistry of reactive allyl hydride
intermediates and the involvement of these species in alkene isomerization
processes. Iron, Osmium, and Ruthenium metal atoms will be incorporated in the
organometallic intermediates. In particular, studies will be directed to allylic
C-H and beta C-H insertion reactions. In the organic studies, experiments will
focus on direct observation of hydrogen migration reactions of carbenes and
1,4-biradicals by time-resolved spectroscopy. %%% This grant from the Organic
Dynamics Program supports the work of Professor Robert J. McMahon at the
University of Wisconsin. The details of how hydrogen atoms migrate in reactive
electron- deficient organic and organometallic intermediates by intramolecular
processes will be studied. These elusive intermediates will be studied at low
temperatures by various spectroscopic methods in order to characterize the
intermediates and individual steps in the overall reaction. The reactive
intermediates that will be studied include carbenes (divalent carbon species),
nitrenes (monovalent nitrogen species), and organometallic intermediates that
have 16 electrons rather than the stable 18-electron complement about the metal
atom. Iron, Osmium, and Ruthenium metal atoms will be incorporated in the
organometallic intermediates.