* 9301075
* Photonic Band Structures for Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Joseph Haus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William H. Carter
* 12/31/1994
* USD 31,500.00

WPC 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , N x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet Series II
HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 OpX @ #| x 2 W C #| x 9301075 Haus We propose to carry
out theoretical investigators regarding the fundamental physics and applications
of photonic bandgap structures (PBSs). We briefly describe the proposed research
directions: 1. Design and refinement of photonic bandgap materials: Considerable
progress has been made in the past two years in the design of PBSs. So far, only
lossless two component dielectric composites have been investigated for use as
photonic bandgap materials. The research has focused on finding the structure
with the right geometry. We will address the following topics in our research:
The effects of realistic considerations, such as losses finite size effects,
frequency dependence of the dielectric constant, imperfect periodicity, etc., on
the photonic band structure and the eigenmodes. Possibility of using alternate
materials, such as superconductors, materials with strong magnetic or
piezoelectric properties, and nonlinear dielectric materials, to name a few. The
electromagnetic response of these materials can be controlled to varying
degrees, making possible the design of PBSs with optical properties that can be
controlled by means of an applied electric or magnetic field, or by elastic
deformations or by other means. 2. QED: An important motivation for the
calculation of the eigenmodes of a PBS is for possible use in cavity QED
calculations. The atom field interaction is not only through the density of
photon states, but also through the spatial distribution of electromagnetic
fields associated with the mode. Another source of atom field interaction is
through an additional term that represents the interaction of the atom with the
induced polarization charges in the h) 0*0*0* medium. A thorough understanding
of these mechanisms is essential in designing optoelectronic devices with PBSs.
Periodic superconducting structures can be expected to yield novel QED effects
that are not observed or are insignificant in experiments with atoms in a single
cavity. By controlling the position of the band edge, we expect that the
radiation properties of the atoms can be controlled altered. This will give
provide a new means of investigating cavity QED; the system could be used as a Q
swithch for generating pulses of coherent radiation. ***