* 9301705
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  The Study of   Metal-Ceramic Interfaces by Electron Energy Loss            Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Judith Yang, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1995
* USD 37,000.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Judith C. Yang to work
with Dr. Manfred Ruhle at the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research in
Stuttgart, Germany. Dr. Yang proposes to do two experiments for the fundamental
study of the atomic structure, chemistry and electronic structure of two similar
model metal-ceramic systems, Pt-NiO and Ni-NiO, by electron microscopy
techniques. For the NiO-Pt system, an intermetallic interlayer, NiPt, is
expected to form at the interface by heat treatment at suitable temperature,
time and oxygen activity as suggested by phase diagrams and previous work. The
chemistry and the electronic structure due to formation of the intermetallic
compound will be studied using electron energy loss spectroscopy. For a more
fundamental study of fine changes in the electronic structure due to the
presence of an interface, a simpler system, Ni-NiO, will be studied with energy
loss near edge spectroscopy. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel and a stipend for twelve months.