* 9301126
* ASM Conference on Multicellular and Interactive Behavior of Bacteria to be Held in Woods Holes, Massachusetts on        March 28-April 1, 1993
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1994
* Martin Dworkin, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 6,000.00

The conference for which funds are requested is sponsored by the American
Society for Microbiology and is titled "Multicellular and Interactive Behavior
of Bacteria". The traditional paradigm of bacteria is that they are essentially
single-celled organisms that do not interact with each other in any systematic
way. Gradually, however, it is coming to be realized that bacteria, like most
other living cells interact with each other as well as with other types of
cells, both animal and plant. These interactions are manifested by their ability
to mate with each other and to exchange signals prior to doing so, to
collaborate in their metabolic processes, to form biofilms on a variety of
surfaces, to undergo complex developmental processes, to engage in cooperative
movements and to coordinate their pathogenic activities with each other. It has
become clear that these cell-cell interactions often allow bacteria to carry out
biotransformations that are not possible otherwise. The conference will bring
together investigators working on these various aspects of bacterial
multicellularity and offer the opportunity for the exchange of ideas and
information. It is the hope of the organizers of the conference that it will
facilitate the introduction of this new paradigm into the field of prokaryotic
biology.