* 9301097
* Response of the Eq. Pacific to Quaternary Climate Change:   Sedimentary Chemical Evidence For Glacial-Interglacial      Contrasts in Productivity and Chemical Transport Rate
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Margaret Leinen, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 12/31/1996
* USD 194,291.00

Response of the Eq. Pacific to Quaternary Climate Change: Sedimentary Chemical
Evidence For Glacial-Interglacial Contrasts In Productivity, Chemical Transport
Rate, and Terrigenous Influence Chemical indicators of productivity, chemical
transport rate, and terrigenous flux will be used to determine the
biogeochemical response of the central equatorial Pacific Ocean to Quaternary
climate change. The strategy involves the analysis of downhole records along a
latitudinal transect. Sedimentary chemistry will be done on 15 m long piston
cores recovered at 2 degree S, 0 degree, 2 degree N, 5 degree N, along a
transect at 140 degree W, thus covering the sharp equatorial gradients in
productivity and associated depositional and diagenetic processes. Studies will
also cover the effect of the dominant aeolian source of terrigenous particulate
matter (the intertropical convergence of the tradewinds, at 5 degree N).
Downhole sampling strategy will result in resolution of < 7 ky for the past 1
Ma. Interactive behavior of the three major biogenic components (CaCO3, Corg,
opal), the aeolion component, and an extensive suite 40 major, trace, and rare
earth elements will be assessed.