* 9301021
* Conservation of Mammal Collections, Museum of Natural History, The University of Kansas
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1999
* Robert Timm, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1999
* USD 298,659.00

ABSTRACT: DEB-9321021, PI-Timm: This support will allow preparation,
incorporation and computerization of an important orphaned collection of
Caribbean mammals by the University of Kansas Museum of Natural History, which
holds one of the premiere research collections of living mammals in the U.S..
The project also entails improving and making accessible to researchers and
students the sizeable spirit collection of mammals, which hitherto has been
housed under crowded and poor curatorial conditions. This award is
opportunistic, in that it occurs in concert with a planned expansion of the
museum into a new wing to house all spirit collections. The systematic
collections improved through this award are critical research and educational
resources for studies in biodiversity. The collection of Recent mammals at the
University of Kansas Museum of Natural History is one of the finest resources
for research and education, being the fourth largest in North America and the
second largest collection in a university museum. It's activity has produced
crowed conditions which this collection improvement award will help alleviate
through the provision of additional storage cases and curatorial material.
Additionally, the collection is absorbing an orphaned collection of Caribbean
mammals, which is extremely important to research and education on U.S. and
Central American mammalian biodiversity.