* 9301292
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Structural     Geology of the Eastern Brazilian Shield
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* W. Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1994
* USD 32,986.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. The actual financial
support for this research will be from the U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science
Program. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. W. Dickson Cunningham of the University of Illinois at Urbana to work with
Dr. Fernando Flecha Alkmim at the Federal University of Ouro Preto in Brazil.
This research project involves the study of the tectonic evolution of the
eastern edge of Brazilian Shield. The project addresses important questions
concerning the structural significance of the Brasiliano (=Pan African) mobile
belt and the tectonic relationship of the Precambrian basement of the
Mantiqueira province to the Sao Francisco craton. The project has important
implications for understanding processes of Precambrian continental amalgamation
and the structural evolution of South America. The structural geology of the
Mantiqueria province is poorly known and existing maps of the region emphasize
Brasiliano trends in the province. Recent reconnaissance investigations by UFOP
and the University of Illinois researchers indicate that the region contains
evidence for an older basement terrane containing Transamazonian (2.0 b.y) age
structures. If this is correct, it will totally change perceptions of the pre-
Gondwana geology of the eastern margin of South America. The Mantiqueira
province may correlate better with West African cratons than with South American
cratons. The Brasiliano belt may mark a Late Proterozoic suture superimposed on
older Transamazonian trends. To address these issues, Dr. Cunningham plans to
conduct a detailed structural analysis combined with detailed petrographic
studies, satellite imagery analysis, topographic studies and geochronological
sampling along three east- west transects between Ouro Preto and the Atlantic
coast. A multi-disciplinary approach using these techniques has never before
been applied to tectonic problems in eastern Brazil. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for twelve months and a
small travel allowance for in-country travel and field work.