* 9301310
* Workshop on Intelligent, Dynamic Scheduling for             Manufacturing, Cocoa Beach, Florida, January 25-27, 1993
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/1993,05/31/1993
* Leslie Interrante, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 05/31/1993
* USD 21,450.00

Intelligent, dynamic scheduling in manufacturing systems encompasses a unique
set of problems which span Computer Science, Engineering, and Cognitive Science
fields of expertise. Many issues come to play in the manufacturing scheduling
arena, including: 1. external (suppliers, production orders, market conditions,
etc.) and internal factors (machine layout, setup times, maintenance, etc.), 2.
interactions within the plant because of, e.g., resource sharing among lines or
cells, 3. unexpected conditions or events (breakdowns, stockouts, strikes,
etc.), 4. inventory policies (e.g., MRP versus JIT), 5. type of layout (e.g.
flow lines, cells, job shop), 6. volume. These and other issues render the
scheduling problem a complicated one, requiring a knowledge-rich solution
procedure based on a model of the plant synthesis-type reasoning tasks. This
workshop brings together researchers with the unique blend of skill necessary to
develop models and schedulers in manufacturing. The goals of the workshop are
to: 1. clarify what progress has been made in this area, 2. identify the various
levels and types of schedules required in manufacturing and how they interact,
3. identify the factors most critical to schedule formation/revision, 4. address
plant-specific research versus more general research via a discussion of
classification or morphology of plant types and/or features, 5. compare
manufacturing scheduling to other types of scheduling tasks; what makes
manufacturing scheduling unique?, 6. discuss empirical versus theoretical
research in the field, 7. set major research goals for future work.//