* 9301564
* Applications and New Technologies for Bio-Physical Inder-   disciplinary Trophic Studies (BITS -2)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Richard Pieper, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1997
* USD 620,000.00

WPC 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet IIID hange
HPLASIII.PRS x @ , \ , MX @ #| x 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , w x 6 X @ 8 ;
X @ HP LaserJet III-Change HPIIILAS.PRS x @ , \ , ||X @ 9301564 Pieper SUBJECT:
Bio Physical Interdisciplinary Trophic Studies (BITS 2) Chronic undersampling of
the marine environment, including both biological and physical components has
been, and remains, a major block to understanding how the marine ecosystem
functions and how it will respond to changes, whether natural or anthropogenic.
This research directly addresses this problem by applying advanced acoustical
technology to the problem of measuring spatial distributions of zooplankton and
micronekton at a mooring, and collecting abundance and size data with a high
temporal resolution over long periods. There are three specific objectives of
this research: 1) operation and maintenance of a recently installed pilot
mooring on the Southern California coast, 2) development of a vertical profiling
platform to allow collection of long time records with high resolution of
vertical fine structure in the plankton and related biophysical variables, and
3) deployment and installation of a mooring for studying zooplankton in the
northwest Atlantic on Georges Bank as part of GLOBEC, a component of the US
Global and Climate Change initiative.