* 9301375
* Process-Structure Relationships in Droplet-Based            Manufacturing Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Jung-Hoon Chun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/1997
* USD 360,000.00

9301375 Chun The purpose of this investigation is to determine the process-
structure relationships and the extent of structural control that can be
achieved in spray forming with uniform droplets. Unlike gas-atomized spray
forming in which structural control is limited by the use of non-uniform droplet
sprays and the coupling among the spray process parameters, this research is
based on the ability to produce uniform metal droplet sprays with precisely
controlled droplet size, thermal state and mass flux. A combination of
controlled experiments and analysis may lead o an understanding of how
processing variables affect material structure, and may provide knowledge that
can be applied to design and control the spray forming process. The experiment
include spray forming with controlled droplet solidification, undercooling, mass
and enthalpy flux, and with reduced ambient pressure. These experiments are
designed to permit studies of the limiting conditions for producing bulk
materials with rapidly solidified, novel microstructure directly from the melt.
The targeted novel structures are those with fine, uniform, equiaxed grains,
controlled texturing and amorphous phases. The uniform droplet spray forming
process, including the droplets generation, fluid-thermal state at impact and
mass flux as well as the substrate condition, will be characterized and modeled.
These results will be compared with the experimental observations on the
microstructure evolution to establish process-structure relationships in the
spray forming process.