* 9301100
* Transient Optical Studies of Non-equilibrium Excitations in Semiconductors and Energy Transfer Processes in Ionic       Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Kong-Thon Tsen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 265,000.00

9301100 Tsen This experimental program will study the dynamics of carriers in
semiconductors under extreme non-equilibrium conditions. A second sub-project
will investigate energy transfer processes in ionic crystals. Sub-picosecond
time-resolved Raman spectroscopy will be used to examine carrier transport under
electic fields. The technique provides a direct, simple interpretation of the
experimental results, which will provide conclusive fundamental information on
ballistic transport as well as velocity overshoot phenomena predicted
theoretically in nanostructured semiconductors. Study of various energy transfer
processes in ionic crystals by time-resolved Raman spectroscopy should provide
direct information about vibrational-to-vibrational energy transfer processes in
a model solid state system. %%% This experimental program will study the
dynamics of semiconductor electrons moving under the influence of high electric
fields. A second project will investigate how energy is transferred among the
various modes of vibration in an ionic crystal when it absorbs light. The
information is of fundamental significance and is also of technological
significance. It will aid in the design of better and faster semiconductor
devices of micron and submicron dimensions. The energy transfer processes are
immediately relevant to the design and utility of far infrared lasers used in
photonics and telecommunications applications. ***