* 9301374
* Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Chemoautotrophic Symbioses
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* James Childress, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1997
* USD 480,000.00

9301374 CHILDRESS The animals associated with deep-sea hydrothermal vents
represent an ancient fauna of global distribution within the oceans. The very
existence of these communities depends upon the ability of a few
invertebrate/bacterial symbiotic associations to oxidize the reduced chemical
species (sulfide or methane) from the hydrothermal vents using oxidants (such as
oxygen or nitrate) from the surrounding deep-sea water to power primary
production in this environment. The capacity for interaction of the symbiotic
association with the chemical properties of the vent environments is fundamental
to the primary production which supports these ecosystems. The central objective
of this project is the determination of the importance of the concentration of
carbon dioxide (PCO2) as an environmental factor affecting the rates of primary
production by hydrothermal vent chemoautotrophic symbioses. This project is
composed of there components, each with its own objectives: 1. A survey of
diverse vent and seep environments to determine the extent to which
chemoautotrophic symbioses in these habitats are exposed to elevated carbon
dioxide and have high concentrations of carbon dioxide in their bodies. 2.
Shipboard studies of the physiology supporting primary productivity in symbiotic
vent animals in order to evaluate whether the concentration of carbon dioxided
is a variable which limits primary production by the symbiotic associations. 3.
The observation and measurement of temporal changes at a station located at 13oN
in order to describe the niches of the symbioses over long time scales to assess
long term rates of primary productivity in these environments. This project will
greatly increase our understanding of the nature of the interactions between the
vent animals and their chemical environment, in particular the interactions with
pH and inorganic carbon, contributing to our understanding of the functioning of
the vent and other chemoautotrophic ally supported ecosystems. ***