* 9301747
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  A Model of the Creep Deformation of Dispersion-Strengthened Intermetallic  Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Ralph Mason, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 37,200.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Ralph P. Mason to work
with Professor Dr. Eduard Arzt at the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research
in Stuttgart, Germany. They propose to develop a model of the creep deformation
of dispersion-strengthened intermetallic alloys where the rate of creep
deformation is controlled by thermally activated detachment of superlattice
dislocations from dispersoid particles. This model will incorporate two
attractive interactions between dispersoid particles and superlattice
dislocations which lead to the attachment of superlattice dislocations to
particles. These attractive interactions which inhibit dislocation motion will
be offset by the applied stress and by thermal activation both of which will
facilitate dislocation motion. The rate of creep deformation will be determined
by the balance of the above elements. The model will be tested against existing
data for dispersion-strengthened intermetallics. The proposed research has
potential application to the manufacture of high-temperature parts such as
blades, vanes and disks in aircraft turbines. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover international travel and a stipend for twelve months.