* 9301805
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: The Beijing-Arizona Color  Survey of the Sky
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Li-Zhi Fang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 12/31/1996
* USD 34,154.00

This award supports initial collaboration on a major sky survey between
scientists at Arizona State University and the University of Arizona, and at the
Beijing Astronomical Observatory, the Chinese University of Science and
Technology, and the Purple Mountain Observatory. This project draws on resources
and capabilities in both China and the US: the Chinese will provide a dedicated
telescope and data acquisition system and will perform the primary image
analysis work; the US group will contribute subsequent follow-up spectroscopy of
interesting objects found during the sky survey. The support requested in this
proposal is for a "mini-survey" to develop procedures and gain experience for
the full-scale survey. The past century has seen a steady transformation of
astronomy from a largely descriptive science to a science concerned with
understanding the physical structures of the universe and the processes which
shape them. New technologies now make it possible to conduct surveys which yield
quantitative information for large samples of objects. Using these new
technologies, this survey will prepare for a major cooperative survey which will
provide a large, accurate data set that can also be applied to studies of
galactic structure and stellar populations. This project makes good use of
complementary facilities and interests; cooperation with Chinese astronomers on
projects such as this is essential for the success of the larger survey of the
sky.