* 9301436
* CEDAR:  Vapor Filters:  Developing New Measurement          Capabilities for Narrowband Na Lidar
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Chiao-Yao She, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 05/31/1996
* USD 183,500.00

This project is a two-year effort to initiate the development of vapor filters
for lidar measurements in the mesopause region. It proposes two different types
of vapor filters whose use will add new measurement capabilities to the
narrowband Na fluorescence lidar. First is a narrow band-pass filter based on
Faraday dispersion in Na vapor near resonance. This filter has an effective
bandwidth of approximately 2 GHz, 85% peak transmission, and wide field-of-view.
When used at a Fraunhofer line, it can reject sky background light more
effectively than a Fabry-Perot system by more than a factor of 50, making the
daytime operation of the Na temperature lidar practical. Second is a temperature
stabilized iodine vapor cell to be used as a transmission filter. The
transmittance of the I2 vapor cell as a function of frequency varies
considerably within a few GHz. Since elastically scattered and Na fluorescence
signals occur at different frequencies, a comparison of lidar returns at the two
operating frequencies, v2 and vc, with and without passing through the I2 vapor
cell will provide enough information for the determination of temperature and
quantification of elastic scattering. Therefore, the use of a well characterized
iodine vapor filter with a Na temperature lidar in the polar cap region will
allow simultaneous monitoring of temperature profiles and noctilucent clouds.