* 9301454
* Partially Synchronous Shared-Memory Systems and the Study   of Real-Time Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Gil Neiger, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 01/31/1997
* USD 160,000.00

9301454 Neiger Models of distributed systems fall into two main classes: systems
using message passing and those using shared memory. Early research on message-
passing systems focused on two system models: completely asynchronous (in which
there is not timing information available about the system) and completely
synchronous (in which perfect timing information is available). More recent
research has also considered partially synchronous systems (in which imperfect
timing information is available), and these intermediate systems more accurately
capture the properties of many real systems. In contrast, research on shared-
memory systems has been restricted almost exclusively to completely asynchronous
systems (completely synchronous systems are not realistic). While such a
restriction permits the development of very general algorithms, it excludes
consideration of more efficient algorithms that would be correct for many real
systems. In many cases, a partially synchronous model is more realistic for
shared-memory systems, just as it is for message-passing systems. Such a model
admits a much wider class of algorithms, and these algorithms can be analyzed
with respect to their realtime performance. The objective of this project is to
provide a comprehensive study of partially synchronous shared-memory systems and
to develop and analyze a wide range of algorithms for these systems. The project
is developing formal models for partially synchronous shared-memory systems,
taking into account timing behavior and failures; an exploration of several
paradigms for algorithm design and analysis in these system, including real-time
analyses; the study of a variety of specific problems in distributed computing
(such as consensus and atomic snapshot) and the development of algorithms to
solve them in these systems; the application of processor knowledge; and the use
of translations between models with different types of faulty behavior. ***