* 9301468
* CRB: Collaborative Research: Consequences of European Honey Bee Removal on Populations of Native Plants and their Pollinators
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Adrian Wenner, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1995
* USD 24,910.00

9301468 Wenner A major goal of conservation biologist is to quantify the impact
that exotic species have had on the abundance and diversity of native plant and
animal species. An impediment to solving this problem has been the difficulty of
completely removing an exotic species from an area circumscribed with definite
borders that is large enough to display ecosystem dynamics. This is particularly
difficult in the case of a highly mobile forager such as the honey bee. The
response o native pollinator and plant species to the extinction of a well-
entrenched exotic pollinator has not been investigated by experimental
manipulations on an ecosystem level. %%% This study examines the consequences of
removing all of the feral honey bees from a 25,000 hectare (96 square mile)
island in step-wise manipulations. The effect of an important exotic species on
pollinators and plants in the ecosystem will be quantitatively described. With
the use of proven bee hunting techniques, biogeographical data on density,
distributions in relation to resources, and rates of dispersal are being
compiled for all colonies on the island. Apis foraging patterns are being
determined to a high resolution by a combination of tested and new methods in
order to reveal the extent of their impact. The recovery of native fauna is
being monitored as release from competition occurs. Removal is being dome in
concert with studies aimed at answering additional questions important to
conservation theory, particularly with respect to native bees and their
pollination of native plants. Changes in seed set, vegetative growth, pollinator
efficiency, and seed quality of both exotic and native plants will be studied.
%%% The results of this set of experiments will provide new insight into the
ecology of plants and pollinators and the recovery of an ecosystem from exotic
species effects. ige, Ken R \ J~ R 4 8 R , Univ. of Illinois R P ~ R 4 ` @ y R ,
q Inbreeding Depression, Environmental Stress, and Fitness Compensation in
restricted Populations of Scarlet Gilia, R , P R , R , R , R , R , R , / 4 ! ! !
! F _ _ ( Times New Roman Symbol & Arial " h z z ( Y - Gayle Edmonds Gayle
Edmonds