* 9301152
* Dissertation Research:  Obsidian Procurement and Production at San Martin Jilotepeque, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 11,172.00

Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Mr. Geoffrey Braswell will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Braswell has participated in an
archaeological project which has studied the prehistory of the San Martin
Jilotepque area of Guatemala. In during much of this time the region was an
important trade center because it contained abundant obsidian resources. Before
the introduction of metal tools, this form of volcanic glass was highly prized
because flakes formed and held sharp edges which were used as cutting tools.
Studies have indicated that obsidian was widely traded both across and beyond
the Mayan area and that this trade may have played an important role in the
development of Mayan civilization. To date Mr. Braswell has located the
geological source areas of San Martin Jilotepque obsidian and charactered them
by neutron activation analysis. The results show that different regions have
distinct chemical signatures and thus archaeological materials can, in
principle, be matched to source of origin. A survey to locate obsidian working
areas has been carried out and small scale excavation conducted. With National
Science Foundation support Mr Braswell will now analyze the materials collected.
He will conduct additional neutron activation analyses to characterize sources
more precisely. Study of ceramics and radiocarbon dating of related materials
will allow the construction of a more precise chronology. Through study of
obsidian remains recovered at archaeological sites the process of manufacturing
and distribution will then be ascertained. Because it was so spatially localized
and so widely traded, it is clear that obsidian played a major role in
prehistoric economic and social system of the Maya. Just how this production and
trade was organized however is not well understood. With his focus on a limited
region with rich obsidian resources Mr. Braswell should gain important insights
into this process. This research is important because it will increase our
understanding of how complex societies emerge and are maintained. It will also
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.