* 9301822
* Collaborative Research: Hf and Pb Isotope Ratios in         Seawater: Indicators of Paleo-Hydrothermal Activity
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* William White, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1995
* USD 114,776.00

Collaborative Research: Hf and Pb Isotope Ratios in Seawater: Indicators of
Paleo-Hydrothermal Activity This study is to investigate the behavior of Hf and
Pb in seawater and hydrothermal systems with the goal of using the isotope
ratios of these elements in marine sediments as indicators of the past rates of
volcanism. The isotopic compositions of marine Hf and Pb indicate that large
proportions of the oceanic inventory of these elements are derived from 'mantle'
sources: young volcanic rocks of subduction/.orogenic zones and mid-ocean
ridges. Hf and Pb are complementary because of their different oceanic residence
times. Hf has a residence time in the oceans similar to ocean mixing times,
making it relatively isotopically homogeneous throughout the oceans. New
analytical developments make it now possible to measure the concentration and
isotopic composition of Hf in reasonable volumes of natural waters. Its marine
chemistry can now be better defined. Pb has a short residence time in seawater,
and the hydrothermal flux from mid-ocean ridges locally dominates its isotopic
composition, thus allowing regional variations in this flux to be determined.
Models of mantle flux variations will be based on isotope systematics that allow
the proportion of mantle Hf and Pb to the oceans to be determined unequivocally.
Combination of Pb and Hf with Sr flux models will make it possible to define
past changes in mantle fluxes to the oceans more accurately than has been
possible by using Sr alone. It will then be possible to test the hypothesis that
faster spreading rates, volcanism rates, and increased mantle fluxes to the
oceans are synonymous by comparison with other measures of spreading rate
variations. This in turn will allow a refinement of models of global geochemical
cycles of other elements, such as carbon.