* 9301574
* S/C:  Sliding Mode Control of Structures with Regenerative  Electric Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Luis Suarez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 06/30/1997
* USD 199,695.00

9301574 Ramu The application of the variable structure and sliding mode control
techniques to reduce the vibratory effects in civil structures due to wind and
earthquake forces, will be investigated. Algorithms for synthesizing the control
forces for both linear and nonlinear models of the structures will be developed.
For physical application of control forces, an electric actuator with
regenerative capability is proposed. Energy regeneration concept utilized for
braking trains and other moving systems will be used both for controlling the
vibratory effects and for recovering the energy from the structures for
subsequent cycles in the active control of structures. The proposed regeneration
capability is expected to reduce the energy storage requirement and will lead to
an efficient utilization of the power for the application of control forces. The
time delays inherent in the control system and the issues concerning real time
implementation of the controller using single chip micro controller will be
analyzed. This is a collaborative research effort involving an electrical
engineering team and a structural engineering team. The outcome is expected to
be an integration of research ideas in the field of control and structural
engineering to develop a practical approach to mitigate the hazardous vibratory
effects in civil structures.