* 9301068
* Defects and Charge Transport in Perovskite-Related Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1997
* Donald Smyth, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 10/31/1997
* USD 347,479.00

This proposal intends to study the recently found important role of hole
trapping in perovskite structure titanates. As a result of hole trapping and its
consequences, insulating material may be obtained after equilibrium at lower
partial oxygen pressure than previously considered possible. This proposed
program will focaus on undoped and acceptor-doped BaTiO3 and SrTiO3, and will
conduct experiments to further the understanding of the equilibrium defect
chemistry of the perovskite titanates and its rel;ationship to properties of
technological interest. Second part of the proposed program will be focussed on
the defect chemistry and charge transport of perovskite-related oxides,
specifically of the brownmillerite A2B2O5 structure and based on indium,
gallium, and related elements. %%% This proposed study pursues the recently
found important role of hole trapping in perovskite related oxides. It has
significant implications with respect to the multilayer ceramic capacitor
market. This study aims to pursue the investigation into to the defect chemistry
and its relationship to properties of technological interest. Second part of
this study will investigate the origin of the high levels of ionic conductivity
in oxygen- deficient variants of the perovskite structure such as the
brownmillerite structure of A2B2O5. This study will have important contributions
to the understanding of materials used in devices of technological importance.