* 9301196
* A Geometric Study of the Phase Margin and its Implications  in Design for Multivariable Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Kevin Grasse, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1997
* USD 47,847.00

9301196 Bar-on In robust control a collection of perturbations with a given
structure can be viewed as a differentiable manifold with a nontrivial topology.
This manifold can be divided into regions of stability and instability, where
the identity matrix is a point in the region of stability and represents the
unperturbed system. A stability margin for such a collection of structured
perturbations can be defined as the smallest "distance" on the manifold from the
identity matrix to the region of instability. Bar-on and Jonckheere have defined
the multivariable phase margin by restricting the class of perturbations to the
group of unitary matrices. It has been shown for the two-dimensional case that,
when viewed geometrically, the phase margin can be represented as the minimum
arc length on the three sphere from the north pole to the region of instability.
The proposed research centers on generalizing these properties to the
n-dimensional case with special focus on: (1) the geometric and topological
properties of the phase margin; (2) the division of the manifold of unitary
perturbations into stabilizing and destabilizing regions; and (3) the design of
compensators to improve the phase margin. The main goal of this research is to
develop a thorough understanding of the phase margin and to relate these
abstract concepts back to engineering issues in robust control theory and
design. ***