* 9301039
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Differential Equations,    Vector Field Approximations and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Henry Hermes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,376.00

The focus of this research is the development of a coherent program to
determine the stabilizability of nonlinear control systems. Understanding
stabilizability is important; almost all issues in both systems theory and
systems practice eventually reduce to some version of the stabilization problem.
The importance of linear systems theory rests more on the ease of testing a
linear systems for stabilization than on its linearity per se. Earlier work
concentrated on the question of short time local controllability, a necessary
condition for stabilizability. viewed as stabilization by open loop controls
while the latter is stabilization by closed loop controls. As a result of the
prior work, one now has computational criteria for deciding STLC. Work has
turned to approximations of nonlinear systems by simpler ones such as nilpotent
systems and systems which are homogeneous with respect to a dilation. This work
holds promise for a relatively comprehensive theory of nonlinear
stabilizability. In the present project, a new concept of vector fields which
are stable with respect to measurement are introduced. The concept is closely
related to the shadowing ideas of nonlinear dynamics. It has been shown already
that if Brockett's locally onto conditions not satisfied then a nonlinear system
is not locally stabilizable to a vector field which is stable with respect to
measurement. Work will also be done using homogeneous approximations and
homogeneous Lagrangians to construct dynamic asymptotically stabilizing
feedbacks for systems which don't satisfy Brockett's locally onto condition
using approximate feedback linearization and optimal control. The combination of
mathematical power and engineering applications has long made control theory one
of the healthiest sources of new mathematical themes. The bridges built between
mathematicians and engineers have provided for dynamic interchanges leading to
the advancement of both fields. This project takes up the problem of what one
can do when some of the traditional tests for stabilizing state feedback control
are not present. In many important problems, including mechanical systems with
nonholonomic constraints and the inverted pendulum in a gravity free
environment, efforts are to be made to construct discontinuous state feedback
controls.