* 9301316
* Mathematical Sciences: Strategies for Bayesian Data Analysiswith Application to Quantal Bioassay and Geographic Disease Occurrence Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Alan Gelfand, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

Recently there have been major advances in the development of monte carlo
strategies to obtain samples from high dimensional nonnormalized joint
densities. These techniques have proved especially valuable in fitting
structured random effects models. In such settings, Analytic examination of the
posterior distribution is infeasible but sampling enables arbitrarily accurate
estimation of any features of the posterior with the promise of fitting an
enormous range of previously inaccessible models attention must now turn to the
development of tools for bayesian data analysis. Consistent with the informality
of the art of model development we propose to develop informal tools with an eda
flavor to mesh naturally with the sampling based approaches used to fit the
model. Application will be in two Biometric areas, quantal bioassay and
geographic disease mapping. CONTEMPORARY STATISTICAL WORK IS DRIVEN BY SERIOUS
Applications. Realistic Models in such applications will necessarily be complex
incorporating many unknowns. Indeed, there may be several plausible models with
collected data, the question arises of how to fit such models with several
choices of models we might ask if any of them are good and which one we prefer.
The role of the data analyst is to provide answers to these questions. The
proposed research is intended to help the data analyst by providing a unifying
strategy for carrying out the fitting and an associated set of tools for
studying adequacy of and choice of models at the heart of the entire approach is
the most elementary of statistical ideas - drawing samples to learn about model
unknowns. We propose to utilize this approach in two biometric areas of
application. One considers geographic patterns of disease occurrence. The other
involves the change in toxicity to a population due to change in exposure to a
toxin.