* 9301751
* Computational Optimization Problems in Local Access         Networks, SONET Rings and Lightwave
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Daniel Bienstock, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 07/31/1997
* USD 262,857.00

9301751 Bienstock The purpose of this research is to develop, implement, and
test practical algorithms for optimization problems in various areas of
telecommunications. The problems to be studied arise in concrete settings and
have the common feature of being extremely intractable from a computational
viewpoint; the focus will be on building experimentally practical and
theoretically sound algorithms. The first area of interest concerns capacity
expansion problems in local access networks. The resulting optimization problems
turn out to be rather intractable from the point of view of integer programming.
However, we have recently developed a fast and accurate heuristic for a variant
of this problem used by Bellcore in its planning; we plan to extend the analysis
and the heuristic to handle more complex and detailed models. The second problem
area is that of SONET rings. This is an emerging field which will be for
increasing importance in the near future, and there are many important
optimization problems that arise in this context (for example, the assignment of
capacity to a given ring sa as to handle traffic requests between the nodes in
the ring). The last problem area concerns lightwave networks. A problem that has
received some attention is that of assigning frequencies to the transmitters and
receivers in a network, and then to route traffic requests in the resulting
logical network, sa as to achieve minimum congestion over all possible frequency
assignments and routings. This is an extremely intractable optimization problem;
nevertheless, preliminary experience with a special-purpose algorithm has been
encouraging. The approach for studying these problems will encompass both the
theoretical analysis needed to develop new tools, and , building upon successful
recent work, the implementation of resulting algorithms, with added emphasis on
speed and practicality of the resulting code. ***