* 9301200
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular and Boundary Control of     Multidimensional Diffusion Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Michael Taksar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

The proposed research lies within the area of optimal stochastic control. It
deals with optimal control of diffusion processes by means of a free boundary,
as well as optimal control at a reflection boundary of the stochastic process.
This type of control naturally appears in problems in which there is no natural
restriction on the rates of control and the optimal control rate id infinite.
The optimal policy is then to reflect the process from the a priori unknown
boundary. Such type of action arises in problems with additive control, where
there are no a priori limits on the control rates. It is intended to develop of
the related partial differential equations with gradient constraints, to study
optimal reflection barriers in multi-dimensional cases and to investigate other
problems pertinent to singular control in queuing, inventory and flexible
manufacturing models. The proposed research lies within the area of optimal
stochastic control. This type of control problem arises in models involving
automatic cruise control of an airplane subject to uncertain wind conditions, of
a space vehicle subject to small perturbations in mechanical units. The solution
to this problem suggests the optimal timing of the correction of the course of
the airplane of the space vehicle. Singular control also appears in
queuing/production/manufacturing models. In a typical model of a flexible
manufacturing system one seeks the optimal scheduling of turning on and off the
production unit, the timing of buying new equipment or increasing the capacity
of the existing unit, finding optimal levels of inventory stocked for supply,
etc. In many cases when the production process faces uncertainties due to
fluctuation of demand or due to unreliability in the process itself, it is
possible to use the theory of singular control to address the questions posed
above.