* 9301812
* Oligonucleotide Synthesis on Minerals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* James Ferris, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/1996
* USD 247,250.00

The focus of this research is the role of clay mineral surfaces in the synthesis
of oligomeric molecules relevant to the origin of life. Specific goals include
the development of regiospecific syntheses of oligoribonucleotides in aqueous
solution without using blocking groups to help understand how the
olignucleotides required for the "RNA World" first formed. Template directed
syntheses of oligomers of A and G will be studied using U and C oligomers
respectively, formed by montmorillonite catalysis, and will be carried out in
the solution phase and on mineral surfaces. An investigation of the effect of
different phosphorus activating groups on oligomer formation will utilize
2-aminobenzimidazole and 4-aminopyridine groups. The elongation of oligomers, 10
mers to 50 mers, will be studied in which the incorporated pyrophosphate
groupings will be utilized as sites of ligation. The role of mineral catalysis
of the ligation reaction will be investigated. %%% With this Renewal Award, the
Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. James P. Ferris of
the Department of Chemistry at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Professor
Ferris will focus his work on the study of the role of clay minerals in the
synthesis of oligomeric molecules relevant to the origin of life. In doing so,
he will develop new synthetic approaches to the preparation of olignucleotides
and gain understanding how the oligonucleotides required for the "RNA World"
first formed. These studies in prebiotic chemistry are of intrinsic general
interest to all segments of society.