* 9301092
* Components for Decentralized Process-Centered Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Gail Kaiser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1996
* USD 217,000.00

A process is a partially ordered set of steps to be followed in developing a
software system. Processes may vary across organizations and systems. A process-
centered environment provides computer-aided support for a range of project-
specific processes. The general goals of research in process-centered
environments are to devise useful notations for specifying processes and to
investigate ways in which environments may assist users in carrying out
processes. The Marvel process-centered environment is tailored by a rule-based
process model, where each rule defines a process step and states the condition
for initiating the step and the result of finishing the step. The permitted
sequencing among steps is implicit in their conditions and results. The
environment enforces the specified process and assists users in satisfying the
conditions of steps. Recent work has concentrated on concurrency control for
teams of users, and on evolution of processes while they are in progress. Both
are prerequisites for scaling up process-centered environments. This project
addresses four problems; (1) translation of higher-level process modeling
formalisms into rules for execution, (2) formal notations for coordination
modeling and the interaction of corresponding concurrency control algorithms
with process assistance mechanisms, (3) requirements placed on environment
frameworks by process and coordination, and possible protocols for interfacing
process and coordination components to a range of existing classes of
frameworks, and (4) decentralized environment architectures that permits a
degree of site autonomy for different process and coordination needs.