* 9301683
* Organization of the 1993 Quantum Optoelectronics Topical    Meeting, March 17-19, 1993, Palm Springs, CA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1994
* Jarus Quinn, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 4,000.00

This proposal requests partial support for travel funds for graduate students,
post docs, and invited speakers to attend the first topical meeting on Quantum
Optoelectronics, to be held in Palm Springs, CA March 17-19, 1993, under
sponsorship of the Optical Society of America. The meeting will provide a unique
forum for presentation and disscussion of current research in device physics and
applications of lower dimensional semiconductor and related materials
structures. This includes optical and optoelectronic phenomena derived from
quantum confinement, fabrication of novel light emitters, modulators, and
detector structures based on such effects and techniques as synthesis and
nanofabrication of small device configurations. Semiconductor-based quantum
well, superlattice, and heterostructures have made significant inroads into
novel device physics and device engineering. Quantum wire and dot structures as
well as more complex low dimensional architectures in materials of exceptional
quality now make possible the next generation of optoelectronic devices. One aim
of the requested support is to sponsor young researchers who form a large
portion of the active community in the field. The students will be asked to
provide feedback as to their experience in the form of a two-page letter report
that will be forwarded to NSF.