* 9301924
* The Thermal Characteristics of Combustion Waves:                Investigation of Field-Assisted Combustion Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Zuhair Munir, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/1997
* USD 345,572.00

An investigation of field-assisted combustion is proposed. The planned research
will focus on the role of electromagnetic fields in the mechanism of self-
sustaining reactions. Preliminary observations have demonstrated that the
imposition of electric fields alters markedly the kinetics of the process as
well as the nature of the products of combustion. The goal of the study is to
provide a basis for the inclusion of a field as a processing parameter in
combustion synthesis. The proposed approach will focus on the use of thermal as
well as material analyses to ascertain the role of the field. These include the
use of the Boddington-Laye method temperature profile analysis. Anticipated
results will determine the nature of the field effect in terms of thermal or
chemical contributions to the combustion wave reaction. Both electric and
magnetic field effects will be investigated. The proposed work represents a
continuation of the already established collaborative arrangement with FSU
scientists in accordance with the established Memorandum of Understanding
between NSF and the FSU Academy of Sciences. Participants from the FSU will
include Professor Shteinberg from the Russian Institute (RISM) of Structural
Macro-kinetics, Professor Maximov (RISM), and Dr. Gedevanishili from the Tavadze
Inst. of Metallurgy of the Georgia Academy of Science. The U.S. portion of the
research will be carried out at UCD and the Russian portion conducted at the
Tomsk Branch of RISM at the main facility in Chernogolovka, and at the Tavadze
Institute if Metallurgy. A coordinated research plan will be conducted in the US
and FSU initially on the same combustion systems and subsequent investigations
will assume a different emphasis depending on the initial results. It is
anticipated that the proposed research will impact both fundamental and applied
aspects of combustion synthesis.