* 9301199
* Biomolecular Materials:  Structure, Phase Behavior, and     Interaction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 07/31/1996
* USD 285,000.00

9301199 Safinya Synchrotron based small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering methods
will be used to characterize the structure, phase-behavior, and interlayer (in
lamellar preparations) and inter-macromolecular interactions, and the protein
shape stability of (1) native and reconstituted self-assembled membrane
proteins, (2) functionalized biomolecular interfaces, and (3) a new material
which will be based on membrane proteins complexed with associating polymers.
The project is an interdisciplinary effort involving experiment and theory. The
theory will use statistical mechanics techniques to address the phase bahavior
and mechanics of membranes with internal degrees of freedom, as well as to
examine fundamental issues underlying self association in complex fluids. %%%
X-ray techniques employing radiation from synchrotron light sources will be used
to investigate the structure and dynamics of complexes involving proteins
(separated from native membranes) which are associated with polymers or other
molecules, or surfaces. The objective is to develop a new environment, such as a
nest of polymer molecules, with which the membrane protein will associate. If
such an association structure is developed, it would represent a new
"biomolecular" material which could trap photoactive and other membrane
molecules in a three-dimensional network. Such a structure may be useful as a
memory storage element, biosensor or other system. The project is
interdisciplinary and involves both a theory and an experimental component. ***