* 9301980
* Mathematical Sciences: Seventh International Conference on  Domain Decomposition in Scientific and Engineering Computing, Penn State University, October 27-30, 1993
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Jerry Bona, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 11/30/1994
* USD 15,000.00

The Seventh International Conference on Domain Decomposition Methods in
Scientific and Engineering Computing will be held at Penn State University from
October 27 to 30, 1993. Domain decomposition refers to a class of methods for
the simulating large-scale scientific and engineering systems on computers.
Using a divide-and conquer strategy to obtain the solution to a massive problem
by combining the solutions to numerous smaller ones, domain decomposition offers
the possibility of simulating systems that are too large and complex even for
today's powerful supercomputers using conventional solution methods. Such
problems include long term climate prediction and the study of global change and
the design of space vehicles and structures. Among computational scientist,
engineers, and mathematicians, domain decomposition techniques are of
particularly intense interest now because they are well adapted to emerging high
performance computer architectures. This conference will convene academic and
industrial researchers in domain decomposition and allied areas in order to
disseminate recent advances and stimulate further development in areas ranging
from basic theoretical research on the analysis and validation of domain
decomposition algorithms to specific industrial applications. The conference
will enhance the technology transfer between academia and industry, and provide
opportunities for students and young scientists and engineers to become involved
in this important new class of computational methods. Graduate students, young
researchers, women, minorities and people with disabilities are being especially
encouraged to attend the conference and to contribute papers. The proceedings of
this conference will be published by the American Mathematical Society and are
expected to become an important resource for researcher and users of domain
decomposition.