* 9301915
* Laser Absorptometer for Detection of Trace Species
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Allen Flusberg, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 299,986.00

9301915 Flusberg With the increase in atmospheric pollution and a new, growing
public awareness of resulting environmental damage, there is a need for new
technology to measure the concentration of trace species in the atmosphere.
Extractive methods, in which a sealed sample of air is analyzed in a laboratory,
are expensive and are inapplicable to continuous, in situ monitoring of
concentrations. Science Research Laboratory (SRL) will develop an instrument
called a laser interferometric absorptiometer (LIA) to fill this need. The basis
of this instrument is the interferometric measurement of the optical-path change
that occurs immediately after a pulsed laser beam is absorbed by trace species
present in one arm of the interferometer. This novel approach will lead to a
breakthrough in the technology of monitoring trace gases. It will allow rapid in
situ measurements of trace-gas concentrations to be made for the first time at
parts-per-trillion (ppt) levels, 100-1000 times more sensitively than
instruments based on other approaches to monitor trace species in the field. In
Phase I the characteristics of a LIA were determined, and an LIA suitable for
ppt trace-gas measurements was designed. IN Phase II, SRL will experimentally
research and demonstrate rapid ppt detection of several trace gases including
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), major pollutants that are responsible for depletion
of the ozone layer and are considered significant contributors to global
warming. In a privately funded Phase III follow-on program, SRL will develop a
commercial instrument capable of measuring industrial emissions of CFCs and
other pollutants.