* 9301094
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Phenomena in Fluid Dynamicsand Related P.D.E.'s with Applications to Atmosphere-Ocean  Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Andrew Majda, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1995
* USD 210,000.00

9301094 Majda The investigator continues his research on the partial
differential equations of fluid dynamics, involving a combination of modelling,
mathematical theory, asymptotic methods, and scientific computing. The present
project centers around various theoretical issues regarding turbulence in
incompressible flows, with a new direction involving potential applications to
atmosphere-ocean science. This proposal contains specific research projects in
the following areas: (a) Eddy diffusivity, renormalization, and Monte Carlo
simulation in turbulent transport; (b) The generation of small scale three-
dimensional structures in incompressible flow; (c) The statistical interaction
of internal gravity waves and vortical structure in stably stratified flow
fields. The range of physical scales necessary for understanding fluid flow in
the atmosphere or ocean is enormous. The processes associated with molecular
diffusion involve scales smaller than centimeters while the large scale patterns
of significance for weather prediction and other environmental issues involve
scales of hundreds to thousands of kilometers. Even the largest supercomputers
process observations over the globe at a mesh spacing with each side no smaller
than 500 kilometers. How can one assess the mean impact of the many scales,
which cannot be described in detail on the large-scale processes of
environmental significance? The proposal takes up this question. The work bears
on current issues in atmospherics and oceanics. ***