* 9301334
* Influence of Biogenic Surfactants on Gas Exchange at the    Air-Sea Interface
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1994,12/31/1996
* Nelson Frew, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 12/31/1996
* USD 477,144.00

FREW 9301334 Surface-active organic matter produced by marine phytoplankton is
known to reduce the exchange of gases at the air-water interface. Surfactants
have a first-order effect on the gas transfer velocity- wind speed relationship
up to moderate wind speeds and the mean square wave slope offers a
parameterization of transfer velocity Kw at different wind speeds and surface
viscoelastic conditions. The objective in this continuing research is to further
refine this parameterization for gas exchange in the presence of natural
surfactants and to use surfactants as a tool to examine the role of small-scale
waves and turbulence as agents affecting gas exchange. New techniques for
characterizing 3-dimensional wave spectra and for measurement of viscoelastic
damping will be applied to measurements of Kw in two circular wind-wave tanks of
different scales. A range of surface-active compounds, including synthetic and
natural surfactants, which yield films with different elastic and viscous
contributions to the dynamic surface viscoelasticity will be used to modify the
wave field during measurements of Kw and the three-dimensional wave spectra and
gas transfer and to discriminate between mechanisms involving viscoelastic
(marangoni) damping of either small scale wave or near-surface turbulence. The
research is relevant to models of upper ocean biogeochemical processes in which
gas exchange is an important component.