* 9301720
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Validation     and Expansion of a Human Computer System Design Model
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Diane Sonnenwald, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1996
* USD 49,377.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Diane H. Sonnenwald of
Rutgers University to work with Dr. Annelise Mark Pejtersen at Risoe National
Laboratory in Roskilde, Denmark for ten months and with Dr. Heinz-Dieter Boecker
at GMD-IPSI in Darmstadt, Germany for two months. Their research project
proposes to validate a descriptive human computer system design model
(Sonnenwald, 1992) that characterizes communication among users, designers, and
developers and expand it to include strategies which may help design
participants interact more effectively while creating human computer systems.
The model, developed through a qualitative analysis of an expert system design
project and telecommunications network management system design project,
describes design roles, themes, and intra- and intergroup communication networks
and their evolution during the design process. Hypotheses, based on the model,
will be generated to predict participants' interactions in design situations. An
empirical test strategy, using multiple groups in real design projects, will be
used to determine the validity of the predictions. The result will be a proposed
predictive design model that may ultimately improve the quality of design
outcomes and lead to the development of a more comprehensive design curriculum.
The award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend
for twelve months, a dependent allowance for Dr. Sonnenwald's family, and an
allowance for travel within country to meet with study participants.