* 9302157
* The Dynamics of Phase Changes in Molecular Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Lawrence Bartell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 10/31/1996
* USD 475,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Bartell will study the dynamics of homogeneous nucleation in phase
changes in which he will use two new techniques which are relevant to studying
solid-state transformations. Experimentally he will probe clusters generated in
a supersonic flow using electron diffraction at various times-of-flight to
monitor changes in packing during molecular "phase transitions." He will also
characterize the molecular behavior computationally using molecular dynamics
simulations. The formation of "critical nuclei" will be revealed by the
simulations. Many of the same phase transitions will be studied using both
techniques. %%% Studies of nucleation, such as the changes from one phase to
another in solid- or liquid-state matter, are of crucial importance in many
areas of science and technology, such as meteorology, materials engineering,
petroleum catalysis, and earth sciences. This research program aims at acquiring
a better understanding of such homogeneous phase changes by examining the
different ways that molecules are packed in arrays. A special emphasis of this
program is a comparison of theoretical prediction and experimental measurement
of the rate of phase transitions. New tests of nucleation theory will be made,
resulting in insights into the molecular mechanisms of phase changes.