* 9302388
* Highly Parallel Wavelength Distributed Data Interface       for Fiber-Optic Local Area Networks
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Allan Gerrish, Optivision Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 01/31/1996
* USD 299,980.00

This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is designed to provide an
opportunity for small business, particularly the small high technology firm, to
participate in NSF research. Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to
select promising proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality
research. Phase II is the principal research project. Phase III is the
conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications and
technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture capital or other
non-federal financing. This Phase II project addresses the use of wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM) and optical amplification to handle multimedia
communications with varying data rates in both analog and digital formats in a
single optical network. In Phase I the researcher developed an optically-
amplified subnetwork-partititoned WDM network concept with the following
attributes: multiple wavelength-addressed virtual subnetworks, compatibility
with other network standards including FDDI; incremental and flexibile
upgradability; and high reliability. In Phase II the company is designing,
building, and evaluating a small scale experimental 4-node WDM network
integrating wavelength MUXs/DeMUXs, tunable transmitters/receivers, optical
amplifiers, a star coupler and an FDDI adapter board. The network will serve as
a testbed for subsequent Phase III commercialization.