* 9302069
* The Kinetics and Surface Chemistry of Mineral               Corrosion
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 175,155.00

We will continue our research into the mechanisms by which mineral surfaces
interact with an aqueous solution during corrosion. In particular, we will
determine the enthalpy contribution to the activation energy (Eexp) for mineral
dissolution that arises from the rapid acid-base reactions which precede the
rate-controlling step in dissolution. These acid-base reactions impart a
distinct pH-dependence of the overall reaction. In research funded under
EAR-910583, we showed that the enthalpy arising from acid-base reactions is the
largest contribution to the Eexp (Casey and Sposito, 1992). This contribution
varies considerably with pH and temperature, and is poorly constrained for
silicate minerals. This research is important because atomistic models of the
reaction energetics , such as molecular-orbital calculations (e.g., Casey et
al., 1990), employ Eexp values as a gauge of the model accuracy. We also will
indirectly probe the elementary step reaction controlling dissolution of simple
minerals containing first-row transition metals. We predict that the affect of
certain rate- enhancing ligands on the dissolution rates of these minerals will
differ systematically and predictable with the delectronic structure of bonds to
oxygen. This prediction arises from differences in the activation entropies and
activation volumes of solvent exchange reactions around corresponding dissolved
metal complexes. In previous work (e.g., Casey, 1991; Casey and Westrich, 1992)
we found a close correspondence between reactivity trends for solvent-exchange
reactions and metal removal from a dissolving oxide or orthosilicate mineral
surface.