* 9302884
* Role of Two-Way Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction on             Extratropical Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Robert Gallimore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1996
* USD 344,543.00

The role of ocean-atmosphere interactions on climate variability in
extratropical latitudes, both within the season and during transitions between
seasons, will be examined. The focus of the proposed research will be on
assessing the two-way interactive relationship between temperature anomalies
produced in the ocean and synoptic scale transient activity (e.g. locations and
paths of high and low pressure systems) and related low frequency flow patterns
produced in the atmosphere. The results will aid in understanding the causes of
climate variability and the potential for predictability on seasonal time
scales. This research builds upon (1) past studies which investigated the one-
way forced effects of SST anomalies (prescribed) on atmospheric transient eddy
processes and (2) past work which investigated the two-way interaction between
mid-latitude SST and atmospheric circulation anomalies as deduced in long multi-
year seasonal integrations of a low resolution atmospheric model coupled to a
constant depth mixed layer ocean. For these studies a higher resolution
atmospheric model (NCAR CCM1) will be used so that the climatic behavior of
transient eddy processes can be simulated more realistically. The simple mixed
layer ocean model has been chosen to permit examination of the ways that the
important ocean-atmosphere energy exchange influences the evolution of middle
latitude SST anomalies. Three experiments are planned: (1) a 100-year seasonal
integration of the atmospheric model (CCM1) using prescribed climatological
SSTs, (2) a 100-year seasonal integration of CCM1 coupled to a constant 50 m
depth mixed layer ocean (CCM1CO) and (3) a 40-50 year seasonal integration of
CCM1 coupled to a constant 50 m depth mixed layer ocean but with prescribed
forcing of observed tropical SST variability (CCM1CO/TROPSET). The variability
of transient eddy activity (storm tracks) and abrupt seasonal shifts in
circulation in the absence of SST variability wil be investigated in Experiment
1. The two-way influence between model produced extratropical anomalies and
storm tracks (and the associated time mean atmospheric circulation) will be
examined in Experiment 2. The modifying influence of tropical SST variability
(which includes El Nino cycles) on middle latitude SST anomalies and variability
of extratropical atmospheric transient eddy activity will be assessed by
comparing the results of Experiments 2 and 3. The behavior of synoptic scale
storm tracks will be characterized by examination of model variation in RMS
time-filtered 1000 mb and 500 mb heights and in the processes of baroclinic eddy
momentum and heat fluxes; the determination of abrupt seasonal changes in
atmospheric circulation will include an analysis of model energetics. Dominant
SST anomaly patterns and their relationship to atmospheric processes will be
examined using various statistical and composite analyses including EOF, lag
correlation, singular value decomposition and canonical correlation methods.