* 9302897
* RUI:  Nuclear Magnetic Moment Measurements Using On-Line    B-NMR Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Warren Rogers, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing Grant
* Harold C. Britt
* 05/31/1995
* USD 29,138.00

Nuclear ground state magnetic moments of short-lived B-unstable nuclei are
measured using B radiation-detected nuclear magnetic resonance (B-NMR)
spectroscopy in conjunction with recoil mass separation and tilted foil
polarization. After separation from the beam and other reaction products, recoil
nuclei are polarized by passage through an array of tilted carbon foils, after
which they are implanted in a crystal host immersed in a strong magnetic field
whose direction coincides with the polarization axis. Angular distribution of
the B-decay is asymmetric parallel and anti-parallel to the polarization axis
owing to the parity- violating nature of B-decay. Search for the NMR involves
applying a weak RF magnetic field oriented perpendicular to the polarization
axis, and finding the frequency at which decay asymmetry disappears. Knowledge
of this frequency and of the magnetic field in which the nucleus precesses
allows simple extraction of the nuclear magnetic moment. The current focus of
this project is 23Mg, the last T = 1/2 mirror nucleus in the sd- shell whose
magnetic moment is unknown. Successful measurement of its moment will supply an
important nuclear datum to the study of mirror nuclei in the sd-shell, and will
contribute to the understanding of the shell model structure of the nucleus.
Similar measurements are planned for other nuclei, both in the sd- and fp-
shells.