* 9302803
* SGER:  The Influence of Hurricane Iniki on Metrosideros-    Acacia Forest Ecosystems on Kauai
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Kenneth Kaneshiro, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1994
* USD 10,000.00

On September 11, 1992, Hurricane Iniki, the most powerful hurricane to hit the
State of Hawaii this century, struck the Island of Kauai with steady wind speeds
of over 230 km/hr and gust over 280 km/hr. Everything in the path of the
hurricane was profoundly transformed; homes, public building, hotels,
agricultural crops, and the natural features of the island were severely damages
or destroyed. An aerial survey by the State Division of Forestry and Wildlife
described the vegetation of the mountains as being "mowed by a giant weed-
eater&gt;" This event presents a once-in-a-century opportunity to study the
consequences of such a phenomenon for the natural environment of the Hawaiian
Islands. Prior research on Kauai will, in some cases, provide a baseline from
which to measure changes wrought by the hurricane and track subsequent responses
as t he ecosystems adjust to its short, medium and long-term consequences. The
research proposed her seeks to measure the immediate effects of the hurricane
and to monitor the ongoing consequences of this natural phenomenon. Of
particular interest are the genetic effects of a population flush of some
organisms, e.g. some species in the insect family Drosophilidae, in response to
a huge but temporary increase in decaying organic mater. The population
explosion may followed by a long period of small population size as the decaying
material diminish and since it may be months or even years before some of the
vegetation is restored to pre-hurricane conditions. Understand the genetics
consequences of the sudden increase in population size followed by an extended
period of small population size is important for understanding the ability of
populations to survive catastrophic environmental conditions. Dr. Kaneshiro will
also monitor population levels of exotic drosophilid species which have been
shown to be a good indicator for disturbed habitats. As exotic fruit plants
invade the now open forest, an increase is expected in exotic drosophilid
species which are associate with the exotic plants. As the native forest canopy
recovers and is restored to pre-hurricane conditions, a decrease in populations
size of endemic drosophilids should occur. The results of the research here
would therefore further document the significance of the drosophilids as an
important indicator species group for monitoring the relative health of Hawaii
native ecosystem. //