* 9302562
* Colloidal Trace Metals and DOC/DON in the Surface Waters of the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1993,12/31/1995
* William Landing, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 12/31/1995
* USD 129,354.00

The research involves participation in the 1993 Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission Open-Ocean Baseline Survey for Trace Metals: Atlantic Ocean
expedition, scheduled aboard the Canadian ship CSS Hudson between July and
August, 1993. The IOC Open-Ocean Baseline program is organized t evaluate the
current concentrations of a variety of trace metals and other anthropogenic
pollutants in the major water masses of the world oceans. This will stand as a
"baseline" against which future anthropogenic impacts can be compared. The
proposed cruise track and station locations will allow sampling of deep, source
water masses to the North Atlantic in the overflow and formation regions. In
between deep profiling stations, near-surface samples will be collected in
transects (every 3-4 hours) using a clean, towed "fish"/pumping system. Samples
will be collected by the PI under "contamination-free" conditions for a number
of U.S. and international participating laboratories. Samples from the deep
profiling stations will be filtered under clean-lab conditions for particulate
(&gt;0.4 um) and total dissolved (&lt;0.4 um) trace elements. Samples from the
surface transect will be processed for particulate (&gt;0.4 um), total dissolved
(0.4 um), colloidal (3,000 MW to 0.4 um), and truly dissolved (&lt;3,000 MW)
metals and analyzed by the PI for Cr(VI), Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, and Pb.
Samples for dissolved DOC and DON fractions (as described for metals above) will
also be collected along with the colloidal trace metal samples and analyzed by
the high temperature catalytic oxidation technique to address the unresolved
questions regarding the importance of high MW DOC/DON in seawater.