* 9302735
* Mathematical Sciences: Multiplicative Structures on Free    Resolutions &amp; Local Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Hema Srinivasan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 57,000.00

The principal investigator will study three areas of commutative algebra. The
first area is concerned with multiplicative structures on free resolutions. She
will find a criterion for the existence of an associative commutative
differential graded algebra structure on the minimal free resolution on cyclic
modules. She will also determine if such a structure exists for the minimal
resolutions of the cyclic modules defined by the ideals in the linkage class of
a complete intersection. The second area is concerned with fundamental groups
and equivalences of singularities. In particular, she will determine a number k
such that for a given determinantal ideal I in a power series ring R and for any
other ideal J of the same height, J equivalent to I modulo the kth power of the
Jacobean ideal of I guarantees the existence of an isomorphism of R which maps I
onto J so that J is also a determinantal ideal. The third area is to determine,
in positive characteristics, if the symbolic algebra of a monomial prime is
finitely generated. This is reasearch in the field of algebraic geometry, one of
the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary
flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origins, it treated figures that
could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.
Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis
and topology, and conversely is finding application in those fields as well as
in theoretical computer science and robotics.