* 9302839
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Physics of     DNA and Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Adam Simon, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 35,750.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Adam Simon to work
with Dr. David Bensimon at Ecole Normale Superieure, CNRS in Paris, France.
Their proposed research program concerns the physics of DNA and proteins. It
consists of two general parts. The first one is a plan to accurately
characterize the physical properties of DNA, including the elasticity and
torsional strength using laser tweezer based experiments, and to study the
physics and dynamics of DNA replication and polymerization, including the
activity of the associated motor proteins involved. For the second part, they
intend to make precise picoNewton force measurements of motor protein pairs,
like actin-myosin, using an enhanced magnetic feedback non-contact tip on an
Atomic Force Microscope. Precise interaction force measurements can be made by
coating the tip, for example, with a low density of myosin molecules and
measuring the interaction force with an actin filament. They expect to reveal
details of the single molecule interaction, allowing understanding of the
elementary force generator. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel, a stipend for twelve months and a small travel allowance
for in-country travel.