* 9302970
* Mathematical Sciences: Conley Index Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9302970 Mischaikow Mischaikow is using the Conley index to study the global
dynamics of evolution equations. The first question which Mischaikow is trying
to answer is: given a parameterized family of differential equations what
minimal dynamic structure is common to the system at all parameter values. For
equations such as Cahn-Hilliard, Ginzburg-Landau, Fitz Hugh-Nagumo, differential
delay with negative feedback and others the goal is to derive nontrivial model
flows and continuous surjections from the global attractors of the systems of
interest onto the model flows. For other dynamical systems such as the Henon
map, the Lorenz equations, non-monotone cyclic feedback systems the goal is to
obtain a semi-conjugacy from an invariant set to subshift dynamics on a finite
set of symbols. The second question involves singular perturbation problems. The
goal in this case is to compute Conley indices for the perturbed system (and
thereby gain information about the dynamics) using only the dynamics of the
singular system. The problems being considered include thin domains and fast
slow systems. Most mathematical models are not derived from first principals,
and hence, are based on heuristics, intuitive understandings, and approximations
of the physical system. This means that it is impossible to know precisely the
appropriate parameter values or even nonlinearities used in the model.
Therefore, it is important that the qualitative dynamic structures observed in
the mathematical system be robust with respect to changes in the nonlinearities
and parameters. The goal of Mischaikow's work is to develop applicable
mathematical techniques which can identify such robust dynamics structures. ***