* 9302120
* Fluxes of Dissolved Organic Matter form Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* David Burdige, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1998
* USD 249,856.00

9302120 Burdige Previous work has begun to illustrate the important role that
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) fluxes from marine sediments play in oceanic and
sedimentary carbon cycling. At the same time, benthic fluxes of dissolved
organic nitrogen (DON) represent a poorly quantified component of sedimentary
nitrogen remineralization that may be similarly important in oceanic and
sedimentary nitrogen cycling. The goals of this proposal are therefore to
continue studies of benthic DOC fluxes, and to begin studies examining benthic
DON fluxes. Pore water DOC an DON studies will also be carried out in
conjunction with these flux studies. In part, this work will examine the
characteristics of pore water DOC and DON as they relate to the controls on
benthic fluxes of DOC and DON. Our proposed work will be carried out at sites in
the Chesapeake Bay on the California continental margin. Studies in continental
margin sediments are of particular interest since several lines of evidence
suggest that carbon and nitrogen cycling in margin sediments (and benthic fluxes
of DOC and DON from margin sediments) may play important roles in oceanic carbon
and nitrogen cycling. Given the range of characteristics among the sites chosen,
the data will provide further insights into the factors controlling benthic
fluxes of DOC and DON. These results will be used to improve estimates of the
global DOC flux from marine sediments and to initiate a similar examination of
the role of benthic DON fluxes in oceanic and sedimentary nitrogen cycling.
Finally, these new results will be used to critically examine a model which may
describe the relationship between benthic DOC fluxes and overall rates of
benthic carbon remineralization.