* 9302040
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron       Microscope for Electron Channelling Contrast Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Martin Crimp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 168,475.00

9302040 Crimp It is proposed to purchase a field emission gun scanning electron
microscope (FEG SEM) equipped with digital image processing which will be
dedicated to support research in materials engineering. This equipment will be
fitted with a electron channelling contrast imaging (ECCI) imaging system
currently being constructed in conjunction with a National Science Foundation
Young Investigator Award. The FEG-SEM equipped with the ECCI system, which will
be the first facility of its type in the United States, will be used for several
research projects which require microcrystalline analysis, but are not possible
with conventional transmission electron microscopy (TEM), in particular:
Intrinsically brittle materials, including intermetallic alloys will be examined
using bulk samples deformed in-situ to determine the nature of the dislocation
generation and motion at and near the crack tip zone. Other research programs
will also use the ECCI capability for a wide range of materials investigations
including microstructure morphologies in polymer matrix composites, interfacial
characterization of intermetallic matrix composites and compliant layer
coatings, and damage accumulation studies at fracture surfaces. Additionally,
the FEG SEM has advantages over conventional W and LaB6 electron source SEMs,
such as greater resolutions (1.5 nm) and the ability to examine non-conducting
materials at low voltages without the need to apply a conductive coating.
Numerous researchers throughout the Department of Materials Science and
Mechanics, and Michigan State University will use these advantages to enhance
their materials research. ***