* 9302352
* Crustal Genesis and Mineralization in the Eastern Dharwar   Craton, South India, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Gilbert Hanson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1996
* USD 48,680.00

Description: This project supports collaboration by Dr. Gilbert Hanson of State
University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook with Dr. V. Rajamani of Jawaharlal
Nehru University (JNU) in New Delhi on geochemical study of the Eastern Dharwar
Craton (EDC) in South India. The study is aimed at a hypothesis that the EDC is
made up of accretionary terranes and that gold mineralization occurred
associated with accretion of the terranes. If there are different terranes, it
is intended to determine the histories of the rocks within the various terranes
and determine the timing of their assemblage. The field work will continue
geological studies in the Ramagiri Schist Belt, and begin studies of the Hutti-
Maski Schist Belt 500 Km north of the Kolar Schist Belt along regional
structural trend. The work will include collecting samples by the U.S. and
Indian scientists in the field, to be followed by chemical analysis mainly at
the SUNY laboratory by the U.S. and Indian co-investigators. Some of the
chemical analysis will be done at JNU by Dr. Rajamani and his students. Scope:
This project is building on a well-established working relationship by the two
scientists. They have several joint publications as a result of their previous
work. This project is likely to continue this productive scientific cooperation.
U.S. Graduate students and post doctorates, from the SUNY at Stony Brook, are
involved in the field work, and are expected to gain experience in international
research efforts.