* 9302125
* The Biogeochemistry of Hydrogen Sulfide and Carbonyl Sulfidein the Surface Ocean:  Production and Consumption Mechanismsand Rates
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1996
* William Dunstan, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 10/31/1996
* USD 301,380.00

Hydrogen sulfide in oxic seawater can be found as uncomplexed dissolved species
("free sulfide. H2S+HS+S2), as dissolved metal sulfide complexes ("complexed
sulfide"), and as particulate metal sulfides. The biogeochemical cycle of
sulfide species in the surface ocean includes sea-air exchange, reactions with
trace metals, production via carbonyl sulfide (OCS) hydrolysis and emissions
from phytoplankton, and removal via oxidation and particle sinking. In this
fashion, an understanding of the cycling of OCS and hydrogen sulfide species is
relevant to the global sulfur cycle and to the cycling of trace metals.
Analytical methods have been developed to determine OCS and hydrogen sulfide
speciation (uncomplexed/complexed; particulate/dissolved) at picomolar
concentrations, the rate of OCS hydrolysis in seawater has been measured, and
phytoplankton has been identified as important sources of dissolved and
particulate sulfide in the surface ocean. This research will quantify the
remaining portions of the hydrogen sulfide cycle, with the specific objectives
being (1) to determine the formation constants of sulfide complexes with Cd, Ni,
and Zn, and use these in thermodynamic complexation models to help elucidate the
chemical speciation of dissolved sulfide; (2) to determine the rate of oxidation
of uncomplexed sulfide by iodate; (3) to measure the flux of particulate sulfide
production by phytoplankton; (4) to quantify the rates of total dissolved and
particulate sulfide production by phytoplankton; (5) to evaluate whether OCS, a
precursor of uncomplexed sulfide and a radiatively important gas, can be
produced during the regeneration of particulate organic matter.