* 9302546
* FASEB Summer Research Conference:                           Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements to be held  at Copper Mountain, Colorado from July 25-30, 1993
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Rodney Rothstein, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 15,000.00

9302546 Rothstein This grant provides partial funding for a FASEB Surnmer
Research Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements, which is
being held July 25 to July 30, 1993 in Copper Mountain, CO. The conference is
under the auspices of the Federation of the American Societies of Experimental
Biology (FASEB). The format of this meeting will be the same as that used by the
Gordon Research Conferences. There will be nine major sessions with 36 invited
speakers. The chairperson of each session will give an introductory talk on the
historical background and the current problems to acquaint all participants with
the topics in that session. Poster sessions will be held throughout the meeting.
Informal workshops of small groups will be arranged before or at the meeting.
Topics will cover a broad range of organisms from mammalian cells to bacteria.
Both in vivo and in vitro approaches will be presented. This conference is the
only regularly scheduled meeting in the United States that is devoted
exclusively to genetic recombination and genome rearrangements. The topics to be
covered at this meeting are current approaches to gene therapy, genome
rearrangements that lead to cancer and other diseases, problems in linkage
analysis, genetics of homologous recombination, enzymology of homologous
recombination (strand transferases, nucleases, and resolvases), physical
structure of recombination intermediates, repair of mismatch sites in
heteroduplex recombination intermediates, site-specific recombination and
regulation of gene expression, and bacterial and eukaryotic transposition. %%%
This meeting provides a crucial interface between scientists interested in the
basic mechanistic aspects of recombination and those interested in practical
applications, such as gene therapy, creation of animal models of disease, and
remodeling of genomes to test functional alterations of gene regulatory
sequences. ***