* 9302034
* U.S.-Mexico Workshop on Sociological Perspectives of Labor  Market Areas; Cuernavaca, Mexico, November 17-19, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Charles Tolbert, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 02/28/1995
* USD 13,300.00

9302034 Singelmann This U.S.-Mexico award will support a workshop on the
sociological perspectives of labor markets. The workshop, organized by
Professors Joachim Singelmann and Charles Tolbert of Louisiana State University,
and Professors Humberto Munoz of the Universidad Autonoma Nacional de Mexico
(UNAM) and Orlandina de Oliveira of the El Colegio de Mexico, will bring
together scholars with expertise in quantitative measures of labor market areas
and in case study approaches. The primary objective of the workshop is to build
collaborative ventures in both countries that will enhance opportunities for
joint research. Though labor market research programs are well established in
both Mexico and the U.S., the research traditions on both sides of the border
are very different. The Mexican approach primarily consists of rich case studies
of local market areas, whereas the U.S. research tradition has emphasized broad
labor market areas that can serve as statistical units of analysis While the
Mexican and the U.S. approach are complementary, there have been few attempts to
combine their perspective in comparative work. This workshop will contribute
toward that goal by bringing together Mexican and U.S. sociologists to discuss
collaboration on labor market research. This cooperation is critical if the
social science communities of both countries are to monitor and assess the
effects of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). ***