* 9302380
* Applications of Neutron Scattering Techniques to the        Investigation of Prototypical Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Jeffrey Lynn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 04/30/1997
* USD 375,000.00

This project will explore three general avenuew of research using both polarized
and unpolarized neutron scattering techniques. The first involves the magnetic
ordering and spin fluctuations associated with copper and rare earth moments in
the oxide superconductors. the second concerns the superconducting aspects of
these systems, including the investigation of the nature of the vortex state in
these 'magnetic-superconductor' materials, as well as the determination of the
magnetic penetration depth in superconductors via polarized neutron
reflectometry. The third project deals with the spin dynamics of isotropic
ferromagnets. Polarized beam techniques will be used to separate the
longitudinal and transverse spin dynamics of materials, such as Invar alloys
where substantial discrepencies have been found between the magnetic excitation
spectrum observed directly with neutrons and the temperature dependence of the
magnetization. Investigation of the longitudinal and transverse fluctuation
spectra just below the Curie temperature, and their behavior as a function of
applied field will be undertaken. %%% This project will explore three general
avenues of materials research using neutron scattering techniques. The first
involves the fundamental structural and magnetic properties of the cuprate
superconductors, in an effort to establish the origins of the superconducting
state in these novel systems. The second aspect concerns the determination and
understanding of the materials properties which control the superconducting
parameters of central importance to commercial applications, such as vortex
pinning to produce high critical current materials. The final area deals with
the fundamental and practical properties of soft magnetic materials, which have
commercial applications as transformer cores, magnetic shielding, etc.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the Invar class of soft magnets, as these
are of technical importance because their density does not change with
temperature, in contrast to most metals which expand upon heating.