* 9302985
* Mathematical Sciences: Bergman Spaces: Theory and           Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Boris Korenblum, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1995
* USD 35,000.00

Korenblum 9302985 This project is a continuation of mathematical research into
classical function theory focusing on Bergman spaces and developments which have
issued from recent advances. A fundamental breakthrough occurred when H.
Hedenmalm discovered a factorization of functions in Bergman space analogous to
the classical one of F. Riesz which helped clarify the structure of the Hardy
spaces. Among the goals of this research, work will be done to describe the
invariant subspaces of the analytic Lebesgue spaces, on understanding the
nonstandard invariant subspaces and determining the domination relations on zero
sets. Work will also be done on the Green's function for the biharmonic operator
in n-dimensional Euclidean space and algebras of harmonic functions in three-
dimensional space. The latter is concerned with locating those complex harmonic
functions whose modulus is also harmonic. These are thought to be the closest
generalization to odd dimensions of analytic functions. Complex analysis has a
long, distinguished mathematical history. It has been a basis for studies in
diverse areas as number theory, computation, approximation theory and potential
theory. Although the classical theory has been thoroughly investigated for
centuries, the newer Bergman spaces have been slow to develop, despite their
recognized importance. The recent work of Hedelmalm has completely changed the
landscape to a point where one fully expects major thrusts to take place in this
area similar to those which occurred when the theory of Hardy spaces flourished
in the 1950's and 60's. ***