* 9302853
* Dissertation Research:  Transition to Domestic Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 6,755.00

Under the direction of Dr. Geoffrey Clark, Ms. Jane Peterson will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project is to determine how
social organization changed in the Near East over the period from ca. 15,000 to
6,000 years ago. During this time plants and animals were first domesticated and
thus Ms. Peterson is attempting to relate changing social systems to a changing
subsistence base. To accomplish this goal she will study three classes of data.
First she will examine materials and site plans from a series of archaeological
excavations. She will look at the patterning of activities as revealed by
structures and artifacts on the ground and relate these to gender specific work.
Secondly, she will take advantage of cultural data associated with human
burials. With this information, she can attempt to relate the type and number of
material remains to age and sex as revealed in skeletal materials. Finally she
will analyze skeletons themselves. Bone responds to repeated stress and
therefore those muscles which receive heavy use can be determined by examining
them for increased thickness and growth at attachment regions. With this
approach it is possible to reconstruct specific activities and relate them to
gender and age. A central goal of archaeology is to understand how complex
social systems develop. A major shift in both human subsistence and social
organization occurred with the domestication of plants and animals and their
incorporation into the human diet. Closely related to this are gross changes in
patterns of social organization for with domestication sites become larger and
many new traits such as pottery appear. While archaeologists know a great deal
about the subsistence part of the equation, they do not understand on a detailed
level how social organization was altered. The work by Ms. Peterson will provide
new insight into this question. This research is important for several reasons.
It will synthesize a large and diverse body of data. It will shed new light on
the origins of complex society and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.