* 9302103
* Biogeochemical Cycling of Mercury in the North Atlantic     Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* William Fitzgerald, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 06/30/1995
* USD 64,517.00

Subject: Biogeochemical Cycling of Mercury In The North Atlantic Ocean This
research will investigate the speciation, distribution and biogeochemical
cycling of Hg in the North Atlantic Ocean. The ocean is an important source and
sink for atmospheric Hg, and plays a significant role in the global Hg cycle.
Knowledge of the behavior and fate of Hg in the marine environment is hindered
by the lack of information on the distribution and speciation of Hg in open
ocean regions. The Intergovernment Oceanographic Commission (IOC) Baseline Trace
Metal cruise aboard the C.S.S. Hudson in June/July 1993 will provide essential
data, as well as the supporting chemical and physical oceanographic program, to
complement and extend previous oceanic studies of Hg, particularly those in the
productive equatorial Pacific Ocean. Shipboard analyses will be made for
reactive Hg, and dissolved gaseous species (Hg degree and dimethylHg). Post
cruise analyses will be conducted for total Hg, participate Hg, and for
monomethylHg. The research will focus on the distribution of methylated Hg
species and elemental Hg in an effort to ascertain the principal sources and
sinks for these compounds in the surface and deep ocean. The data obtained will
allow the testing of current hypotheses concerning the sources and fate of Hg
species in open ocean waters, and will broaden the understanding of the role of
the ocean in the global Hg cycle.