* 9302788
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Genetic Analysis of      Nitrogen Fixation in Acetobacter diazotrophicus, an         Endophyte of Sugar Cane
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1997
* Christina Kennedy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 06/30/1997
* USD 35,810.00

9302788 Kennedy This U.S.-Brazil Program award will support the collaboration of
Christina Kennedy of the University of Arizona and Johanna Dobereiner of EMBRAPA
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The project aims to isolate and mutate genes of
Azobacter diazotrophicus necessary for nitrogenase enzyme activity. Nitrogen-
fixing bacteria have been isolated from sugar cane varieties in Brazil in which
up to 70 percent of total plant nitrogen comes from atmospheric nitrogen
(dinitrogen). The major organism isolated, A. diazotrophicus, is an endophyte
thought to be responsible for the fixation of dinitrogen and transfer of
products to the plant system. The researchers will use mutants unable to fix
nitrogen to prove or disprove a role for this species in providing fixed
nitrogen in sugar cane. They will also characterize genes involved in bacterial
responses to environmental factors such as ammonia and oxygen that control
nitrogenase biosynthesis. Strategies to increase amounts of fixed nitrogen
provided to plants will be applied to construct strains that produce nitrogenase
in the presence of ammonia or have increased tolerance to oxygen. The U.S. side
has expertise in the genetics of nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The Brazilian
laboratory is where A. diazotrophicus was identified and its colonization of
plants is being studied. Both sides will benefit from establishing the
significance of a novel and potentially important nitrogen-fixing bacterial
species. ***