* 9302809
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Cretaceous     Volcanism in the Pacific:  Distribution in Space, Time, and Source Composition
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1994
* Malcolm Pringle, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/1994
* USD 38,750.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Malcolm S. Pringle to
work with Professor Dr. Hubert Staudigel at the Free University in the
Netherlands. The Cretaceous volcanism of the western Pacific is thought to be an
ancient analog of the anomalous intraplate volcanism seen in the southern
Pacific today, and may have a causal relationship with the systematic, global
changes which culminated in the Mid-Cretaceous Greenhouse. The proposed research
project will more fully characterize the distribution in space and time of this
volcanism and its mantle source, and investigate whether this volcanism is the
result of one large "Superplume" or a series of smaller, more discrete events.
The principal tools of this study will be radiometric age determinations, to
determine the original position of each site of Cretaceous volcanism, and
radiogenic isotope analyses, to characterize the mantle source at that
particular location and time. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel to the Netherlands, an allowance to attend research-related
meetings and a stipend for twelve months.