* 9302792
* U.S.-Hungary Research on Photochemistry and Photophysics of Copper (I) Complexes in Solution
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Kenneth Stevenson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1997
* USD 14,300.00

9302792 Stevenson This U.S.-Hungary research on the "Photochemistry and
Photophysics of Copper(I) Complexes in Solution" is between Dr. Kenneth L.
Stevenson of Purdue University and Dr. Attila Horvath and Dr. Otto Horvath of
the University of Veszprem. This work will examine (1) hydrated electron
scavenging mechanisms in the photolysis of copper(I) complexes with halo-,
pseudohalo, and amine ligands, and (2) luminescence and the mechanism for
exciplex formation in such complexes, and in similar complexes of other
coordinating metals. The study will use uv-visible adsorption and luminescence
spectroscopy, and Nd-YAG laser flash photolysis in the nano-second time regime
and ultraviolet wavelength region. Results should improve our understanding of
the fundamental behavior of exciplexes and solvated electrons in inorganic
photochemical systems. Copper offers many possibilities for efficient
photogeneration of hydrated electrons, which could be used for certain chemical
processes requiring reducing agents. This proposed research in chemistry
fulfills the program objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts
in the U.S. and Hungary to combine complementary talents and pool research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.