* 9302584
* Mathematical Sciences: Pade and Other Rational              Approximation; Moment Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Wolfgang Thron, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 48,971.00

Jones 9302584 This mathematical research project will focus on the approximation
of complex valued functions of a complex variable. The work centers on the use
of rational interpolation by Pade approximates. These are rational functions
which match the power series of specific functions at two or more points. Within
this framework investigations will be carried out on the indeterminate strong
Stieltjes moment problem and the associated orthogonal Laurent polynomials, on
applications of Szego polynomials to digital signal processing and the
convergence of Pade continued fractions relative to classical special functions
including truncation error analysis. Finally, a comprehensive survey of
continued fraction representations of mathematical functions along with a guide
to their computation will be prepared. Large scale computation will be done for
experiments in search of general properties that can be proven and for graphical
and numerical illustration of the convergence behavior of rational approximants.
In many scientific applications, the relevant functions are not computable by
elementary methods. Approximation theory, as exemplified by this project, seeks
to establish and catalogue methods for approximating more or less general
functions by means of specific, easily computable substitutes. It is important
that the methods developed also provide error analysis and, where possible,
algorithms for efficient implementation of the approximations. ***