* 9302615
* From Text Corpora to Text Databases:  Research in Text      Processing and Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Ralph Grishman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 01/31/1997
* USD 203,500.00

9302615 Strzalkowski From Text Corpora to Text Databases: Research in Text
Processing and Retrieval This is the first year funding of a three-year
continuing award. The goal of this research is to explore the potential of
natural language processing in automated information retrieval from large,
minimally structured text libraries. This effort includes development of more
effective techniques of indexing, routing, contents approximation, abstracting
and creation of hierarchical domain maps from textual data. Both linguistic and
statistical methods are used. The main trust is to find satisfactory solutions
to the following problems: (1) obtaining an accurate and versatile
representation of database contents for search purposes; and (2) devising
algorithms that can accomplish this task with the speed and robustness to match
or exceed that of statistical systems. In order to create an accurate
representation of database contents that would be able to support various types
of search, an extensive natural language processing component is created.
Linguistic processing includes stochastic part of speech tagging, dictionary-
assisted stemming, syntactic parsing, phrase extraction and disambiguation, and
semantic correlation of concepts underlying the database domain. This research
is based extensively on empirical experiments with large text collections. It is
expected to produce technologies that will significantly improve the expected
performance levels for top-of-the-line full-text information retrieval systems.
***