* 9302591
* Mathematical Sciences: Support for FORTE '93 The Sixth International Conference on Formal Description Techniques
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Richard Tenney, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 12/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9302591 Tenney FORTE'93 will be the Sixth International Conference on Formal
Description Techniques ("FDTs"). The FORTE series of conferences concentrates on
formal techniques applicable to distributed systems and protocols. Initially the
focus was on the techniques standardized by ISO and CCITT (Estelle, LOTOS, and
SDI), but the scope has widened considerably, and recent FORTE conferences have
also included papers on CCS, CSP, ANS, 1 , Z, Actor, VDM, RAISE, and other
techniques. In addition to a strong theoretical component, FORTE, has always
included a practical component, attracting, practitioners in the field by
actively soliciting papers from industry and including demonstrations of
electronic tools for manipulating formal descriptions of systems. Much of the
importance of these formal techniques is the contribution that their use can
make in improving the software of distributed systems. The conference provides a
forum for presentation of the state of the art in theory, application, tools and
industrialization of formal techniques and provides an excellent orientation for
newcomers. By bringing together both researchers and practitioners, FORTE
conferences open communications between these groups. This helps keep the
research vital and improves the state of the practitioner's art. By facilitating
the participation of graduate students, the NSF broadens the experience of the
students and helps assure growth in the United States in this important research
area.