* 9302015
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Regulation     of Gene Expression in Drosophila Neurogenesis
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1994
* Deborah Eastman, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/1994
* USD 25,500.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Deborah Eastman to the
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Crete to work with Dr.
Christos Delidakis. Their research will focus on the role of the neurogenic
Enhancer of Split ıE(spl)! gene products during embryonic neurogenesis. These
genes code for proteins with a conserved Helix-Loop-Helix motif, which makes
them members of a family of proteins that regulate transcription. Dr. Delidakis
has focused on elucidating the role of the E(spl) HLH proteins in the lateral
inhibition during embryonic neurogenesis and in later developmental events. Dr.
Eastman will focus on several of the E(spl) HLH proteins. Her main objective
will be to biochemically characterize them in order to determine their function
and to determine the regulation of that function by other neurogenic gene
products in the signalling pathway. These characterization studies will begin by
determining whether these proteins bind DNA. DNA binding activity will be
assayed and specific DNA binding sites will be determined. Putative DNA binding
sites will be sequenced and genes downstream of these sites will be cloned and
sequenced. It will also be determined whether other proteins are complexed with
specific E(spl) HLH proteins and if disruption of these complexes affects DNA
binding. Additionally, a genetic screen will be performed to detect other gene
products which may interact with the E(spl) HLH proteins. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a stipend for
twelve months.