* 9302393
* Subglass Relaxation Processes in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Richard Boyd, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/1996
* USD 270,000.00

The details of the molecular mechanisms underlying subglass relaxations in
amorphous polymers remain largely a mystery. Although there is a considerable
body of useful experimental description, the experiments are rarely specific in
revealing the nature of the motions taking place. Molecular modelling or
simulation is becoming of increasing value in interpreting the details of
molecular motion. An important recent advance has the been the ability to
generate, via molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, detailed description of the
structure and packing in amorphous polymeric melts and glasses. In the present
work, such advances in modelling will be exploited in describing subglass
relaxations. The work will be done in association with dielectric relaxation
experiments. Systems to be studied include subglass processes in main-chain
liquid crystalline aromatic polyesters; subglass processes in other aromatic
polyesters; the gramma- relaxation in polyethylene; subglass processes that are,
by design, at very low temperature by virtue of low internal rotational
barriers; and, side-chain mesogen liquid crystalline polymers. Unlike many other
materials, such as metals and ceramics, the usefulness of all polymeric
materials depends on the fact that they are very dynamic on the molecular scale.
That is, the constituent molecules are in a constant state of motion and the
kinds of motion determine the properties. Even in polymers that are apparently
rigid and glass-like, residual molecular motions determine such behavior as
strength and toughness. However there is not yet a clear understanding of these
motions. The present work is directed toward attaining this understanding in
order that better materials can be developed. Modern computer modelling
techniques will be combined with sophisticated experimental tools in
accomplishing this goal.