* 9302228
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Interactions   of Macropolymers with Microcolloids in Aqueous Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Garrison Sposito, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1995
* USD 46,310.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Jon D. Chorover of the
University of California, Berkeley, to work with Professor Jacques Buffle of the
University of Geneva in Switzerland. The transport of chemicals in natural
aquatic systems is regulated by the partitioning of solutes between the solid
and aqueous phases. Colloids, the smallest of the solid particles, may be
readily entrained and transported by the mobile fluid, thereby providing
transport for sorbed inorganic and organic adsorptives. Although colloid
mediated transport is considered an important mechanism for contaminant
transport, the basic processes affecting colloidal behavior are poorly
understood. Organic-polymer/inoranic colloid associations are ubiquitous in
natural aquatic and soil systems and these aggregates have profoundly different
colloidal properties than the inorganic particles alone. The technology for in
situ study of colloidal systems has improved dramatically over the last decade,
yet the effects of experimental artifacts are not well known. Careful
investigations of colloidal structure and stability therefore incorporate
several complimentary analyses. In the proposed project, Dr. Chorover and
Professor Buffle will study interactions between anionic macropolymers and
inorganic microcolloids. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel, a stipend for twelve months, travel to meetings, and a
dependent allowance for Dr. Chorover's family.