* 9302830
* Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of Wave      Front Propagation in Inhomogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Jack Xin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1996
* USD 61,295.00

This award supports mathematical research on nonlinear waves inhomogeneous
media, focusing on properties of wave front phenomena arising in nonlinear
partial differential equations. In particular reaction-diffusion equations and
porous medium type equations will be treated. These equations come from premixed
flame propagation problems in combustion theory and solute transport problems in
underground water flow. Work will be done investigating general reaction-
diffusion front propagation in the presence of periodic coefficients under the
small diffusion fast reaction limit. Also to be studied is the reaction-
diffusion front quenching problem in two dimensions from a numerical point of
view and investigations into the existence of reaction-diffusion front
propagation in quasiperiodic and random media. The concentrate front propagation
for solute transport in homogeneous and inhomogeneous media will also be taken
up. Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the
physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the
equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.