* 9302726
* Rathematical Sciences:  Nonlinear Problems of Solid         Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Stuart Antman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 181,000.00

This project will involve research on a number of nonlinear problems in solid
mechanics. These problems include: (1) dynamical problems of viscoelasticity and
dissipation and shocks (including one-dimensional problems for nonlinearly
viscoelastic bodies and self-sustained oscillations, Hopf bifurcations, and
fluid-solid interactions); (2) asymptotics of light flexible bodies; (3)
bifurcation problems of nonlinear elastoplasticity; (4) contact problems; (5)
coexistence of phases in anisotropic media; and (6) other problems such as
inverse bifurcation problems, nonlinear magnetoelasticity, and control problems.
Each problem will be given an exact formulation (without ad hoc geometric
simplifications) and each problem employs general constitutive equations
satisfying the standard invariance conditions and mild physical restrictions.
The use of such constitutive equations illuminates the mathematical structure of
the governing equations and permits the detection of new effects associated with
material response. The goals of the research are to detect new phenomena,
especially those associated with instabilities and the occurrence of thresholds,
to treat concrete problems that illuminate the general theories, and to develop
analytic tools for the treatment of both general and specific problems. A
variety of dynamic and steady-state nonlinear problems for rods, shells, and
three-dimensional solid bodies will be studied. The bodies are composed of
nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic, plastic, or magnetoelastic materials. In each
case, fully invariant, geometrically exact theories encompassing general
nonlinear constitutive equations are to be used. The goals of these studies are
to discover new nonlinear effects, determine thresholds in constitutive
equations separating qualitatively different responses, examine important kinds
of instabilities, contribute to the theory of shocks and dissipative mechanisms
in solids, and develop new methods of nonlinear analysis for problems of solid
mechanics.