* 9302340
* Patent Indicators of Global Technology Strategy
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Mary Ellen Mogee, Mogee Research and Analysis Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1996
* USD 291,963.00

9302340 Mogee To be competitive in today's environment of technological change
and global competition, firms need to develop and follow sagacious technology
strategies. In order to make important decisions regarding which particular
technology strategies would be optimal to follow, a firm needs reliable
information to answer questions such as: how quickly and efficiently can its R&D
department develop and build on new technological innovations in its industry
relative to its competitors, and how effective is the firm at appropriating the
benefits of its R&D efforts and withholding those benefits from others? Results
of the Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish the
technical basis for using patent citation data as a valuable tool for helping
firms evaluate their own technological capabilities and those of their
competitors. The objectives of the Phase II research focus on (1) demonstrating
the feasibility of constructing a patent citation database that meets technology
managers' analytical needs easily and cost-effectively; (2) extending the
citation model developed in Phase I to the point where it can function as a
reliable tool for (a) correcting citation data for censoring and (b) predicting
future citation levels; and (3) using these prototype tools to examine the
validity of hypothesized relationships between citation patterns and the
technology strategies of companies. The project aims to provide analytical tools
for developing and assessing corporate technology strategies, including patent
citation databases and user-friendly search and analytical software, consulting
services, and publications. The project addresses the need to understand the
interrelationships among patent citations, the technology strategies of
companies, and their economic performance. The project will use this knowledge
as the basis for its contribution to the future of US economic competitiveness,
that is, to make available analytical to ols useful for formulating and
analyzing corporate technology policies that will be valuable to companies and
investors. ***