* 9302370
* The CEPEX Mission: The In Situ Measurement Water Vapor and  Ozone from the ER-2 Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* James Anderson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1994
* USD 63,200.00

9302370 Anderson Water vapor is the dominant greenhouse gas and, as the original
Central Equatorial Pacific Experiment (CEPEX) proposal pints out, water vapor is
therefore the dominant regulator of the Earth's energy budget and thus the
critical regulator of climate. An understanding of the processes that dictate
the distribution of water vapor and the processes that link the distribution of
water in all its phases to the frequency-dependent divergence of flux and
radiance constitutes a central element in any considered strategy to understand
secular trends of the Earth's climate. The PIs will augment the array of CEPEX
observations with in situ observations of water vapor, ozone, pressure and
temperature from the ER-2 aircraft. Water vapor measurements will be carried out
using the Lyman- alpha photofragmentionion technique: Water vapor + hv
hydroxyl(A) + hydrogen hydroxyl radical(X) + hv + hydrogen that fragments a
water vapor molecule with 121.6 nm radiation from a plasma discharge lamp and
observes 308 nm radiation from the electronically excited product hydroxyl
radical. This experiment is done both in absorption and in fluorescence to
provide a dynamic range of five orders of magnitude in water vapor concentration
and an absolute calibration of the instrument during each flight. Ozone
observations will be done using ultraviolet absorption in the Hartley continuum
at 257nm. The instrument uses an on-board Hg resonance lamp; a MnO2 getter to
establish the absorption cell count rate in the absence of ozone in the sample;
a Roots blower to actively aspirate the measurement cell; and counting
electronics to obtain fractional absorption levels of one part in 105. This
research is important because it will provide water vapor and ozone observations
needed to help interpret climate processes in a climate-sensitive part of the
world. ***