* 9302750
* 11th Annual Southwest Regional Developmental Biology        Conference, May 14-16, Kingston, OK
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1994
* Frank Seto, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 04/30/1994
* USD 2,000.00

The Eleventh Annual Southwestern Developmental Biology Conference will be held
May 14-16, 1993 at the University of Oklahoma Biological Station located on Lake
Texoma near Kingston, OK. The meeting is sponsored by the Society for
Developmental Biology, which states in its guidelines: "Regional meetings are an
important activity of the Society for Developmental Biology... The function of
the Regional Conference is to provide a more informal opportunity than national
meetings for the exchange of information on development. Participation by
graduate students, postdoctorals and junior faculty is particularly
encouraged..." The meeting to be held at the University of Oklahoma Biological
Station will adhere to the goals outlined above. For this conference, four
prominent speakers (Drs. Randall Moon, Raymond Runyan, Helen Hathaway, and Gary
Wessel) have been invited to present papers related to the following theme:
"Cellular Signalling and Recognition in Development". To complement these
invited talks, developmental biologists, as well as cell biologists working on
developmentally-related problems, from the Southwest will be encouraged to
present recent and preliminary findings on the meeting topic, or on any other
field of developmental biology. We will seek especially to encourage and promote
graduate students and postdoctoral fellow participation in the scientific
program by providing financial support to cover the costs of registration,
housing, and travel wherever possible. The conference format will thus give
developmental biology students in the Southwest an excellent opportunity to give
a talk, interact with a variety of active investigators in developmental
biology, and gain a better understanding of the developmental biology research
being pursued in their own geographic region.