* 9302017
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Molecular      Interactions of Filensin in Cultured Lens Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Susann Remington, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1995
* USD 38,350.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susann G. Remington of
the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities to work with Dr. Spyros D. Georgatos at
the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) in Heidelberg, Germany. Dr.
Remington has characterized a full length chicken lens cDNA encoding filensin, a
lens- specific, membrane-associated, cytoskeletal protein. The deduced amino
acid sequence of filensin contains a 280 residue domain with sequence similarity
to the rod domain of intermediate filament proteins. She will examine the
molecular interactions of filensin and its potential contribution to lens cell
organization by transfecting cultured chicken lens cells with constructs that
express truncated forms of filensin, corresponding to domains or conserved
sequence motifs. Truncated portions of filensin are expected to competitively
inhibit protein-protein interactions of the analogous regions of endogenous
chicken filensin, resulting in dominant negative phenotypes(s). Dr. Remington
will monitor the morphology of the transfected cells and the distribution of
filensin, other cytoskeletal proteins, and integral membrane proteins in the
transfected cultures. She will also assess the biochemical state of wild type
filensin under the experimental conditions.