* 9302934
* Dissertation Research:  The Technological and Social        Dimensions of the Mallorcan Copper Age Metallurgy
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1994
* USD 10,414.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ruth Tringham, Mr. Christopher Hoffman will collect
data for his doctoral thesis. He will study copper artifacts from a series of
archaeological sites which are located on the Spanish island of Mallorca and
which date to the Copper Age (from approximately 2500 to 1800 BC). Through a
series of analyses he will attempt to determine where the metal producing ore
was mined, whether it was smelted locally, how the wide range of objects were
fabricated, how they were used, and how and why they were disposed of. To
accomplish this he will conduct chemical and lead isotope analyses of copper
bearing ores from local deposits, attempt to define chemical signatures and then
match these signatures to those of the artifacts themselves. Metallurgical
analysis will shed light on manufacturing techniques and microscopic examination
for traces of wear will provide insight into how the objects were used. Mr.
Hoffman wishes to understand the relationship between technological and social
change. Metallurgy did not originate on Mallorca but diffused to the region from
the Eastern Mediterranean. While it is known approximately when copper tools
first appeared on the island much less is understood about the effects which
this very basic technological change had on social organization. This particular
situation is interesting because archaeologists have argued that Mallorcan and
much of Spanish society was basically unaffected. Because however of the wide
variety of artifact types found on the island and because of the varied
archaeological contexts in which they were recovered, Mr. Hoffman believes
otherwise and he wishes to reconstruct how these objects were manufactured and
used. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists and increase our understanding of Mallorcan
prehistory. It will also shed light on the complex relationships between
societal and technological change and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.