* 9302024
* Mathematical Sciences: Functional analysis on the Eve of theTwenty-First Century-Conference October 24-27, 1993
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,02/28/1994
* Robert Wilson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 02/28/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Functional analysis is one of the most important directions in the mathematics
of the twentieth century. Many mathematicians in the United States and other
countries are involved in research in this area, and conferences are frequently
organized on many aspects of functional analysis and its applications. We
propose to organize a very special conference, entitled "Functional Analysis on
the Eve of the Twenty-First Century," at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New
Jersey, from October 24 to October 27, 1993. The aim will be to focus on new
directions of the subject, directions which can be expected to define the
development of much of the subject for many years. Correspondingly, we plan to
invite as speakers leading experts in topics connected with new directions in
functional analysis. We plan to include as an essential part of the participants
young mathematicians who are beginning their research activity, with the
intention of providing some guidance which will be of value throughout their
scientific life. We expect that the lively discussion of ideas among
participants with many different orientations will prove to be one of most
important features of the conference. A special stimulus for planning this
conference is the eightieth birthday of Israel Moiseyevich Gelfand, who has
played a crucial role in the development of functional analysis during the last
half-century, and who is now at Rutgers University.