* 9302168
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Single-atom    Effects Responsible for the Generation of High Harmonics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Justin Peatross, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1994
* USD 34,250.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Justin Peatross of the
University of Rochester to go to Moscow, Russia to the General Physics
Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences to work with Professor M. V. Fedorov. It
has recently been discovered that high-order harmonics of laser light can be
created when an intense laser interacts with atoms. The efficiency of generating
the higher harmonics relative to the lower ones can be surprisingly high,
outside of the range wherein perturbative approximations can be used. The high
harmonics appear when a laser drives atoms so strongly that they are on the
verge of ionization. The problem of understanding high-harmonic generation has
two parts: 1) the single-atom response to incident laser light, and 2) the
collective behavior of the atoms regarding the matching of the phases of the
emitted harmonic light. The proposed research centers primarily on the single-
atom effects responsible for the generation of high harmonics. An investigation
will be made into the relevance of the classical equations of motion of a driven
electron trapped in a non-linear potential well. Other single-atom descriptions
of harmonic generation will also be investigated. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for twelve months, a
dependent allowance and money for lab fees.