* 9302328
* U.S-Malaysia-Japan Cooperative Research on Understanding    how Tree Biodiversity is maintained in the Lambir National  Park, Sarawak,East Malaysia in the Northwest Borneo Hotspot
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* James LaFrankie, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1995
* USD 25,178.00

This proposal requests supplemental funds to permit Drs. Peter S. Ashton and
James V. LaFrankie, Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University, to complete with Mr.
Hua-Seng Lee, Department of Forestry, Sarawak, Malaysia, the training of U.S.
and Malaysian personnel essential to the success of their NSF-supported research
on tropical biodiversity. The research itself deals with understanding how tree
biodiversity is maintained in balance in the Lambir National Park, Sarawak, East
Malaysia, in the Northwest Borneo hotspot, an area that may be the most species
rich forest in the Old World. A special 50 hectare plot has been reserved in
which the role of soil heterogeneity in maintaining species diversity can be
studied. A possible deterrent to the full utilization of this resource is the
fact that there are less than 10 botanists in the United States, 5 in Malaysia,
and only two in Sarawak who are fluent in the flora of Borneo. The educational
objectives of the project seek to widen the regional forest expertise of the
resident researchers and technical staff, and thereby foster regional
collaboration among a new generation of forest scientists. Dr. Ashton is a
senior researcher with an excellent international reputation gained through some
three decades of research on Bornean forests. Dr. LaFrankie is a young U.S.
scientist who has been engaged in postdoctoral research in Borneo. Mr. Lee is
Assistant Director of Research and Reforestation, Sarawak, Malaysia. Primary
research support is provided through NSF Grant No. BSR-9107247, with matching
funds from Japanese sources, notably, the Monbusho Fund and the Marubeni
Corporation. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to contribute to the infrastructure of
developing countries and to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.