* 9302837
* U.S.-Republic of Korea Cooperative Research: Adsorption and Diffusion of Fluids in Model Porous Media
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1996
* USD 22,118.00

9302837 Gubbins This award provides funds to permit Dr. Keith E. Gubbins, School
of Chemical Engineering, Cornell University, to pursue with Dr. Soong-Hyuck Suh,
Department of Chemical Engineering, Keimyung University, and Dr. Soon-Chul Kim,
Andong University, Korea, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on
the behavior of fluids in narrow pores and in microporous media using the
methods of statistical mechanics and molecular simulation. The objectives of the
research are (1) to use several molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulation
techniques to study the equilibrium and transport properties of simple fluid and
their mixtures in porous media having simple geometries, (2) to use these
computer experimental results to test recently developed density functional and
kinetic theories of fluids in pores, (3) to study networking effects in porous
media using molecular dynamics simulation techniques, (4) to study the
adsorption and dynamical behavior of water in porous carbons, and (5) to further
develop and improve the density functional and kinetic theories for fluids in
porous media. Microporous materials are widely used in the chemical, oil and
gas, pharmaceutical, and food industries to carry out chemical reactions and for
purification and separations. The collaborators expect the proposed work to help
them design improved processes and materials for these industries. The
collaborators are recognized as experts in the field of the proposal. They will
be assisted by several postdoctoral workers and graduate students. This project
is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program
which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). Thi s project adds an international cooperative
dimension to the PI's research under NSF Grant No. CTS-9122460. ***