* 9302704
* Mathematical Sciences:  Chromosome Geometry and Chromosome  Aberrations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1997
* USD 183,125.00

9302704 Sachs The investigator models chromosome aberrations in live mammalian
cells, emphasizing implications for large-scale chromosome geometry and for the
biology of ionizing radiation damage. The study entails developing computer
algorithms, explicitly solving stochastic process models, and collaborating with
various experimental groups. Production of chromosome damage (for example,
illegitimate recombinations, involving the exchange of fragments between two
different chromosomes) after induction of DNA double strand breaks during the
interphase part of the cell cycle is analyzed, using probabilistic models for
DNA geometry, motion, and reactions at the macromolecular level, in particular
polymer models for large-scale chromosome structure and motion. Comparisons of
the effects of densely ionizing radiation to those of sparsely ionizing
radiation, relevant to chromosome geometry and to biological dosimetry, are
made. Statistical questions that arise when very detailed experimental
information about specific individual chromosomes is made available by modern
fluorescent labeling techniques are answered by extending already developed
Monte-Carlo simulations based on previously analyzed biological models.
Understanding how ionizing radiation damages chromosomes is important in
understanding cancer induction by radiation, understanding how to cope with
radiation accidents or waste, and improving tumor radiotherapy. Such
understanding requires geometric information about the chromosomes in a live
human cell; conversely, information about radiation damage contributes to
understanding chromosome geometry, which is of fundamental biological
importance. While much effort has been devoted to sequencing the DNA in
chromosomes and to modeling local geometry of chromosomes, quantitative
geometric models of the larger scales of main interest in analyzing radiation
produced chromosome aberrations are just now being developed, by the principal
investig ator and others. The project combines standard information on the
physics of ionizing radiation with these new biological models of chromosome
geometry to analyze how the damage is formed. In particular, preliminary
mathematical investigations and a literature search show that, due to geometric
effects, densely ionizing radiations, such as alpha particles from radon
daughters, make a larger fraction of certain specific kinds of damage (e.g.
centric chromosome rings) than other kinds of chromosome damaging agents,
including sparsely ionizing radiations such as x-rays. This "signature" of
densely ionizing radiations should help in realistic assessments of radiation
hazards and will help in understanding chromosome geometry. ***