* 9302201
* S/C:  U.S. - Korea Joint Research on Hybrid System for      Seismic Structures with Resonant Dampers and Robust         Multiobjective Controllers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Vittal Rao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1997
* USD 245,760.00

9302201 Cheng A joint research project between the University of Missouri Rolla
(UMR) and the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) is
proposed to experimentally and analytically study a hybrid system for seismic
resistant structures. The innovative system will be developed by integrating
tuned viscous dampers with active tendon controllers. The viscous damper will be
designed with low sensitivity to surrounding temperature and self heating as
well as the ability to damp out a structure's critical or offending mode. Active
control will provide the forces necessary to bring structural response within
prescribed constraints. The hybrid system is effective in controlling structural
response over a wide range of earthquake intensity, wind force and other types
of dynamic excitations. Its adaptability allows application to low and high rise
buildings. The USA component of this project involves an interdisciplinary team
consisting of researchers in civil, mechanical, and electrical engineering at
UMR. This team will emphasize a control algorithm and its robustness,
manufacturing hybrid devices, experimental verification of control parameters,
and a shaking table test of model structural response. Korea's interdisciplinary
research team will focus on numerical analysis of a large number of structures,
wind tunnel testing, feasibility studies for the hybrid system's application,
and preparation for full scale experiments. ***