* 9302467
* Acquisition of Portable Two-Axis Servo Hydraulic Testing    System for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Herbert Einstein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1995
* USD 45,000.00

9302467 Einstein Numerous research projects and academic courses in several
departments at MIT require the capability to apply loads in two directions. The
proposed portable two-axis hydraulic testing system will be used for this
purpose. The system fabricated by Instron, consists of two modular hydraulic
actuators (with 5 gpm servo-valves) and capacities of 11 and 22 kips
respectively, each with a 6" stroke. The actuators will be powered by a 6 gpm
hydraulic pump mounted on casters. The control console will be cart mounted and
provide uni-axial and biaxial capabilities. Each actuator can be configured for
force control, stroke control or external transducer control. The digital
function generator does accommodate for a phase shift between the two actuator
motions. The equipment will be part of the MIT REMERGENCE (Resource Extraction,
Materials and Energy, Reservoir, Geotechnical, ENvironmental and Construction
Engineering) Laboratory, a joint laboratory of the Departments of Civil
Engineering; Materials Science and Engineering; Mechanical Engineering; Ocean
Engineering and Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences. Faculty, graduate and
undergraduate students use this laboratory. Typical research projects for which
the equipment will be used are: Experimental Investigation of Microcracking
Processes in Cementitious Composites under Biaxial Compression (PI: C. Leung)
Fracture Coaalescence Research on Model Rock and Real Rock (PI: H. Einstein)
Cyclic Fatigue of Soils (PI: J.T. Germaine) The close tie-in between research
and education at MIT implies that graduate and undergraduate students will work
with his equipment be it in research projects or courses with experimental
requirements.