* 9302324
* Workshop on Phosphorus Cycling in Terrestrial and Aquatic   Ecosystems:  A Global Perspective; Budapest, Hungary
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1994
* Kate Lajtha, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 11/30/1994
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal requests request support for U.S. scientists to participate in a
SCOPE sponsored workshop on Phosphorus Cycling in Terrestrial and Aquatic
Systems. The goal of the workshop is to collect and integrate data, concepts and
models on phosphorus cycles in a global context. In addition, a symposium will
be held during the workshop with the aim to present integrative ecosystem
analyses on phosphorus inputs, transformations, transfers and losses in Hungary.
The Hungarian analysis will focus on three systems: (1) The Balaton Lake basin,
an inland closed watershed, (2) The Danube, as an example of a major river
system with pollutant phosphate inputs from intensive agriculture, major cities,
and industries, that accumulate in its course through several countries with
widely differing environmental protection standards, and (3) Hungarian
agriculture, which has been plagued by inefficiencies of nutrient use and
resultant off-site contaminations. The global analysis is based on the results
of 4 previous workshops, held in Europe, South America, Southeast Asia and
Africa, and aims at the integration of knowledge across boundaries of ecosystems
and regions while exploring the links between phosphorus and other element
cycles. %%% Both the global and Hungarian perspectives will be provided by
recognized experts from several disciplines through presentations and working
groups with the following mandates: (1) To synthesize chapters on the major
cycles and transfers of phosphorus based on prepared manuscripts and extensive
discussion and review sessions for the production of a book to be published by
John Wiley in the SCOPE series; (2) to develop concepts and models applicable
across ecosystems and test them against the Hungarian case studies; and (3) to
facilitate discussions and cooperation between Hungarian, U.S., and other
invited experts with the aim to foster future cooperation and provide guidelines
for environmental planning.