* 9302205
* Gene Flow, Dispersal, and Systematics of Deep-Sea           Hydrothermal Vent Organisms
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Robert Vrijenhoek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1996
* USD 425,000.00

This project continues its genetic studies of deep-sea organismsfrom
hydrothermal vent and cold-water sulfide/methane seeps. The objectives of the
study are: 1) to obtain estimates of gene flow among populations living in
hydrothermal vent fields along ridge crests throughout the world's oceans; and
2) to define phylogenetic relationships among hot-vent species and similar fauna
living in cold-vent sulfide/methane seeps. During the past 30 months, frozen
samples of more than 100 species have been collected during submersible dives to
over 25 distinct vent and seep areas throughout the world. Additional dives are
plan at sites from which adequate samples are not available. Genetic data are
obtained from examination of allozymes, mitochrondrial (mt) DNA, anonymous
single-copy nuclear (scn) DNA, and direct sequencing of PCR amplified genes.
This integrated genetic approach has already revealed much higher species
diversity in these deep-sea habitats than was previously known. Whether the vent
organisms of a family constitute a monophyletic group, whether they had
polyphyletic origins from related seep fauna, or vice versa remains to be
discovered. Ongoing genetic studies are providing a comprehensive picture of
relationships within and between the dominant species living in these unusual
abyssal environments.