* 9302247
* CRB:  Metapopulation Structure of the Mexican Spotted Owl:  Theory and Conservation Implications
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Peter Stacey, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Therese A. Markow
* 12/31/1996
* USD 164,905.00

9302247 Stacey Habitat fragmentation is one of the most serious factors
threatening the preservation of biological diversity. As a result of human
development, once continuous landscapes such as forests and wetlands have been
altered and divided into small patches. This reduces population sizes of the
plants and animals within each patch, and may make them more vulnerable to
extinction. In this project, researchers will test predictions of the
metapopulation model of Stacey and Taper. They will study the federally listed
Mexican Spotted Owl in New Mexico, and owl whose survival has been threatened by
logging and other changes to its habitat. They hypothesize that small and
naturally fragmented populations of this owl are united by dispersal, and that
immigration form one population can "rescue" other populations from extinction.
Both field observations and several new molecular genetic techniques will be
used to measure dispersal of juveniles and adults among four adjacent but
isolated mountain ranges. %%% This Study will provide important new information
on the role of dispersal and metapopulation structure in the persistence of rare
species in arid environments, and new data needed by land management agencies
for the development of successful management plans for the conservation of the
Mexican Spotted Owl itself. ***