* 9302991
* Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and       Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Richard Wheeden, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 55,000.00

Wheeden 9302991 This award continues support for mathematical research into
problems arising in the modern theory of partial differential equations and
singular integral operators. The form of the analysis which takes place involves
critical inequalities measuring the power norms of functions with that of their
gradients, especially when the measures are weighted by different functions.
Such comparisons fall under the heading of Sobolev- Poincare inequalities. From
such results one obtains upper and lower bounds for fundamental solutions of
divergence form degenerate parabolic equations in case the degeneracy is time-
dependent and measured in terms of the two weight functions. Work will be done
establishing similar inequalities when the gradient is replaced by vector fields
other than the gradient. A second line of investigation concerns Carleson-type
estimates for measuring functions (weighted) in a half-space with their boundary
value norms taken against different weights. Good, but incomplete, results have
been obtained for harmonic functions. Efforts will be made to determine the
extent that integral transforms generated by other than the Poisson kernel
produce the same type of inequalities - especially in cases of non- convolution
kernels. Finally, work is to be done on characterizing weights which give good
bounds on weighted fractional integrals when compared with the original function
norms. The measurement of integrals plays a central role in determining both
existence and bounds on solutions of differential equations. Many of these
results involve parameter bounds which are dependent only on the underlying
dimension. Through careful analysis of the integrals and norms of the
corresponding derivatives one obtains significant information about the
existence and regularity of solutions. ***