* 9302481
* ANLC-93: Aircraft-Borne and Ground-Based Hydroxyl and NLC   Measurements of Small and Large-Scale Dynamics in the Polar Summer Mesosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Patrick Espy, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 02/29/1996
* USD 66,132.00

As part of the Arctic Noctilucent Cloud Campaign-93, the PIs propose to make
aircraft-borne and ground-based spectroscopic observations of the hydroxyl
infrared nightglow as well as photographic observations of NLC. These will be
done to investigate the residual gravity and planetary wave fields present
during the Arctic summer and their possible relationship to the formation of
mesospheric clouds. The intent is to measure the OH nightglow radiance and
temperature from the NCAR aircraft. This will be done both to characterize the
mesosphere in the NLC and PMC regions and to examine the relationship of the
mesospheric clouds detected by the aircraft Lidar to the geographical
characteristics of the OH gravity waves and planetary-scale disturbances. Next,
the PIs propose to characterize the polar summer mesosphere throughout the
campaign with observations of the OH nightglow radiance and temperature from
ground stations located at about 60oN. These measurements will be used to
examine the temporal behavior of gravity waves and planetary scale disturbances
and will provide the context within which the aircraft data may be interpreted.
Finally, the presence of NLC will be photographically documented over the ground
stations in order to determine the occurrence frequency, extent, altitude and
the structure and morphology of the NLC.