* 9302387
* SBIR Phase II:  "Wearable" Information Systems for          Construction Site Management
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Angelo Pasquale, Frontier Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1998
* USD 234,571.00

*** Pasquale 9302387 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will develop a "wearable" information system for site supervisory personnel that
provides up-to-date project information such as project schedule, design
changes, and other project details and enables the supervisor to easily and
accurately record job progress and site conditions. The construction industry
has failed to adopt and apply new information system technology as quickly as
most other industries. Specifically, construction field site management and
supervision has seen little improvement in techniques for data gathering,
progress reporting and communications between field sites and corporate offices.
During this research computer hardware and software will be developed that will
provide site supervisors with an information management tool in a hands-free,
voice activated environment. Several "wearable" prototype computers will be
designed and created using commercially available components such as a miniature
computer processor, heads-up display monitor, a voice recognition system, and a
cellular telephone. The system components will be fitted to a standard
construction hard hat. The prototypes will be field tested at construction sites
by supervisors managing actual construction projects. Results of field testing
and evaluation will yield further system refinements for use in developing a set
of design specifications for future commercial product development. The
introduction of a "wearable" information system for hands-free, voice activated
construction site management could yield great benefits in construction site
productivity and should lead to reduced errors caused by inaccurate or out-dated
information. Widespread implementation of "wearable" information systems should
greatly improve the effectiveness of communications on the modern construction
site. ***