* 9302144
* CEDAR:  Mapping Conjugate and Non-Conjugate Convection      Response Dating Equinox Intervals
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Delores Knipp, United States Air Force Academy
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 06/30/1997
* USD 32,600.00

The PIs propose to use the Assimilative Mapping of Ionospheric Electrodynamics
(AMIE) procedure to derive ionospheric conductance, electric filed, current and
Joule heating maps for three disturbed equinox periods: 20-21 March 1990, 23-28
March 1991 and 28-29 March 1992. The first period is a Coupling Energetics and
Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) storm study interval for which we have
begun initial data collection. The second period is one of considerable
geophysical interest because it follows one of the largest flare events of solar
cycle 22. Three Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites
observed particle and field variations during this interval. For this interval
the PIs will also acquire selected Fabry-Perot optical data and geosynchronous
magnetospheric plasma analyzer data which we intend to correlate with high
latitude-electrodynamic patterns. Considerable data also exist for the 28-29
March 1992 interval which was a Geospace Environmental Modelling (GEM)
observational campaign. Because four DMSP spacecraft were operating during March
1992, the interval has the potential of producing the most comprehensive data
set ever assembled for the study of large scale electrodynamic linkages from the
solar wind to the magnetosphere, the ionosphere and ultimately to the neutral
atmosphere. As in previous studies data will be acquired from DMSP particle and
field measurements, NOAA particle measurements, Incoherent Scatter Radars,
Coherent High Frequency Radars, and ground magnetic observatories from both
hemispheres. These data will be assimilated to produce electric potential field
distributions, horizontal and field-aligned current distributions and Joule
heating and conductance distributions. The primary objectives for this study
are: (1) providing explanation of deviations from large scale conjugacy in
equinoctial convection patterns in terms of solar wind parameters, (2)
documenting the temporal and spatial scale of high-latitude variations
associated with significant changes of the IMF and correlating these variations
with observations in the magnetosphere; (3) supporting new and ongoing
coordinated storm studies (CEDAR and GEM) by providing a means for interpreting
local observations in a global context.