* 9302016
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Numerical      Analysis of Reaction-Diffusion Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Donald Estep, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/29/1996
* USD 38,696.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Donald Estep of the
Georgia Institute of Technology to work with Professor Claes Johnson at Chalmers
University of Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden. This project involves the
development of a mathematical theory for adaptive finite element methods for
systems of singularly-perturbed reaction-diffusion equations. These equations
offer many technical challenges to mathematicians while representing many
important models in applied science. Because solutions of such problems
typically have multiply-scaled behavior and because accurate results are needed
for a range of parameter values, standard numeric techniques and analysis are
inadequate. Dr. Estep and Professor Johnson hope to overcome these difficulties
by developing an error control based on a posteriori and a priori error bounds
that will indicate how to control the error as well as give a measure of
robustness to the computations. The ultimate goal is the public release of a
code that can solve general problems with minimum user interface. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for
twelve months and administrative costs for Georgia Tech.