* 9303879
* RUI: Biochemistry of Nitrogen-Limited Growth of Wood        Decaying Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Walt Lilly, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 174,625.00

The goal of this research program is to elucidate mechanisms of sustained
mycelial growth of wood-decaying fungi. In the model organism, Schizophyllum
commune, proteolysis and recycling of amino acids supports mycelial growth
during nitrogen limitation. S. commune produces a wide range of proteolytic
activities, including members of the aspartic-, serine- and metallo-protease
type enzymes. Two proteases that have increased activities during nitrogen-
limitation are ScPrA (a serine-endopeptidase) and ScPrB (a metallo-
endopeptidase). In addition, two aminopeptidases and a carboxypeptidase are also
regulated by nitrogen. Objectives of the work proposed are 1) to extend the
study of the proteolytic system in S. commune by using mutant analysis and
molecular cloning of specific protease genes, and 2) to initiate studies
designed to elucidate the regulatory mechanism(s) for proteases involved in
intracellular protein turnover. Mutants will be screened by ability to hydrolyze
chromogenic peptide substrates and gelatin. S. commune protease genes will be
cloned using heterologous hybridization with protease genes from other fungi
(particularly yeast), and by transformation/complementation testing in mutant
strains. Cloned genes will be sequenced analyzed, and then used to generate
probes to measure RNA transcript levels and to localize in situ protease mRNA
under nitrogen-limiting conditions. Regulation of protease ScPrB by an
endogenous inhibitor will be studied by standard biochemical techniques and
mutant analysis. %%% Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for all organisms. In
mushroom producing fungi, nitrogen must be obtained from the material upon which
the organism grows. Often this "food" (leaf litter, wood) is a poor source of
nitrogen. This limits the growth of the organism. However, even under nitrogen-
poor conditions fungi may continue to expand by digesting older portions of its
body, and recycling nutrients to younger, growing areas. The goal of the present
work is to understand the cell mechanism of protein-nitrogen recycling in wood-
decaying fungi. We will characterize the cell machinery required to digest
proteins in older parts of the organism and see how this machinery is regulated
at the molecular level. The research is important because it will provide
insight into the basic cellular mechanism of protein and nitrogen metabolism of
a diverse group of organisms. This group of organisms includes the edible
mushroom, fungi that rot wood and wood products, and fungi that are pathogens on
corn and wheat. An added objective is to provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students to prepare them for careers in science and technology.
This award is funded jointly by Metabolic Biochemistry (Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences) and the Functional and Physiological Ecology
(Integrative Biology and Neuroscience) Programs.