* 9303866
* Synthetic Organosulfur Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Eric Block, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1996
* USD 295,500.00

The focus of this research is the chemistry of both naturally occurring and
synthetic organosulfur compounds. Continuing research on the constituents of the
Allium family, which contains garlic and onions and their allies, will address
the question of optical activity of primary flavorants and the role of enzymes
in their formation. The invention of new reagents and methods for organic
synthesis will include those based on the Ramberg-Backland reaction and their
application to new routes to cyclopentadienes and 1,3-eneynes. The total
synthesis of unusual physiologically active organosulfur natural products and
unnatural sulfur compounds will be carried out. The microwave spectroscopy of
highly reactive small organosulfur compounds will be studied. Synthesis of new
polythiols of interest as ligands and/or in material science will be carried
out. %%% With this Renewal award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting
the research of Dr. Eric Block of the Department of Chemistry at SUNY Albany,
who will study both naturally occurring and synthetic organosulfur compounds. In
the natural product area, the emphasis will be on the highly labile compounds
which account for the odor and flavor of the Allium family which includes garlic
and onions. In the synthetic area, organosulfur compounds will be utilized in
for the production of new compounds useful in sequestering heavy metals or in
the synthesis of new materials.