* 9303334
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  An             Ethnoarcheological Study of Specialized Pottery Production  in Guizhou Province, China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Anne Underhill, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1995
* USD 19,900.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a four-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Anne Underhill to the
Museum of the Qiannan Buyi and Miao Autonomous District in China. The goal of
Dr. Underhill's research is to examine archaeological indicators of different
kinds of specialized pottery production. She wants to determine whether or not
criteria described in the literature can be supported and if new criteria can be
developed. She will assess vessel standardization and diversity in order to
identify variation among family (household industry) specialists and individual
workshop production. Dr. Underhill will also assess spatial indicators of
organization of production such as number and location of work tools and size of
work space. She will attempt to determine whether differences in scale and
intensity of production can be recognized as well. Dr. Underhill feels that the
south- central Guizhou would be an excellent study area given the quantity of
communities where potters use traditional techniques. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for four months and an
allowance for field expenses.