* 9303217
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Large Cardinals, Forcing and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Richard Laver, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1996
* USD 84,544.00

The research area of this project is set theory, in particular, large cardinals
and forcing. Set theory contains classical mathematics in the sense that every
theorem of classical mathematics can be formulated as a statement about sets,
and then formally derived from the standard collection ZFC of axioms for set
theory. Beginning with the work of Godel (1936) and Cohen (1963), set theorists
have shown that some problems on which mathematicians have worked are
independent, i.e. neither provable nor disprovable from ZFC. Some of these
independent statements are nevertheless known to be provable when ZFC is
augmented by axioms asserting the existence of large infinite cardinal numbers.
The instant project has three parts: first, to continue the study of a class of
very large cardinals; second, to continue the study of the relation of these
cardinals to problems in groups and finite combinatorics; and third, to study
some unrelated open questions in forcing and infinite combinatorics. The main
subject of this project is connected both to set theory and to algebra and
topology. On the algebra/topology side, one of the topics to be studied is the
classical braid groups, which arise in many contexts, including statistical
mechanics (see for instance Kauffman, New invariants in the theory of knots, AMS
Monthly, March 1988, 195-241). The connection of this area with the algebras
studied in this project has led to new results about the braid groups. Moreover,
results on the set theory side of the project have opened the question whether
some properties of knots and braids will require the large cardinal tools of set
theory for their solution.