* 9303672
* Temporal Variations in Molecular Records of Sea Surface     Temperatures &amp; Plankton Productivity:  Assessment of High   Resolution Signals in Sediment Trap Particulates, etc.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Simon Brassell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 10/31/1995
* USD 124,151.00

Temporal Variations of Molecular Records of Sea Surface Temperatures &amp;
Plankton Productivity: Assessment of High Resolution signals in Sediment Trap
particulates, etc. This research is determining the temporal variability in
alkenone production and in the alkenone unsaturation index (UK37) used in the
evaluation of sea surface temperature (SST) variations. Analyses are being done
on sediment trap materials collected in the Gulf of California at 2 week
intervals during the period August 1990 to February 1993. The samples provide an
opportunity to test fluctuations in UK37 through multiple nutrient and plankton
productivity cycles (including bloom periods of Emiliania huxleyi) over an
annual temperature range of ca. 15 Degree C and to directly compare the
molecular temperature values with measured SST. Thus, the proposed study will
test the veracity of UK37, as defined for normal marine conditions in Pacific
waters, over multiple seasonal oscillations and through a broad temperature
range. The investigation is also evaluating the molecular record of marine
plankton biomass and their diversity through multiple seasonal cycles. The
concentration profiles observed for biologically specific compounds will be
compared with independent plankton counts obtained from concurrent
micropaleontological studies on the same samples by other investigators. Thus,
molecular trends will be tested as signals of temporal variability in plankton
population dynamics. The analyses will enhance the of molecular signals of
environmental and climatic change in the sediment record.//