* 9303692
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Operation of Ethnic    Networks in Producer-Service Industries
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1995
* USD 9,028.00

Research by geographers, regional scientists, economists, sociologists, and
other scholars on the operation of contemporary economic systems has documented
the importance of ethnic networks in traditional consumer-oriented ethnic
businesses. Recent economic geographic research has stressed formal and informal
production networks as an emerging aspect of industrial organization in advanced
economies. Little research has been conducted, however, on the role of ethnic
ties or other informal social relations in the producer-services sectors. This
doctoral dissertation project will examine ethnic networks among Chinese
enterprises in various producer-services industries of the Los Angeles area in
order to better understand the influence of ethnic relations on production-
oriented sectors of the economy. The research will use statistical methods to
analyze information gathered through surveys and intensive interviews, with
special emphasis placed on examining the locational and sectoral concentration
of Chinese firms, the extent to which Chinese firms depend on ethnic networks
for capital, information, employees, supplies, and clients, and the dynamics
through which ethnic networks function. In addition to adding to focused
knowledge about the spatial and operational dynamics of firms run by one of the
largest and most active ethnic groups in a rapidly growing sector in the Los
Angeles area, this research will provide valuable new insights into the role of
social networks in contemporary economic transformations functioning elsewhere
in the U.S. and the world. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.