* 9303980
* ESPRIT COLLABORATIVE:  Control of Perception in Active      Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 01/31/1998
* USD 65,700.00

9303980 Bajcsy This is the first year of a three-year continuing award to
support collaboration of researchers in four U.S. institutions (University of
Pennsylvania, University of Rochester, University of Maryland, and University of
Massachusetts) with their European colleagues engaged in the ESPRIT-funded
research project entitled "Vision-As- Process ". The collaborative objective is
to develop a practical theory of perception control in active vision, while
pooling expertise and avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort. The broad
areas of concentration are development of novel physical and computer hardware,
conceptual frameworks, and software tools for integrated vision/robotic systems,
which include an actively controlled binocular camera head and various actuators
for affecting the external world. The collaboration covers four subareas:
Control of perception in active vision, Interpretation of dynamic scenes, Robust
image and scene measures, and Dynamic gaze control and image formation. For each
subarea a mailing list for information exchange will be created, scientific
meetings held, and techniques and associated experiments organized. Two to three
week partner-to-partner visits will facilitate intense collaboration on the
specific topics. US Ph.D. students will spend time in EEC laboratories as part
of an exchange agreement. Both sides will benefit from a demonstrated real-time
active vision system, and development of a common framework for integration and
control experiments. Such a system will enlarge the variety of experiments
within the same class of problems and the range of applications in different
domains. The results will be made widely accessible, through planned publication
of a book on the theoretical and experimental results, journal papers, and
presentations at conferences. ***