* 9303413
* Mathematical Sciences: Integrable Models in Mathematics and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1999
* Craig Tracy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 225,000.00

This research project develops new methods involving completely integrable
differential equations (of the Painleve type), operator theory and asymptotic
analysis to study the level spacing distributions for various random matrix
ensembles. The level spacing distribution for various orthogonal polynomial
ensembles can be expressed in terms of a Fredholm determinant. The methods of
the PI and his collaborator Harold Widom show that this determinant is also a
tau-function. In the general problem that will be analyzed the tau function has
two distinct types of variables. There are the ``KP type variables'' which
describe a KP flow on the Sato Grassmannian and there are the ``deformation type
variables.'' It is the combination and interplay between these two types of
variables that give the general tau-function. Particular examples of this
general tau function are important in disordered conductors, numerical analysis
associated with the condition number of a matrix, in addition to the standard
applications of random matrix ensembles to the analysis of eigenvalue
statistics. The methods developed in this program will give detailed and
explicit formulas for these important cases. %%% Complex systems that arise in
nuclear physics, atomic and molecular physics, condensed matter physics dealing
with media with impurities require a type of mathematics that gives results for
averaged quantities, since on the macroscopic everyday world the variables that
are controlled in various experiments (like concentration of an impurity, the
energy of the system) do not completely specify the microscopic system.
Therefore one develops statistical methods that predict average behavior or give
the probabilities of deviation from this average behavior. The subject of random
matrices is one such statistical theory that has been successfully applied to
the above problems in physics along with a host of more theoretical problems in
mathematics and practical problems in numerical analysis. This research project
develops new methods using the tools of differential equations to study these
statistical theories.