* 9303346
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Search for Housing by  Female-Headed Households in Guadalajara, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1994
* Irene Tinker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1994
* USD 9,992.00

Across the globe, more than one-third of all households are headed by women. In
parts of Latin America, the share of female- headed households approaches one-
half. Despite these striking statistics, very little research on housing in
developing countries has examined gender and related issues. Prevailing theories
have focused on social class, often treating "the urban poor" as an essentially
homogeneous group. This doctoral dissertation research proposal will examine the
role of gender and household composition in addition to other socioeconomic
characteristics as factors influencing housing choices made by women heading
households in two lower-income neighborhoods in the Mexican city of Guadalajara,
Jalisco. Structured surveys will be used to examine correlations between
different types of households and informal housing submarkets. This phase of the
research project will set the stage for in-depth interviews focusing on female-
headed households in order to examine how constraints and resources related to
class, gender, and household composition affect the evaluation of housing
alternatives. By examining gender and household composition in addition to
socioeconomic variables in the analysis of housing opportunities available to
the urban poor, this research project will enhance understandings of fundamental
differences among various subgroups, especially households headed by women. The
project also will provide valuable insights for planners and others responsible
for providing housing for disadvantaged segments of the population. As a
doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.