* 9303345
* Nuclear Structure Studies of Mixed-Symmetry States in the   N=84 and Z=52 Vibrational Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Sally Hicks, University of Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Steadman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 105,483.00

A three-year research program involving nuclear scientists from the University
of Dallas, the United States Naval Academy, and the University of Kentucky is
proposed. This program is designed to include active participation by
undergraduate students in the research effort. The experiments will be conducted
at the University of Kentucky Van de Graff laboratory using the (n,n'y) reaction
mechanism. The focus of this research is the study of mixed-symmetry, or
isovector, collective excitations in the N=84 and Z=52 vibrational nuclei. The
specific nuclei planned to study are 142 Ce, 144Nd and 120, 122Te. Fragmentation
of the quadrupole isovector strength will be explored. Considerable
spectroscopic information will be ascertained in achieving this goal since M1
and E2 transition rates and E2/M1 multipole mixing ratios are required to
interpret the mixed-symmetry character of ollective quadrupole levels.
Transition rates will be determined from nuclear lifetimes measured using the
Doppler-shift attenuation method following inelastic neutron scattering.
Comparisons of our data with theoretical models will be made to obtain a better
understanding of the low-lying collective excitations of these nuclei and their
proton-neutron symmetry properties.