* 9303109
* Electric Field Effects on Excited State and Electron        Transfer Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 11/30/1996
* USD 353,200.00

Professor Boxer of Stanford University will use Stark effect spectroscopy to
investigate charge-transfer processes in simple molecules, with support from the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program. The technique
entails subjecting the sample (a thin film containing the molecule of interest)
to a high and variable electric field, and observing the effect of the field on
the absorption or emission of light. Characteristic lineshapes are obtained that
yield information regarding the relationship between the transition dipole and
the molecular axes. Processes to be investigated include LMCT transitions,
intramolecular electron transfer reactions, proton transfer reactions, and
vibrational transitions. Of particular interest is the influence of driving
force on electron transfer rates. Molecules to be investigated include
coordination complexes such as tris(bipyradyl)ruthenium(II) ion and related
mixed-valence species, covalently-linked benzophenone/naphthalene derivatives,
porphyrin/quinone species, certain rhenium complexes, and bromobenzene. This new
technique should add an important new dimension in the understanding of
molecular dynamics. %%% A particularly nettlesome problem is to understand the
flow of charge within molecules. For example, if a molecule absorbs a photon of
visible light, how do the electrons within the molecule respond spatially?
Professor Boxer has developed a potentially powerful new technique, called Stark
effect spectroscopy, to answer such questions. Essentially, the molecules are
subjected to high electric fields while their interactions with light are
measured. The results to be obtained will reveal how different parts of a
molecule "communicate" and will improve understanding of the charge-separation
processes so important in photosynthesis and related phenomena.