* 9303198
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research: Intelligent Control in  Manufacturing Via a Fuzzy Logic Based Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* John Yen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1996
* USD 14,214.00

This Americas Program award will support Prof. John Yen and Prof. Reza Langari
of Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station in collaboration with Prof.
Rogelio Soto and Prof. Jose M. Sanchez, both of the Instituto Tecnologico de
Monterrey (ITESM). The proposed research focuses on the development of fuzzy
logic based intelligent control strategies for applications in manufacturing
automation and specifically in the development of control strategies for
autonomous operation of unit manufacturing processes. The emphasis will be on
application areas where the complexity of the unit manufacturing process, and
the amount of interaction among the subsystems involved, preclude the
application of conventional control engineering methods. Integration of the
activities of human operators in relation to the operation of unit manufacturing
processes requires the ability to control rather complex large scale systems
These systems are generally nonlinear, from a dynamical subsystems standpoint,
and are made up of multiple interacting subsystems. Current techniques in
control theory, primarily focused on linear systems, are not optimally designed
for this category of problems. The researchers aim to show that fuzzy logic, an
alternative to classical logic, provides a viable means for dealing with the
reality of manufacturing process control in that it enables one to deal more
effectively with the issue of complexity that inevitably arises in this context.
This collaboration should bring together well- established research teams in
both countries to solve management and control problems of complex manufacturing
systems.