* 9303363
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integral Operators,         Decompostions of Function Spaces Related to Wavelets, and   Boundary Elements in Nonsmooth Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Rodolfo Torres, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9303363 Torres Work done on this project will develop wavelet type
decompositions for the study of spectral and continuity properties of operators.
In particular, pseudodifferential operators with rough symbols will be
considered. The analysis of the operators will be carried out through the
construction of molecules whose smoothness matches that of the symbols of the
operators. Similar decompositions for parabolic spaces will be constructed and
used to study operators whose kernels have non- isotropic singularities.
Previous work on discrete spaces and multiplier operators will be developed
further. Work will also be done on boundary element methods in nonsmooth
domains. Singular integral and layer potential techniques will be employed. The
problems to be considered include the construction of Galerkin procedures for
the traction boundary value problem from elastostatics and for moving boundary
problems in unstable solidification. To aid in applications of this research,
efforts will be made to confine the function spaces to those that permit
efficient numerical implementation. For this purpose, the latest developments on
the method of layer potentials in Holder spaces and decomposition techniques for
spaces of homogeneous type will be incorporated into the project. The
application of wavelet analysis to singular integral operators has led to new
insights into the continuity properties of these transformations. In addition,
the very discrete nature of the wavelet decompositions allows for unexpected
accuracy in their numerical approximation. The second part of the research on
boundary element methods continues efforts to understand the degree by which
mathematical treatment of differential equations may be carried out in the
absence of standard smoothness assumptions. These assumptions often do not
reflect conditions present in problems describing phenomena taken from the
physical world. ***