* 9303007
* Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Thin Film Depositions on   Plane Substrates and in Vias
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Vishwanath Prasad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 256,342.00

9303007 Prasad This project is a multidisciplinary, university-industry AMPP
collaborative research program to develop a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
tool which can be used to create and develop new thin film technologies, improve
the old ones, and study the effect of process parameters on film structure and
its mechanical and electrical properties. Essential features of this MD model
are: a suitable potential function(s); efficient algorithms for force evaluation
and sorting of neighbor atoms; higher-order, adaptive time-interval integration
schemes; an appropriate temperature control algorithm and an improved method for
calculations of local and average film stresses. It can simulate three-
dimensional thin film depositions on plane substrates and in vias for
metallization of passivation of devices. By allowing the periodic boundary
conditions to vary, this model can demonstrate the effect of substrate
conditions, e.g., external stresses and temperature. The effect of gas impurity
and ion bombardment can be studied by varying the descriptions of the deposited
atoms. A hybrid approach where a via solution is built from the results for
plane surfaces and corners is also proposed. Two different strategies, use of a
massive parallel computer, and distributed computing on a cluster of
workstations will be developed for computations for a large number of particles.
Predictions of the PI will be compared with the experimental data obtained from
the IBM and AT&amp;T research laboratories. With the help of this simulation
code, a deposition process can be designed on a computer and a range of
optimized conditions for the growth of thin films of uniform structure and
consistent properties can be predicted. A suitable visualization software can
display the evolution process on a monitor screen which can be video recorded
for further analysis. This research will be a major step in the direction of
using molecular dynamics theory for micro-and nano-technolo gy, an area of
significant future growth. ***