* 9303032
* Ion Beam and Surface Analytical Studies of Macromolecular   Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/1997
* USD 255,000.00

9303032 Gardella This research deals with studies directed at understanding the
structure and reactivity of polymer surfaces. A special focus of the research
program is emphasis on refining surface-sensitive spectroscopic measurements to
derive structure, bonding, and reactivity information from macromolecular
surfaces. In particular, model systems are constructed by Langmuir-Blodgett (LB)
techniques to determine the qualitative and quantitative capabilities, and
sampling depths of Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS), High Resolution
Electron Energy Loss Spectrometry (HREELS), and angle and energy dependant
Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis (ESCA or X-Ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy, XPS). Results from SIMS, ESCA and infrared spectroscopic methods
are combined with surface energetics, thermal analysis, electron microscopy, and
other more established methods in addressing three general problems in polymer
surface science. One focus is to provide quantitative descriptions of the
surface reactivity of thin molecular, monomer, and polymer films prepared by LB
and "self-assembly" methods. A second group of projects aims to describe the
near-surface composition and structure of selected multicomponent and multiphase
polymers, especially those which are phase separated. Emphasis is placed on
determining the effects of preparation and evaluating the composition as a
function of depth. The third area of investigation involves surface chemical
modification of fluoropolymers using both low-wattage plasmas and chemical
reactions. The studies for the next three-year period build on the previous
work, and the new research program will emphasize the use of quantitative SIMS
methods study interfacial polymer chemistry. This research aims to develop
quantitative methods of measuring the composition of polymer surfaces. This type
of information in essential for an understanding of such applications as
adhesion and biocompatibility. ***