* 9303942
* SEM and Electron Microprobe Analysis of Ceramics from       Machu Picchu, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1997
* USD 26,873.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Burger and his colleagues will
conduct a technical analysis of pottery excavated at the archaeological site of
Machu Picchu which is located in the Andes mountains of Peru. Discovered by
Hiram Bingham in the early 1900s, this is one of the most spectacular Incan
sites and is visited by large numbers of tourists each year. However despite
it's fame and extensive excavations conducted by Bingham, it is not well
understood how the site functioned and what purpose within the Incan empire it
served. Through ceramic analysis Dr. Burger will address this question. He will
take a sample of ceramic materials and subject them to combined scanning
electron microscope (SEM) and electron microprobe examination. With the former
technique he will gain insight into the manufacturing process and this will
allow him to determine the degree of standardization. The latter technique will
permit him to determine the elemental composition of the paste and allow Dr.
Burger to infer whether it derived from one geographical source or many. On this
basis he can begin to reconstruct the economic and political context in which
these essential materials were distributed and produced. The Inca peoples
created an empire which spread from Ecuador to Argentina and from the heights of
the Andes mountains to the arid Pacific coasts. Lacking both writing and a
centralized market system they were able to integrate large numbers of disparate
peoples into a single political system. Archaeologists wish to understand how
they were able to accomplish this and how the Incan system developed. The study
of pottery in what is clearly an elite context should provide insight. In
addition to the knowledge this research will provide about Incan prehistory, it
is important because of the methodological contribution it will make. Although
the combined SEM electron microprobe is currently used in geological studies it
has not been applied an archaeological contexts. If it is successful it may
greatly simplify ceramic analysts' work. Dr. Burger's research constitutes a
first practical test and the methodological implications are considerable.