* 9303374
* Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory of Vertex      Operator Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Chongying Dong, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 51,700.00

The theory of vertex operator algebras and their representations is a very
important subject of study, which has many applications in mathematics and
physics. The first area of this project is the study of the representation
theory of vertex operator algebras. This study will lead to the construction of
irreducible twisted modules which are always assumed to exist in the physics
literature. The second area of the project is the study of the orbifold theory
associated with a finite cyclic group G for a holomorphic vertex algebra V. The
last area of the project is to study the moonshine module vertex operator
algebra and to prove the Frenkel-Lepowsky-Meurman conjecture on the moonshine
module vertex operator algebra. Conformal field theory is an important physical
theory describing both two-dimensional critical phenomena in condensed matter
physics and classical motions of strings in string theory. Besides its
importance in physics, the beautiful and rich mathematical structure of
conformal field theory also has interested many mathematicians. New relations
between different branches of mathematics, such as representations of infinite-
dimensional Lie algebras and groups, Riemann surfaces and algebraic curves, the
Monster sporadic group, modular functions and modular forms, elliptic genera,
and knot theory, is revealed in the study of conformal field theory. It is
believed that the study of the mathematics involved in conformal field theory
will lead to new mathematical structures which will be important both in
mathematics and theoretical physics.