* 9303682
* Exploitation of Primitive Molecular Recognition Effects in  Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Joseph Hupp, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 02/28/1997
* USD 218,700.00

Professor Hupp of Northwestern University will investigate the effects of
molecular recognition on electron transfer rates with support from the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program. He plans to probe two
fundamental aspects of electron transfer reactions, one being the molecular
aspects of the solvation barrier, the other being the influence of the
intervening medium on the donor/acceptor electronic coupling strength. He will
conduct four classes of experiments to assess these issues. 1) Crown ethers in
solution will bind to D/A complexes, and this binding will simulate the
molecular aspects of solvation. 2) Donors and acceptors will be trapped inside
hemicarcerands, and the influence on bimolecular electron transfer will likewise
simulate the molecular aspects of solvation. 3) D/A complexes where the bridging
ligand is a crown ether or related moiety will be examined vis-a-vis their
binding of cations; this will give information on the effects on coupling
strength. 4) D/A complexes will be examined as a function of the conformation of
the bridging ligand;this will give information about gated electron transfer and
it will help in the interpretation of the studies in part 3. The general outcome
of these studies will be an enhanced understanding of how electron transfer over
long distances is affected by the intervening and surrounding media. %%% One of
the major types of chemical reaction is electron transfer from one atom to
another. This can even occur over long distances, when the two atoms are
separated because they reside in bulky molecules, or because they reside in
remote sites within the same molecule. Under such circumstances the rates of
electron transfer are quite sensitive to the intervening medium and also to the
surrounding solvent. Experiments to gain a general understanding of these
effects will be undertaken by examining electron transfer in molecules that have
been designed specifically for this purpose. In particular, aspects of
"molecular recognition" will be investigated. Molecular recognition means that
the specific structural features of one molecule will cause it to bind to
another molecule in a highly controlled way; this binding will then lead to
effects on the rates that can be directly attributed to known aspects of the
bound molecule.