* 9303417
* SGER: Predation by Fishes on Species of Mnemiopsis in the   Coastal Waters of the Americas, and its Potential Utility asA Means of Population Control in the Black Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1993,02/29/1996
* G. Richard Harbison, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1996
* USD 48,910.00

About ten years ago, the ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi, first appeared in the
Black Sea. This ctenophore was previously found only on the eastern seaboard of
the Americas, so it was probably transported to the Black Sea in the ballast
water of ships. Since then, it has multiplied enormously, causing a drastic
decline of several important fisheries. One possible reason for its profound
impact in the Black Sea is that the ctenophore has no predators there, since the
fish fauna is extremely limited. Therefore, in collaboration with Russian and
Ukrainian scientists, this Small Grant for Exploratory Research project will
develop a plan to study the feasibility of introducing fishes from the Americas
that specifically feed on Mnemiopsis. These scientists are ware of the dangers
of introducing exotic species, and recognize the need for a general agreement as
to the advisability of such a course from all of the nations in the region.
However, before any such proposals can be put forward, basic information on the
feeding behavior and environmental tolerances of such fishes is necessary. This
project represent the first step in the American part of this research program.
Basic information on feeding preferences of fishes will be obtained by
interviews with local fishermen along the eastern seaboard of the Americas, and
with laboratory studies on feeding preference. Methods will be developed for the
mass culture of Mnemiopsis in the laboratory. Dr. Harbison will also determine
the ability of these American ctenophore-eating fishes to survive in the
specialized environmental conditions of the Black Sea. This research will
provide the first step in trying to solve a major case of biological pollution,
and will serve as a model program for international cooperation in dealing with
other forms of introduced marine species.