* 9303898
* Understanding the Function of the Upfl Protein in mRNA      Turnover
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Stuart Peltz, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 01/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9303898 Peltz Recently, it has become clear that the decay rates of mRNAs are
regulated and play an important role in controlling gene expression. Work from
many laboratories has demonstrated the requirement for translation in the
degradation of mRNAs, and understanding the relationship between these two
processes is a major challenge for this field. One clear example of this
relationship is the observation that nonsense mutations accelerate the decay
rates of mRNAs 10- to 20-fold. We have demonstrated that the product of the UPF1
gene is involved in this pathway. Deletion of the UPF1 gene from the yeast
chromosome completely abrogates the accelerated decay of nonsense-containing
mRNAs without affecting the decay of wild-type transcripts. The DNA sequence of
the UPF1 gene has been determined and demonstrated to contain several sequence
motifs and regions of homology with other genes that may suggest several
putative activities, including: 1) an NTP binding and hydrolysis motif(s), 2) an
RNA helicase motif, 3) Zinc-finger motifs and 4) sequence homology with the SEN1
gene, whose protein product is the noncatalytic subunit of the tRNA splicing
endonuclease. Biochemical analysis of the Upf1 protein has revealed that it is
polysome-associated and that the decay rates of nonsense-containing mRNAs in
extracts prepared from UPF1+ and upf1- strains recapitulate the results observed
in cells. Based on these observations, the objective of this proposal is to
genetically characterize the UPF1 gene in order to begin to identify its role in
the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway. Mutations in the UPF1 gene will be
isolated and their alleles will be characterized to determine the effect of
these mutations on the decay of nonsense- containing mRNAs. %%% Proper cellular
growth and differentiation is determined by the regulated expression of the
genetic material within the cell. The control of gene expression has been
studied intensively in many organisms and ha s been demonstrated to be
controlled at multiple points from transcriptional initiation to protein
stability. Recently, it has become clear that the decay rates of mRNAs are
regulated and play an important role in controlling gene expression. The decay
rates of mRNAs vary from each other by more than fifty-fold. In addition, mRNA
decay can be modulated depending upon multiple factors including the stage of
the cell cycle, cellular differentiation and reponses to hormones. The
mechanisms which are responsible for determining either the intrinsic decay rate
of an mRNA or the regulation of that rate are largely unknown. It is the goal of
my laboratory to identify both cis-acting sequences and trans-acting factors
which regulate mRNA stability. ***