* 9303029
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of COP9, A Regulatory        Component Involved in Light-Controlled Development in       Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Xing-Wang Deng, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 384,500.00

9303029 Deng Light signals from the environment are perceived by specific
regulatory photoreceptors in plants and transduced by unknown mechanisms to
control growth and development. The long term goal of this research is to
dissect the molecular mechanisms by which such signals are transduced and
integrated to modulate plant development. The light-regulated seedling
development of Arabidopsis thaliana has been used as a model experimental system
in my laboratory. Nine COP (constitutive photomorphogenic) loci, which when
mutated produce dark-grown seedlings with a morphology resembling that of light-
grown wild-type seedlings, have been identified. The Arabidopsis COP1
(constitutive photomorphogenic) locus, which plays a central role in the light
signaling process and encodes a novel protein with putative DNA-binding and
G-protein homology domains, represents the only light signaling component
besides phytochrome that has been characterized in a molecular term. The
preliminary studies in my laboratory indicate that the cop9 mutation results in
the same range of phenotype as the cop1 mutants. Therefore COP9 and COP1 may
encode closely related regulatory components in the same signaling pathway. It
is proposed here to clone and sequence the COP9 locus, by using an available
T-DNA insertional mutant allele. After determining the molecular identity of the
COP9 gene, appropriate probes (DNA and antibodies) will be developed for the
molecular analysis and COP9 promoter-GUS transgenic plants will be generated for
analyzing expression pattern of the COP9 gene. With these tools available, it
will enable us to determine at the molecular level 1) how the wild-type COP9
gene product couples light signals and seedling development, and 2) the
relationship between the COP1 and COP9 genes. Furthermore, the regulatory
hierarchy of COP9 and other identified photomorphogenic loci during light-
regulated seedling development will be analyzed. %%% Accomplishment of these
studies will not only ascertain the nature of a critical regulatory component
that links light signals to seedling development, but also provide clues as to
how the COP9 relates to other photomorphogenic genes. ***