* 9303983
* Mathematical Sciences:Mathematics in Industry:              Opportunities and Educational Requirements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* I. Edward Block, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1996
* USD 190,000.00

9303983 Block The Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) will
conduct a project that will provide guidelines for those educators who desire to
improve the match of their mathematics graduate students (master's and doctoral)
to the needs of business, industry, and government by characterizing both the
uses and users of mathematics in those sectors by identifying the skills and
attributes possessed by successful practitioners of nonacademic mathematics, by
communicating this information to employers and educators, and by initiating and
promoting reform in education for those master's and doctoral students bound for
careers in industrial mathematics. Data from surveys and interviews of selected
graduates, their employers, and their faculty will be analyzed and appropriate
recommendations and guidelines developed. The objectives of the project are to
(1) characterize the demand for individuals with training in the mathematical
sciences at the master's and doctoral levels and the ways in which training is
utilized in industry; (2) characterize the skills and attributes possessed by
successful practitioners of nonacademic mathematics as well as any perceived
weaknesses of current mathematics graduates; (3) formulate guidelines for
educators who desire to improve the match of mathematics graduate students to
the needs of industry; (4) create a continuing process to monitor the progress
of mathematics graduates in industry and to disseminate this information to
educators; (5) initiate activities to increase among industry managers
understanding of how mathematical and computational analysis can be used
effectively to improve product design, manufacturing processes, and other
industrial functions; and (6) assess the value of mathematics as perceived by
influential managers in a cross- section of U.S. industries. The project
consists of three tasks: (1) a written survey with telephone follow-up of recent
mathematics graduates and their employers and relevant faculty; (2) site visits
to industrial organizations and federal laboratories; and (3) a survey of
decision makers in industry about the current and potential future value of
mathematics to industry.