* 9303299
* PRF/J:  Intraspecific Chloroplast-DNA Variation and         Phytogeography in the Pacific Northwest
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Jacqueline Soule, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 09/30/1997
* USD 69,600.00

Many plants exhibit a similar geographic distribution, occurring from
southeastern Alaska to northern California. Molecular genetic investigations of
three species have revealed a pronounced north-south cytoplasmic discontinuity
located south of the Wisconsin glacial maximum. These data implicate glaciation
as a possible causal factor in creating the discontinuity and raises the
possibility of a link between phytogeography and the genetic architecture of
plants in the Pacific Northwest. If so, then other plants displaying similar
geographic distributions should also exhibit similar patterns of genetic
variation. This study addresses two questions: (a) do similar geographic
patterns of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) variation occur throughout a spectrum of
Pacific Northwest plant taxa?, (b) are patterns of variation in cytoplasmic and
nuclear markers congruent? Populations of five taxonomically diverse taxa (a
gymnosperm, a monocot, and dicots from Dilleniidae, Rosidae, and Asteridae)
having different life history features will be examined using cpDNA restriction
site analysis, rDNA analysis, and enzyme electrophoresis. From these data,
phylogenies will be generated and patterns of genetic variation will be
assessed. Further analysis will address biogeographical questions and may help
clarify the location and extent of suspected glacial refugia. %%% Our knowledge
of the extent of intraspecific cpDNA variation will be enhanced through this
investigation. It will also serve to facilitate a broad comparison of patterns
and extent of cpDNA variation within species to that observed for nuclear
genetic markers, improve knowledge of plant genetic architecture, and establish
an important link between the areas of systematics and population genetics.