* 9303135
* Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Analytic Function Theory    Via Circle Packing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Kenneth Stephenson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1997
* USD 97,500.00

This project continues investigations into the connections between circle
packing and the theory of analytic functions of a complex variable. Circle
packings have long been an intriguing concept in mathematical research. In 1985
William Thurston proposed that circle packings - packings of plane domains by
circles of various sizes - could lead to a completely new point of view in
conformal mapping. This turned out to be the case and this project is one of
several by-products of that now famous lecture. The idea has grown and
prospered. Circle packings are exhibiting faithful discrete analogues to the
classical results of geometric function theory such as the Schwarz-Pick lemma,
Dirichlet problem, uniformization theorem, Brownian motion, etc. The current
project concentrates on the discrete version of the length-area method, a
powerful, but unwieldy method exercised by a few experts and not easily
understood by consumers of function theory. The second part concerns infinite
packings, possibly the most speculative part of the project. Most research to
date considers only finite packings. The final component of the research
involves packings using circle with overlap. There are fundamental results which
allow for overlap, but little work has been done on this generalization. Past
research led to the development of software for manipulating, displaying and
animating circle packings. This is both a research tool for performing
experiments and a practical method for creating the pictures needed for
presentation. The software is freely available. Complex function theory is the
mathematical basis for computing with and visualizing the behavior of complex
functions of a complex variable. The subject has an extensive history and is
normally studied concurrently as analysis and geometry. This project adds a new
dimension: computation. Circle packing leads naturally to computer simulation.
This in turn has led to new insights and proofs in the classical theory. To
prove its worth, the new point of view will have to lead to new , unexpected
discoveries.