* 9303164
* PRF/J:  The Evolution of Metabolic Rate in Response to      Temperature
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* David Berrigan, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 69,600.00

Interspecific comparisons of temperature effects on metabolic rates of
ectotherms have long been used as premier examples of physiological adaptation
to environment - - typically populations from relatively cold habitats have
evolved increased metabolic capacities (compensation) at low body temperatures.
Interspecific comparisons provide a perspective on long term evolutionary
patterns, but little insight into contemporary dynamics of physiological
evolution. The dynamics of metabolic evolution in contemporary populations will
be explored using a series of complementary studies of the thermal dependence of
metabolic rate in Drosophila melanogaster. First, replicate stocks of the
species will be compared. Second, these results will be compared to the same
type of data from specimens collected along a 3000 kilometer transect. If
compensatory evolution has occurred, flies evolving at low temperatures (or high
latitudes) are expected to exhibit elevated metabolic rates relative to flies
from high temperature situations. Correlated responses of thermal dependence of
metabolic rate to selection for temperature extremes will also be examined. If
there are genetic correlations between components of the metabolic response to
temperature, selection for tolerance of temperature extremes should influence
metabolic rate at other temperatures. %%% Metabolic rate in ectotherms has a
profound significance for locomotor performance, competitive ability, and is
strongly correlated with an array of life history variables. Recent work in
comparative and evolutionary physiology repeatedly stresses the importance of
understanding the evolution of thermal sensitivity, but few studies have
examined this feature in small ectotherms. One important goal of studying
comparative physiology is to ascertain why tradeoffs between life history
parameters (for example, the tradeoff between growth rate and asymptotic size)
exist. Ultimately such research has implications for understanding the
biological limits of human life history traits such as longevity and
reproductive life span.