* 9303974
* Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition of Aluminum Nitride: Surface Chemistry and Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* James Rogers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 11/30/1996
* USD 319,773.00

This work focusses on the growth and processing of aluminum nitride (AlN), a
technologically important III-V compound, by metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD). The adsorption, decomposition, and thermal stability of a
series of alkylaluminum and alkylsilylaluminum compounds are investigated on
selected substrates. The derivatized substrates are subsequently reacted with a
nitridant gas (ammonia or hydrazine) to promote precursor formation; the
precurser is then reacted further to form two-dimensional oligomers of AlN.
Energetics and intermediates at each stage of the deposition process are probed
with both high-pressure and ultrahigh-vacuum surface analysis techniques.
Objectives include the requirements for ordered growth at low substrates
temperature, use of modified substrates as templates for site-selective
adsorption, more facile nitridant gases, and the advantages of using alkylsilyl
leaving groups in MOCVD. Aluminum nitride (AlN) possess a wide Fermic band gap,
high thermal conductivity, high refractivity, chemical inertness, and a good
thermal match to silicon; these properties make it an ideal material for
electronic packaging. It also has application in passivation layers, dielectric
layers, piezoelectric films, and nonelectronic applications. This study of
improved deposition technology for AlN could also have applicability to other
materials desired in thin-film form.//