* 9303880
* Organization of Bacteriophage T4 DNA Replication Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Edward Gogol, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1995
* USD 210,000.00

Initial experiments to visualize components of the bacteriophage T4 replication
apparatus by cryo-EM, under enzymatically active conditions, have successfully
identified distinctive assemblies of a complex of the replication accessory
proteins bound to DNA. These assemblies require continual ATP hydrolysis, have
short lifetimes, and appear to comprise only a minority of the protein in the
sample; hence they are difficult to isolate for structural analysis by means
other than cryo-EM. The next step in this project is determining the composition
and arrangement of the proteins in these complexes, by a combination of cryo-EM,
site- specific labelling (subunit-specific antibodies and covalent labels), and
biochemical analysis. The mechanism of formation and translocation of these
structures will be examined, and their interaction with the T4 DNA polymerase
will be determined, to try to understand the role of the accessory proteins in
the process of replication. The other elements of the T4 replication machinery,
the DNA helicase and RNA primase, will also be examined by these methods, to
determine their arrangement in enzymatically active complexes and their
structural relationship to the polymerase. %%% Accurate and efficient
replication of the genome is a critical process in all life. Much progress has
been made, primarily by biochemical analysis, in elucidating the molecular
mechanism of DNA replication. The complexity of the enzymes involved is greater
than had been initially anticipated. The interactions among the many proteins
required for DNA replication have proven particularly difficult to analyze
directly, in part due to the transient nature of active replication complexes.
New technologies in electron microscopy, in particular the use of minimally-
perturbing specimen preservation by cryogenic methods (cryo-EM), has opened new
avenues to approach the study of active, chemically-sensitive macromolecular
assemblies such as those which catalyze DNA replication. Biochemical examination
of replication mechanisms in many different organisms has identified common
elements of the process, which allow structural information gained about simple
systems (phage and bacteria) to be related to genome replication in higher
organisms. The work proposed here is an attempt to further the understanding of
the mechanism of DNA replication by structural study of functionally relevant
complexes of the proteins of the bacteriophage T4 replication apparatus (with
DNA templates and products), and to correlate the structural analysis to steps
in the enzymatic activity.