* 9303401
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Monitoring Micro DrillingProcess States
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1994,02/28/1997
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1997
* USD 18,915.00

9303401 Ehmann This award provides funds to permit Dr. Kornel F. Ehmann,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern University, to pursue with
Dr. Dong Woo Cho, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pohang Institute of
Science and Technology, Korea, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research
on factors relevant to process quality and efficiency monitoring of the micro-
hole drilling process in microelectronics manufacture. Their objective is to
develop and implement a technology for on- line monitoring of gradual drill
wear, breakage, and the locational tolerances of through holes on both top and
bottom surfaces of multi-layer printed circuit boards (PCB's). A combined
theoretical and experimental approach will be implemented in this research. A
new theoretical approach will be utilized based on (1) the mechanics of initial
penetration, for determining the state of the process, and on (2) the use of
neuro-fuzzy algorithms, for recognition purposes. Practical studies will take
place on a unique instrumented high speed micro-drilling testbed. Micro-hole
drilling is becoming increasingly important in a wide spectrum of precision
manufacturing industries including the production of automotive fuel injection
nozzles, watch and camera parts, medical needles, air bearings, and thick multi-
layer printed PCB's in electronic circuitry. Mechanical micro- drilling has
proved to be superior to alternative methods such as laser drilling. The
collaborators are recognized as experts in the field of the proposal. They will
be assisted by graduate students who are not supported under this grant. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Korean participation in the project is sup ported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This project adds an international cooperative
dimension to the PI's research under NSF Grant No. DDM-9201144. ***