* 9303321
* PRF/M:  Age of the Amazon Rainforest:  New Evidence Using   Stable Isotopes and Fossil Mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1994,01/31/1996
* Bruce MacFadden, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1996
* USD 56,320.00

Stable isotopes such as carbon-13 can be used to analyze diets of mammals that
inhabited the Amazon River basin during the late Quaternary period, as well as
local habitats and regional climates. Prior studies of fossil mammals and
paleosol carbonates indicate the Amazon has undergone major change within the
last few to several tens of thousands of years. This assertion can be tested by
assessing the types of plants eaten by herbivores of ancient ecological
communities because: (a) incorporation into animal hard tissues (bone, dentine,
enamel) of photosynthetic carbon is from only two sources - - C3 (Calvin cycle)
plants or C4 (Hatch-Slack cycle) plants, and the ratio of each type plant gives
a clue as to the composition of the prevalent vegetation at the time; (b)
isotopic content of carbon from carbon dioxide can be measured by mass
spectroscopy using pulverized fossil or carbonate samples. Analysis of
carbonates precipitated in ancient soils and fossilized bone, some of which was
originally hydroxyapatite Ä±Ca10- (PO4)6-(OH)2!, highly porous and subject to
diagenesis (secondary alteration of the original chemical composition). More
than 25 species of mammals from several Orders should be available, including
Edentata (e.g., mylodont sloths, Megalonyx, armadillos, glyptodonts),
Proboscidea such as Haplomastodon, Perissodactyla (Tapirus), Artiodactyla, and
Notoungulata. %%% Results should yield insight into the question of whether the
present Amazon rainforests were formerly covered at least to some extent by
grasslands. These findings may in turn reveal to what extent global changes have
been directional or cyclic over extended time periods.