* 9303591
* Transition Metal Boryl and Borylidene Complexes:  Synthesis and Reactivity of Unusual Metal Ligand Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* John Hartwig, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 11/30/1996
* USD 250,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports study by Dr. John F. Hartwig of the Chemistry Department, Yale
University, on transition metal complexes with boryl and borylidene
substituents. Borylidene complexes have not previously been prepared. Boryl
complexes of a wide variety of metals containing from zero to eight d-electrons
will be synthesized using methods demonstrated by Hartwig in preliminary work.
Basic information will be compiled on structure and reactivity of this class of
compounds which has not been definitively characterized. The boryl species are
of direct interest because of their relevance to metal catalyzed hydroboration,
which is widely used in organic synthesis, including stereospecific synthesis.
These compounds may display novel reactions not previously observed in related
compounds with metal carbon or metal oxygen bonds. %%% Compounds which contain
one or two bonds between a transition metal and a boron atom have not been
extensively studied. They are analogs to other compounds containing metal-carbon
bonds which are known to be useful catalysts for organic reactions. Because of
the different electronic characteristics of the boron-containing compounds, they
have been shown to have useful catalytic properties, but their potential has not
been fully explored. Dr. Hartwig will develop synthetic methods for preparing
metal-boron compounds, determine their structure and basic properties, and test
their reactivity, particularly as related to their potential use as catalysts.