* 9303304
* PRF/J:  Neighborhood Models of Spatial Interactions in      Tropical Tree Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Sean Thomas, MA Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1995
* USD 69,600.00

Neighborhood models of plant competition have recently proved of considerable
use in predicting consequences of local interference to plant population
dynamics. In tropical forests, competition is but one of several kinds of local
interaction thought to be important; others significant interactions include the
effects of "natural enemies" on growth and survivorship of conspecific trees
(the "Janzen-Connell effect"), and local pollen limitation of reproductive
output in obligately outcrossing species (a form of "Allee effect"). This
research will develop general neighborhood models that incorporate competitive
interactions as well as Janzen- Connell and Allee-type interactions in tropical
tree populations. Empirical analyses and simulation studies will make use of
extensive data sets available from 50 hectare forest plots at Barro Colorado
Island, Panama and at Pasoh Forest Reserve, Malaysia. An important facet of
developing these models will be a focus on dioecious tree species. The fact that
female trees produce seed, while male trees do not, provides an unexplored
aspect of spatial analyses aimed at elucidating patterns of seed dispersal, and
for detecting and measuring Janzen-Connell and Allee-type interactions. It is
expected the models will be particular useful in predicting consequences of
habitat fragmentation on tropical tree populations. %%% Spatial interactions in
tropical forests have received relatively little research attention. A variety
of hypothesized mechanisms has been advanced for explaining the maintenance of
tree species diversity in tropical forests, including niche partitioning on
edaphic gradients, Janzen-Connell effects, "regeneration niche" differences,
demographic "storage effects," and size structure effects but these potential
mechanisms have generally been modeled in isolation such that effects of
interactions have been ignored. Recognition of this shortcoming in previous
models may represent the best hope of addressing predicted responses of
rainforest trees to habitat fragmentation and other massive anthropogenic
changes in the forested tropics.