* 9303871
* Chloroplast Protein Phosphatase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* John Markwell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 137,000.00

Markwell 9303871 Protein Phosphorylation plays a major role in eukaryotic
cellular regulation. Much recent attention has been focused on the protein
phosphatase enzymes which reverse this covalent modification, but there remains
a paucity of information about these enzymes in plants. Chloroplastic thylakoid
membrane protein phosphorylation in higher plants senses environmental light
conditions and correspondingly regulates steady-state photosynthetic energy
production. Whereas much attention has been devoted to the protein kinases which
phosphorylate thylakoid proteins, relatively little is known about the protein
phosphatase enzymes which reverse this covalent modification. The native
phosphoprotein substrates are membrane bound and lack of a soluble substrate for
the protein phosphatase has been the major limitation in studies of this enzyme.
Recent work by the P.I.s has found that synthetic substrate-analog
phosphopeptides are exogenous substrates capable of selectively assaying the
thylakoid protein phosphatase. Using these substrates, this project will purify
and characterize the protein phosphatase activity from pea thylakoid membranes.
Characterization will include kinetic analysis of the enzyme's substrate
specificity utilizing model phosphopeptides, biochemical analysis of structure
and relationship to previously characterized eukaryotic protein phosphatases.
These studies will provide an understanding of the mechanisms underlying
reversible chloroplastic protein phosphorylation and the role of thylakoid
protein phosphatase in plant bioenergetics and physiology. %%% During a normal
day, a plant is exposed to continually changing light conditions. In order to
maintain efficient photosynthetic energy production, plants have evolved the
ability to respond to qualitatively and quantitatively different light
environments. The signal transduction for this compensatory mechanism involves
the phosphorylation of chloroplast proteins involved in harvesti ng light
energy. While many studies have been conducted on the kinase enzyme responsible
for phosphorylation of the light-harvesting pigment-protein complexes, very
little is known about the protein phosphatase enzyme which reverses the
phosphorylation. The major goal of this project is to purify and characterize
the thylakoid protein phosphatase enzyme. These studies will provide an
understanding of the role this enzyme plays in the ability of plants to optimize
photosynthetic energy production under the diverse light conditions which
naturally occur. ***