* 9303172
* PRF/J:  The Direct and Indirect Effects of Temperature and  Food on Life History and Production of Pseudochironomus     Richardsoni
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Susan Gresens, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/1997
* USD 69,600.00

Direct and indirect effects of temperature and food resources on the life
history and production of the aquatic insect Pseudochironomus richardsoni
(Diptera: Chironomidae) will be determined by this research. Field studies are
to be conducted in the Eel River of northern California. In this system, larvae
of the midge Pseudochironomus are an integral link in the trophic cascade by
which carnivorous fish affect the abundance of algae in the river. Specific
objectives are to: (a) compare estimates of seasonal production by the midge in
distinct river habitats that vary in temperature and food resources, (b)
determine variability of relevant physical factors and food resources using path
analysis, (c) by means of radioisotope techniques, identify physiological
mechanisms involved in the interactions between Pseudochironomus, diatoms
(Cladophora), and algal epiphytes such as green algae (Zygnema). %%% Prior
laboratory studies have examined effects of temperature on interactions of
primary consumers, chironomids, and algal foods and habitats but the tendency
has been to perform such studies by rearing chironomids in isolation from other
species. This research has the advantage of integrating larger scale
investigations with small scale enclosure experiments and laboratory studies of
midge- algae interactions. Results should reveal whether shelter provided by
floating algal mats enhance chironomid growth and numbers. These small aquatic
invertebrates serve as essential prey items for fish species of the northwestern
United States, such as salmonids, whose recent numbers have declined along with
the quality of running waters. This research focuses on gaining a better
understanding of interactions at the base of the aquatic food pyramid (the
critical primary producers and consumers), and can provide a basis for studies
at higher levels on the trophic pyramid as well.