* 9303489
* Mathematical Sciences: Research In Algebraic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Edgar Brown, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1997
* USD 258,800.00

Four investigators will study a variety of problems in algebraic topology. (1)
Edgar H. Brown, Jr. will continue his applications of the machinery developed in
"Continuous Cohomology and Real Homotopy Theory" to mod p homotopy theory,
classifying spaces of foliations, and real homotopy type of Kaehler manifolds.
(2) Kiyoshi Igusa will study the relationship between the higher Reidemeister
torsion invariants (algebraic K-theory invariants associated to the
diffeomorphism space of a smooth manifold) and the simpler cyclic homology
groups associated to circle bundles. In particular, he has a plan to prove a
complexified version of a theorem of Bokstedt, which if proved would give an
explicit realization of these difficult invariants. The methods he will use are
Morse theory, algebraic K-theory, and cyclic homology. (3) Jerome P. Levine will
work on a direct topological description of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer rho-
invariant of an odd-dimensional manifold, and determining when it is a homotopy
invariant. In particular, he has a conjectured formula for the jump along a path
of representations. He is also investigating the possible use of the algebraic
version of the rho-invariant (a multisignature) to determine the torsion-free
part of the homology concordance surgery group (Gamma-group) of Cappell-
Shaneson. He will continue to study the "algebraic closure" construction in
group theory, particularly in its application to link concordance questions.
Several geometric questions reduce to purely algebraic questions about the
algebraic closure of the free group. (4) Daniel Ruberman will treat a number of
problems in gauge theory related to the topology of low dimensional manifolds.
One main aspect of the work is the further development of gauge theory on
4-manifolds with boundary, via the moduli space of finite energy anti-self-dual
connections. Applications include obstructions to the representation of homology
classes by surfaces of low genus as well as a new knot cobordism invariant. The
project also includes a study of gauge-theoretic invariants of connections on
3-manifolds, and the relation of such invariants to the topology of the space of
flat SU(2) connections. These invariants lead to potentially new obstructions to
a group's being the fundamental group of a 3-manifold. These various projects
concern the topology and geometry of manifolds, which are spaces locally
resembling the familiar Euclidean spaces. Three and four-dimensional manifolds
provide models for the physical world of space and time, while manifolds of
higher dimension arise naturally as the parameter spaces for complicated systems
involving many variables. The fundamental problems about such spaces include
their classification in terms of numerical and algebraic invariants, the
classification of their symmetries (or diffeomorphisms) and the determination of
how one space may sit inside another (as a knotted curve sits inside of
3-dimensional space). Brown is perfecting some of the algebraic machinery
required. Igusa's part of the project studies ways in which complicated families
of symmetries may be understood in terms of algebraic invariants derived from
corresponding families of matrices. Levine is investigating the interpretation
in topology of an analytically defined invariant, as well its uses in the theory
of knots. Ruberman will use the Yang-Mills equations of mathematical physics to
understand the nature of four-dimensional manifolds and the two-dimensional
surfaces which they contain.