* 9303258
* PRF/J:  Loss of Functional Constraints:  Implications for   Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Keith Crandall, MO Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/1996
* USD 34,800.00

9303258 CRANDALL Within the North American crayfish fauna there are at least 13
proposed independent species colonizations of the cave environment; the
evolutionary divergences span nearly 60 million years. These troglobitic species
exhibit loss of vision, lack of pigment, and other aptations to the subterranean
environment. Such characters in this taxon make it possible to test hypotheses
about effects of vision loss at the molecular level. Thirteen species pairs,
consisting of one troglobitic (blind) and one epigean (not blind) species, will
be compared for molecular level changes in the gene for the visual pigment
rhodopsin. Effects of relaxed functional constraint on the molecular evolution
of the rhodopsin gene, in terms of nucleotide substitutions, amino acid
substitutions, and functional domains, will be examined. This comparative
approach will benefit from substantial statistical power not previously
available in studies of relaxed functional constraint. In addition the utility
of the rhodopsin gene in phylogenetic analyses is to be explored, along with
investigation of relationships of the ten genera of the crayfish subfamily
Cambarinae. %%% In this study that will generate comparative data on the
molecular evolution of DNA sequences both with and without functional
constraint, higher rates of genetic codon substitution are predicted in the case
of evolution without functional constraints (troglobitic species). Under cond
ition of functional release, equal rates of substitution are expected at each
nucleotide position within a codon. These mutational events will be interpreted
in a context of tertiary (3 dimensional) structure of the crystallized protein
of rhodopsin, which is comprised of 15 definable domains. Mutational "hotspots"
can then be detected and interpreted in terms of genetic function. Perhaps the
most potent general effect of this research will be to demonstrate the
interpretive advantage which can be derived by adopting the phylogenetic
approach when attacking biological questions at the molecular genetic level. ***