* 9303244
* PRF/J:  Hormonal Regulation of Worker Behavior in Stingless Bees (Melipona favosa F.)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Sean O'Donnell, WI Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1996
* USD 69,600.00

The first endocrinological regulating mechanism for plasticity in division of
labor identified in a eusocial insect, the honey bee (Apis mellifera), is
juvenile hormone (JH). The evolution of JH as a regulator of division of labor
by age-based task performance (age polyethism) in advanced eusocial insects will
be examined in this research. What will be sought are correlative and causal
relationships between JH titer and age polyethisms in workers of two species
exhibiting independently- evolved advanced eusocial behavior: the stingless bee
Melipona favosa and the swarm-founding wasp Polybia occidentalis. Field studies
in Panama are to encompass three topics: (a) association of JH titer with
behavioral differences, by examination of correlations between endogenous JH
titer (assessed by radio-immunoassay) and rate of age polyethisms in workers
from unmanipulated colonies, (b) effects of increased JH on behavior, by
application of JH topically to M. favosa workers and then testing for dose-
dependency effects on age polyethism, (c) correlation of JH titer with
plasticity of behavioral role, to be studied by removal of workers from foraging
and nest working tasks, then gauging the JH titers of behaviorally altered
individuals compared with non-responsive ones. Results will elucidate patterns
of the evolution of division of labor, a central component of insect colony
integration of advanced eusocial insects. %%% Insect societies are complex,
self-organizing entities that are useful as models for other systems such as
nervous systems and organismal development. This study will augment our
knowledge of rules governing colony function by enhancing understanding of how
the behavior of individual components of the system are regulated
physiologically. Comprehending mechanisms by which individual behavior is
translated into colony function is a central focus of insect sociobiology. Such
information is critical to discovering the elements responsible for evolutionary
success and ecological impact of eusocial insect in contemporary terrestrial
ecosystems, especially tropical ones such as these Hymenopterans inhabit.