* 9303165
* PRF/J:  Mechanisms of Plant Control Over Nitrogen Cycling in the Rhizosphere
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Charles Jaeger, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Richard F. Dame
* 06/30/1997
* USD 69,600.00

This research will investigate the possibility that plants may influence the
availability of nitrogen (N) in soil surrounding their roots. This came to light
when an unexpected alternation between time of maximum N uptake by plants
(during the first half of the growing season) and maximum uptake by soil
microbes (in the later half) was observed under alpine conditions, despite the
fact that moist conditions would seem more amenable to microbial growth early in
the season. Exploring possible explanations for the observed pattern led to two
hypotheses. First, as a null hypothesis plant-microbe competition for N may be
minimized by growth constraints on both plants and microbes. Plants may
assimilate N when it is required for growth in the spring, at which time soil
microbes lack the carbon to engage in N assimilation and growth, and so remain
quiescent. Later, when plant requirement for carbon (C) and N decreases, and C
becomes available to microbes through increased exudates, microbes begin to
assimilate N and grow. Second, as an alternate hypothesis direct biotic
competition for N may be important. Plants may acquire soil N during times of
predicted high microbial activity by direct manipulation of N cycling in the
rhizosphere through plant exudates. %%% Nitrogen cycling in the rhizosphere is
an important focus for study because long term productivity in an ecosystem is
determined by how effectively fixed nitrogen is conserved within the system. If
at any given time, soil available N is not being maximally assimilated by either
plants or microbes, that N is susceptible to loss via leaching or
denitrification. Such loss can result in nitrate pollution of surface waters or
groundwaters, denitrification of NO3+ into N20 (a greenhouse gas and a reactant
in the degradation of ozone in the ionosphere), and depletion of ecosystem N
with consequent loss of productivity. The approach taken here should make it
possible to evaluate nutrient status of an ecosystem such as California
grassland and assess how it differs with change in species composition. Future
ecosystem function might also be predictable with this knowledge, particularly
as a function of shifts in rainfall, temperature, and nitrogen deposition in the
context of global change models.