* 9303019
* Interface Structure and Emission Efficiency of Polymeric    Light Emitting Diodes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Bing Hsieh, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/28/1997
* USD 346,684.00

9303019 Gao This research addresses surface and interfacial phenomena in
polymeric light emitting diodes (LEDs). The objectives are to understand the
electronic states involved in electroluminescence and the electronic and
chemical structure of polymer/metal interfaces. Coordinated experimental studies
of the interface formation of poly(phenylene vinylene)PPV and a selection of
metals using x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), inverse photoemission
spectroscopy (IPES), electroluminescence spectroscopy (ELS), and other surface
sensitive probes will be conducted. The combination of XPS and IPES in the same
ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system allows probing of both occupied and unoccupied
electronic structures independently and simultaneously. Concurrent measurement
of ELS is expected to reveal relationships between light emission efficiency and
interface electronic structure and chemistry. %%% This research is expected to
provide fundamental information useful for the future development of polymer
based flat panel display technologies. Parameters of practical interest such as
the thicknesses of the polymer and metal layers, different degrees of conversion
and different types of light emitting polymers, and the stability of the LEDs
will be investigated. The project combines expertise in surface physics and
polymer chemistry, and is a joint effort between university and industrial
research scientists. The interdisciplinary nature of the project and the
academic and industrial collaboration is expected to uniquely benefit students
and enhance the transfer of knowledge from university to industry. ***