* 9303251
* PRF/J:  Molecular Genetics of Wing Coloration Polymorphism  in Heliconius Butterflies:  Isolation, Characterization and Phylogenetic Analysis of Linked Nuclear DNA Regions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Andrew Brower, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 69,600.00

The evolution of wing pattern variation in Neotropical mimetic Heliconius
butterflies (altogether 38 species in the genus) is an ideal system for
investigating the roles of genetic drift and natural selection in the formation
of geographical races. Years of studying this system have failed to reveal
underlying mechanisms to which a stunning diversity of distinct allopatric forms
may be attributed. By identifying RAPD molecular genetic markers that co-
segregate with wing-pattern alleles in backcrossed broods, it will be possible
to identify and sequence nuclear DNA fragments linked to pattern-altering
alleles from multiple geographical races of a widespread species (Heliconius
erato). A phylogenetic analysis of each pattern-related marker among different
H. erato races will be compared to an independent phylogenetic hypothesis of
intraspecific relationships from a mitochondrial gene, to determine if similar
wing patterns in allopatric races have been maintained over time by selection,
or have arisen multiply and independently from separate ancestors. %%% Results
will enhance our understanding of the roles of alternate evolutionary forces in
the production of a mimicry complex and provide a preliminary template for
genomic map studies in Heliconius. This study will also illuminate the effects
of selection on phenotype at the molecular level. The possibility of identifying
genes that are functionally involved in pattern formation is an exciting one,
for it has been hypothesized that the developmental pathway responsible for wing
patterns is homologous in all butterflies (and possibly all Lepidoptera). If
this is true, it would have far reaching implications for molecular
developmental biology in general.