* 9303440
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Exposure Age   Dating of Late Weichselian Ice Sheet Boundaries in Western  Norway
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Edward Brook, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,000.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Edward J. Brook of
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to work with Dr. Atle Nesje of the
University of Bergen at the Centre de Spectrometrie Nucleare et de Spectrometrie
de Masse (CSNSM) in Orsay, France. This project proposes to answer fundamental
questions about weathering boundaries in Scandinavia and eastern Canada which
provide important constraints on the history and size of past Northern
Hemisphere Ice Sheets. The primary uncertainties in interpreting the
significance of the boundaries are that the age of associated bedrock surfaces
are not known and their mode of origin (ice limit vs. thermal boundary) is
unclear. Dr. Brook and Dr. Nesje will date bedrock surfaces associated with
weathering boundaries in western Norway using cosmogenic 10Be and 26Al. The
results can be used to evaluate existing models of the Scandinavian ice sheet,
theories about biological refugia during the last glaciation, and the processes
that form weathering boundaries in arctic and sub-arctic environments. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for
twelve months and $300 for excess baggage.