* 9303222
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods for Parameter      Estimation in Distributed Parameter Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Curtis Vogel, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1996
* USD 67,500.00

9303222 Vogel The investigator combines Total Variation based techniques and
parallel computing to develop improved parameter estimation methods. This
proposal deals with computational methods for parameter estimation in
distributed parameter systems. Parameter estimation is the process of
determining coefficient functions, typically for partial differential equations,
from observations of solutions. The work of this project was made possible by
recent advances in scientific computing and image processing. In the field of
image processing, the development of so-called ``Total Variation'' based
techniques enables the reconstruction of much sharper images than was previously
possible. The development of parallel computers allows the solution of complex
2- and 3-dimensional problems, which were previously intractable. Direct
applications of research in parameter estimation include the improved
reconstruction of images from electromagnetic, thermal, and acoustic data. Radar
and sonar are perhaps the most well-known examples. Others include noninvasive
medical imaging techniques such as CAT scans, sonograms, and Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI). Seismic data processing, where recordings of disturbances which
have passed through the earth are used to infer the internal structure of the
earth, is yet another important example. Parameter estimation also plays a key
role in the development of mathematical models, i.e., mathematical descriptions
of physical phenomena. These models are used to describe processes ranging from
the transport of toxic chemicals through the soil to the spread of the AIDS
epidemic. ***