* 9303344
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Otis Brown, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1997
* USD 2,809,553.00

The University of Miami will operate the R/Vs ISELIN and CALANUS during 1993 as
general oceanographic vessels in support of NSF- sponsored research projects.
The R/V ISELIN is a 170' general research vessel owned and constructed by the
University of Miami. Although the vessel is capable of world-wide oceanography
it sails mainly in the Atlantic. In 1993 it will work off the northeast coast of
the U.S. from April until July. The ISELIN will do two cruises off Bermuda in
July, followed by two in the Bahamas and Caribbean in August and September. The
final cruise will be in October and November off the Galapagos Islands in the
Pacific. The R/V CALANUS is a 68' general research vessel owned by the
University of Miami. The Calanus normally sails off the coast of Florida on
short cruises. In 1993 Calanus will do a series of short cruises interspersed
with two cruises in the Bahamas and one in the Gulf of Mexico. These vessels are
part of a fleet used by NSF to support oceanographic research. Most
oceanographic research requires highly specialized equipment that must be
permanently installed on a ship for which the ship must be specifically
designed. This equipment also requires highly trained crew members for
maintenance and operation. These vessels do not operate in the same manner as
general cargo or fishing vessels, therefore NSF supports the operation of a
variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research that are
operated by universities and research institutions and around the country.