* 9303414
* Mathematical Sciences: 1-D Vlasov-Poisson and 2-D Euler     Equations with Measures as Initial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Yuxi Zheng, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 60,287.00

9303414, PI-Zheng: Yuxi Zheng proposes to study the one-dimensional Vlasov-
Poisson equations describing the motion of a collisionless plasma (or stellar
dynamics). He is interested in cases when the initial state of the plasma is
very irregular; i.e., the densities of electrons and ions are finite measures.
Thus, a major difficulty is to find the right weak formulation in which one can
prove that there exists one and possibly the unique weak solution. When the
concept of measure-valued solutions is used, he will carefully look for evidence
to show that it is inevitable. If weak solutions are not unique or stable, he
will look for appropriate entropy criteria and stability conditions or the
underlying mechanism of instability. The methods to be used include the $BV$
calculus of Vol'pert, the concentration-cancellation method of DiPerna-Majda,
and potential theory of Calder\'on-Zygmund type. Explicit exact solutions are
possible and he will construct and use them extensively. He will also
investigate weak convergence of numerical schemes for weak solutions. Yuxi Zheng
proposes to study the motion of a collisionless plasma. He is interested in
cases when the initial state of the plasma is very irregular. This problem
resembles mathematically the motion for an incompressible fluid flow with
singular initial data. Both problems are of physical significance and provide
mathematical challenge. Physical examples in clude irregular motions in galaxy
formation, controlled nuclear reactors, and water or air wakes of fast moving
bodies. Understanding of these irregular motions will help the entire front of
nonlinear phenomena and undoubtedly improve the current technologies in these
areas.