* 9303229
* Mathematical Sciences: Low-dimensional Manifolds and Knot   Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 165,100.00

9303229 Gordon Professor Gordon will investigate various questions about the
Dehn surgery construction of 3-manifolds from knots and links. In the generic
case, the knot or link complement will have a hyperbolic structure, which
persists under most surgeries. This persistence fails if (and only if, modulo
the Geometrization Conjecture) the resulting 3-manifold contains an essential
sphere or torus, or is Seifert fibred. This project is to continue a joint
program with Professor John Luecke of understanding and circumscribing these
exceptional surgeries via the combinatorial analysis of intersections of
surfaces. Results obtained so far include the Knot Complement Conjecture, the
Reducibility Conjecture, and strong restrictions on the creation of essential
tori. Specific foci of the project will include the Cabling Conjecture and the
question of when Seifert fibred spaces (both toroidal and atoroidal) arise. The
general context of the project is the attempt to further our understanding of
3-manifolds. A 3-manifold is a "space" which is locally like ordinary
3-dimensional Euclidean space, but whose global topological structure may be
quite complicated. For example, our universe is a 3-manifold, whose global
structure is at present unknown. The problem of describing all 3-manifolds in a
reasonable way is an important one that is still unsolved, although much
progress has been made. The subject is a rich one, which draws on a wide range
of mathematical techniques, including some derived from quantum physics. The
main focus of the project is Dehn surgery, which is a procedure for constructing
3-manifolds from a knot (i.e. a closed loop embedded somehow in 3-dimensional
Euclidean space) or, more generally, a link (i.e. several knots linked
together). Roughly speaking, the knot or link is removed and "sewn back"
differently. Since it turns out that all 3-manifolds can be constructed in this
way, a sufficiently good understanding of Dehn surgery wou ld have important
implications for the general theory of 3-manifolds. ***