* 9303535
* Collaborative Research:  Evolution of the Kerguelen Plume:  A Geochemical Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 06/30/1995
* USD 154,000.00

Among many mantle plumes, the Kerguelen plume stands out as a large, long-lived
plume manifesting itself as the Kerguelen Plateau, one of the two giant oceanic
plateaus of the world. The P.I.s propose to investigate geochemical aspects of
the evolutionary history of the plume. Our effort will be focused into two
separate projects: (1) Basalt project (Frey) will focus on the old plateau
basalt lavas in the northwestern province. Geochemical characterization of these
oldest basalts will present clear understanding of secular isotopic variations
observed on younger eruptives. Comparative studies between the Kerguelen and
Hawaiian plumes will provide important information on how different parts of
mantle plumes are tapped and on how mantle plumes evolve geochemically. (2)
Xenolith project (Shimizu) will focus on detailed petrography, mineral chemistry
(major and trace elements) and isotopic compositions of lower crustal and mantle
xenoliths. The P.I.s intend to obtain definitive answers on whether granulites
are pieces of ancient continental crust or young basaltic crust recrystallized
in the granulite facies conditions. Upper mantle xenoliths will also be used to
investigate the plate setting, a possible involvement of ancient continental
lithosphere, and interaction between plume-derived melts and
lithosphere/asthenosphere.