* 9303929
* Signal Transduction Across Plant Plasma Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1998
* Peter Heinstein, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 06/30/1998
* USD 478,661.00

9303929 Low One of the most rapid defense responses of a plant to an invading
pathogen is the oxidative burst, where, within 5 minutes of the encounter of the
plant cell with a pathogen-derived elicitor molecule there is the sudden release
of hydrogen peroxide and other oxidative species. The oxidative burst is
possibly the plant's first line of defense against infection, and appears to
result from one of the simplest and most topologically localized signal
transduction pathways. The overall goal of this research is to identify and
characterize the second messengers and signaling intermediates that communicate
the association of an elicitor molecule with its cell surface receptor to the
oxidase complex that produces oxygen radicals and hydrogen peroxide.
Intermediate goals are to: 1) identify purified elicitors that activate the
oxidative burst pathway without stimulating other signaling pathways that lead
to delocalized defense responses (e.g. production of phytoalexins or PR
proteins), 2) identify second messengers that are activated by such elicitors,
3) rank the second messengers chronologically in order of their appearance, and
4) show linkage or connectivity between adjacent pairs of identified second
messengers using messenger-specific inhibitors, activators, etc. %%% One of the
most rapid defense responses of a plant cell to an invading pathogen is the
"oxidative burst," the sudden release of hydrogen peroxide and other oxidative
chemical species. The oxidative burst probably represents the first line of a
plant's defense against infection. The goal of this research is to work out the
chain of biochemical events between the detection of a pathogen, as signaled by
the arrival of a pathogen-specific chemical on a specific plant cell receptor,
through the resulting signal transduction pathways, to the production of
oxidative chemicals. The results of this research will contribute substantially
to our understanding of this important cellular signa ling pathway in plants and
should provide considerable information on where and how the defense responses
of plants can be genetically manipulated. ***