* 9303572
* RUI:  Structure-Function Studies on Pituitary Hormones UsingSite-Specific Mutagenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Dennis Luck, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 165,000.00

Prolactin (PRL) is a single-chain polypeptide hormone that elicits a wide
variety of physiologial responses in vertebrates; in mammals these include
growth and development of the mammary gland and lactation. In recent years it
has also become evident that PRL exerts marked effects on the immune system and
several types of immune cells possess PRL receptors: for example the hormone is
a powerful, lactogen receptor-mediated mitogen for rat Nb2 pre-T lymphoma cells.
PRL is considered to be a member of a hormone famioly which includes growth
hormone and placental lactogen, and these hormones are believed to share a
similar three-dimensional structure. There is considerable interest in
determining which regions of these polypeptides are functionally important. The
principal objective of the proposed research is to define the amino acid
residues in PRL which are responsible for its biological activities, particlarly
its mitogenic action on Nb2 cells. The availability of these cells makes
possible a detailed structure- function analysis of PRL with regard to its
action as a growth- stimulating factor. The Nb2 cell will be used as tools in
these studies of how the structure of PRL affects its biological activity. %%%
The study of prolactin and growth hormone has wide application, since these
hormones regulate numerous physiological processes for normal and disease states
in humans, and for the reproduction, development, and productivity of
economically valuable livestock. Althugh these studies are basis, by
concentrating on bovine prolactin and growth hormone, and on the bovine mammary
gland prolactin receptor, the //