* 9303183
* The Na+/H Anthiporters of Alkaliphilic Bacillus firmus OF4 and of Bacillus subtilis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Terry Krulwich, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 280,420.00

9303183 Krulwich Bacillus firmus OF4 is an extreme alkaliphile that can grow
well over a pH range from 7.5 to 10.7, and is also capable of growth over a
range of Na+ concentrations from mM to 1M. This bacterium lacks primary Na+
extrusion mechanisms and apparently requires electrogenic Na+/H+ antiporters for
both pH homeostasis and Na+ tolerance. Na+/H+ antiporter-deficient mutants have
been isolated from Bacillus subtilis, taking advantage of Tn917 mutagenesis, in
order to develop system for heterologous screening and expression of alkaliphile
genes, and for comparative study of a neutralophilic Bacillus. Using this
system, and Tn916 insertional mutagenesis of the alkaliphile itself, attempts
are being made to identify the remaining alkaliphile Na+/H+ antiporter gene (s)
and possibly, regulators thereof. The relationship between each detailed
characterization will be undertaken of the Na+/H+ antiporter that has the
dominant role in pH homeostasis. The basis for the alkaliphile's generation of
genetic variants will be studied. Such variants have the capacity for enhanced
growth at the upper edge of their pH range and at suboptimal Na+ concentration.
They have previously shown to exhibit an increase in the already high
constitutive Na+/H+ antiporter activity. %%% This research will provide an
understanding of how microorganisms can grow under conditions of extreme pH and
sodium variance. This could lead to applications such as bioremediation under
circumstances where it is currently not proactical because organisms with the
desired metabolic capabilities cannot grow due to their sensitivity to strong
basic environments. ***