* 9303037
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Research in Geometry   and Topology
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Martin Guest, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1997
* USD 71,200.00

9303037 Guest This award will support a cooperative research project between
Professor Martin Guest, Department of Mathematics, University of Rochester, New
York, and Professor Mutsuo Oka, Department of Mathematics, Tokyo Institute of
Technology in Japan. Dr. Yoshihiro Ohnita of the Tokyo Metropolitan University
and Dr. Mikio Furuta at Tokyo University will also participate in the project.
During his twelve- month visit Professor Guest and his Japanese colleagues will
continue their previous joint research on the topology of the space of harmonic
maps of a Riemann surface into a Lie group. These maps are of interest from the
point of view of traditional differential geometry and also from the point of
view of gauge theories in mathematical physics. The researchers will study a
systematical description of the singularities of complete intersection varieties
and singularities of the mappings. A complete intersection variety will be
interpreted as the regular fiber of a holomorphic mapping between affine or
toric spaces. They will attempt to determine how the topology of regular fiber
or singular fibers changes under a homotopy of a given mapping. Results of the
research have probable application in advanced mathematics theories as well as
various areas of physics such as theoretical atomic physics. Professor Guest is
an accomplished mathematician who is currently one of several authorities
working in the field of variational principles (harmonic maps) as applied to
problems in mathematical physics, specifically solitons and gauge theory. Dr.
Oka is an authority on toric varieties. Dr. Ohnita has expertise in the area of
differential geometry, especially Lie groups and harmonic maps and Dr. Furuta's
specialty is moduli spaces of Yang-Mills instantons. Japan is a world leader in
the areas of toric varieties and infinite dimensional Lie algebras and
integrable systems. Since the investiga- tor's previous collaboration proved to
be very produ ctive in terms of new directions of research as well as in terms
of publications it is anticipated that the proposed project will provide similar
new scientific opportunities. This project is supported by the NSF-CGP (Center
for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program. ***