* 9303260
* PRF/J:  The Dynamics of a Two-Species Prey/Predator/Parasite System:  Interactions Between the Ciliate Lambornella      clarki and the Mosquito Larva Aedes sierrensis
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1994,07/31/1997
* Joseph Eisenberg, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1997
* USD 69,600.00

This is to be a quantitative study of the tri-trophic level, two-species
interaction between the western tree hole mosquito Aedes sierrensis and the
ciliate Lambornell clarki. Three models will be employed: two will compare a
general 3-species prey / predator / parasite system to explore the unique
properties of the interaction, while a third model will incorporate size
structure and age structure features in addition to extrinsic factors. Model
analysis is to focus on understanding three kinds of larval mortality: over-
compensatory, compensatory, and decompensatory, each of which has been observed
under varying food resource conditions. Sensitivity analysis will be used to
determine which parameters are responsible for causing the various mortality
types. Finally the model is to be validated through experiments designed to test
simulation results. %%% Pollution problems and insect resistance to traditional
pesticides necessitate examination of alternative control methods. The potential
for biological control agents is great due to their target specificity. It is
expected that this investigation will significantly improve our understanding of
mechanisms for insect mortality in nature (for example, are they density-
dependent?). Results should be very useful in guiding pest control strategies
generally.