* 9303317
* PRF/M:  Molecular Phylogeny of Tribe Antirrhineae           (Scrophulariaceae):  A Genetic and Morphological Model      System
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Wayne Elisens, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/1995
* USD 43,461.00

Comparative studies of variation in nuclear DNA and chloroplast DNA have helped
elucidate the pattern of evolutionary relationships in many plant groups. A
phylogenetic framework is particularly important in groups of organisms used as
model systems, to correctly interpret biological phenomena and apply valuable
data. This research is a molecular phylogenetic investigation of a lineage of
flowering plants, tribe Antirrhineae (Scrophulariaceae) that includes a model
system in genetic and developmental studies, the cultivated snapdragon. To
provide a broad molecular database that will insure rigorous tests of
hypotheses, a broad experimental and analytical approach based on comparative
DNA sequencing in nuclear and chloroplast genomes and restriction site variation
of five chloroplast genes has been designed. The objectives here are to
evaluate: (a) the evolution of floral morphological characters, (b) the origin
and evolution of "Tam" transposable elements, and (c) how floral homeotic genes
have evolved and whether their evolution has been influenced by "Tam" elements.
%%% This research presents unusual opportunities for studying basic patterns and
processes of molecular evolution, floral morphology, and developmental genetics
using Antirrhinum majus and its relatives as model organisms. A phylogenetic
context offers the chance to develop optimal application, extrapolation, and
interpretation of biological results and this study, when completed, will
constitute a robust demonstration of such a piece of research.