* 9303713
* Mathematical Sciences:  Large-Sample Approximations for     Analysis of Qualitative Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Shelby Haberman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Large-sample approximations used in the analysis of qualitative data are to be
examined. Problems to be considered involve both large numbers of parameters and
large numbers of observations. Log-linear models, conditional log-linear models,
latent-class models, canonical models, and association models are to be
explored. Large-sample approximations are to be considered for distributions of
maximum-likelihood estimates, Pearson and likelihood-ratio chi-square
statistics, and measures of predictions. Analyses are to be developed without
the assumption that the underlying model is correct. In large-scale surveys and
censuses, statistical analyses are commonly performed on very large samples. In
such analyses, models used to approximate the observations often involve very
large numbers of unknown quantities which must be estimated from the sample in
order to apply the model. In the proposed research, approximations are developed
for the variability expected from the estimates of unknown quantities and for
measures of the value of the model for construction of predictors of future
observations. In contrast to usual statistical analyses, the methods developed
apply even if the proposed model is not entirely consistent with the data. It is
shown that approximate models can be quite valuable in statistical work even
when they do not fully describe the data.