* 9303842
* Biochemistry of Luminescence
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Osamu Shimomura, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1996
* USD 220,000.00

9303842 Shimomura Bioluminescence is a phenomenon of chemiluminescence that
occurs in the body or secretion of wide varieties of organisms. The energy
required for light emission is supplied by the oxidation of a luciferin
catalyzed by a specific luciferase, or through a reaction involving a
photoprotein. The light-emitting reactions of different types of organisms are
often significantly different, thus there are a number of different luminescence
systems. The ultimate goal of this project is the complete biochemical
understanding of bioluminescence and its roles. To achieve this goal, it is
essential to identify the necessary key components and determine their chemical
structures in various different types of bioluminescence system and also to
elucidate the mechanism of the light-emitting reactions. The knowledge on
bioluminescence presently available includes the chemical structures of 8
different luciferins and significant information on 19 different bioluminescence
systems, of which the P.I. contributed to 5 of the luciferins and 12 of the
bioluminescence systems, including the system of the photoprotein aequorin.
Studies will be carried out on bioluminescence in fungi and euphausiid shrimp
(krill). The mechanism of oxygenation in bioluminescence reactions will also be
studied. %%% The long-range objective of this research is the complete
biochemical understanding of bioluminescence, which encompasses the fundamental
reaction mechanism of light emission and the roles of bioluminescence reactions
in living organisms. In this research, it is of primary importance to determine
the chemical nature of the key substances and to elucidate the mechanism of the
reactions involved, in various different bioluminescence systems that occur in
diverse types of organisms. ***