* 9303283
* PRF/J:  Competition in a Spatial Framework:  Single Species and Two Species Models of Competition
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Jane Molofsky, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1997
* USD 69,600.00

Simple ecological models have been used by ecologists to understand how
interactions such as density-dependence affect population dynamics. These
relatively elementary models ignore the spatial aspect of populations. This
research will contribute to the understanding of how spatial processes influence
population dynamics. Cellular automata models of populations that assume that
each individual exists in a unique location and that competition is occurring
over some predefined local scale will be developed. How local competitive
interactions translate into spatial and temporal dynamics and what general class
of patterns (stable, cyclical, or chaotic) are expected for competing
populations distributed in space will be determined. Conditions under which
dispersal and competition can lead to coexistence in a spatially distributed
system will be examined, as will the problem of how differences in competitive
scale and dispersal scale influence the patterns. Simple models have already
yielded important insights into how intra- and interspecific competition can
produce chaotic spatial dynamics. These models for single species and two
species will be generalized to models for multiple species. %%% Overall, results
from this work ought to enhance our knowledge of how local competitive
interactions translate into spatial and temporal dynamics. It will ascertain
what general class of patterns can be expected for competing populations that
are distributed in space. In addition, it will determine the conditions under
which dispersal and competition can lead to coexistence in a spatially
distributed system and will examine how differences in scale impacts patterns
within populations and ecological communities. Such information will be useful
in learning how often we should expect chaotic spatial dynamics in natural
systems. By intensively studying two important variables (competition and
dispersal), it will be possible to discover what patterns are most likely in
spatially distributed populations.