* 9303186
* Raman, Brillouin, Infrared and Modulation Spectroscopy of   Collective and Localized Excitations in Tetrahedrally       Coordinated Semiconductors and their Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Sergio Rodriguez, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 475,900.00

This research focuses on the vibrational, electronic, and magnetic excitations
in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors. Both bulk and submicron
heterostructures fabricated by molecular beam epitaxy and chemical vapor
deposition will be investigated. II-VI and III-V semiconductors (bulk,
epilayers, and quantum well structures) will be examined using Raman, Brillouin,
modulated reflectivity, and photoluminescence and absorption spectroscopy.
Magnetic ions introduced into II-VI compounds have resulted in a new class of
materials called diluted magnetic semiconductors which possess striking magneto-
optic effects. Further exploration of these systems will be undertaken with
special emphasis on materials of low dimensionality. The vibrational spectra and
electronic levels of donors and acceptors intentionally introduced into diamond
and silicon carbide will also be studied. The thrust of the program is to
provide a fundamental understanding of the physical properties of tetahedrally
coordinated semiconductors whose optical characteristics form the basis of many
optoelectronic applications. %%% The family of tetrahedrally coordinated
semiconductors encompasses the well known group IV semiconductors such as C, Si,
and Ge as well as the II-Vs (e.g., GaAs, InSb, etc.) and the II-VIs (e.g., CdTe,
ZnTe, etc.) The electronic, vibrational, and magnetic excitations in these
materials will be examined through spectroscopic investigations using a variety
of techniques. The results of such spectral studies will yield important
fundamental quantities related to their optical properties and are expected to
form the basis of many optoelectronic devices. In particular, magnetic ions
introduced into the II-VIs generate striking magneto- optic effects which have
potential applications as magnetic isolators and optical sensors. These novel
advanced material systems are accessible to both experimental and theoretical
studies, thanks to the ingenious techniques increasingly exploited in the growth
of new semiconductors in the bulk as well as with submicron dimensions. The work
will be done in collaboration with scientists and technologists at several
industrial research laboratories who will supply many of the materials. In
addition, the program benefits from an active collaboration with the Argonne
National Laboratory.