* 9303091
* Experimental Studies of Thin Film Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* James Erskine, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 07/31/1996
* USD 370,000.00

This project investigates electronic and magnetic properties of matter that are
intrinsic to thin film structures, surfaces, and interfaces. The propsed work is
driven by new capabilities to deliberately modify and characterize physical
properties of matter that affect magnetic behavior, and by recent improvements
in magnetically sensitive spectroscopic techniques. The experimental approach
combines novel materials synthesis, advanced structure determination methods,
and spin sensitive spectroscopic techniques. The principle scientific objectives
of the program are to explore the relationship between atomic level structure
and magnetism, and to probe fundamental concepts in phase transitions. Proposed
experiments address atomic level factors that affect magnetic anisotropy,
magnetic coercive forces, and magnetic remanence in ultra-thin epitaxial films
and magnetic coupling through ultra-thin non-magnetic layers. The experiments
also address issues in statistical mechanics including the notion of two-
dimensional universality classes and related specific theoretical predictions of
scaling parameters and critical exponents. These important concepts are studied
under experimental conditions that represent a transition from the two-
dimensional to three-dimensional state of matter. %%% Thin film and multilayer
magnetic materials offer attractive opportunities for future development of
recording media and of novel high-density discrete digital data storage
concepts. These materials also offer important new scientific opportunities for
seeking a more thorough understanding of the broad range of phenomena that
account for the commercial importance of magnetic materials. The opportunities
are especially attractive in the area of thin film magnetic structures because
new processing technology and measurement techniques permit synthesis and
characterization of engineered materials having selected characteristics. This
research program investigates several related aspects of thin film magnetic
behavior that are relevant to advanced materials processing and potential
application of thin film materials. The principle emphasis of the program is to
understand the relationship between the materials processing (film growth), the
structure of the films including compositional and atomic level effects, and the
resulting magnetic characteristics that can be exploited for various
applications.