* 9303836
* Genetics and Photophysiology of Novel Anoxyphototrophs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Carl Bauer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 377,552.00

9303836 Bauer The recently described nonsulfur purple photosynthetic bacterium
Rhodospirillum centenum exhibits several physiological traits previously unknown
among photosynthetic eubacteria. One feature is the existence of a life cycle
involving the formation of heat and desiccation resistant cysts. Germination of
Rsp. centenum cysts leads to cell differentiation characterized by swarm cell
behavior on solid media. Swarm cells grown on solid agar medium have numerous
lateral flagella and are distinct from non-swarm cells which bear a single polar
flagellum. Swarm cell differentiation appears to be a stage of a life cycle and
to be a specific response to an increase in medium viscosity. A second unusual
feature of Rsp. centenum is that swarm cell colonies have the capacity to
migrate rapidly either towards or away from light; rates as high as 45 mm/hour
have been observed. An action spectrum has demonstrated that 585 nm light repels
whereas light over the region 800-880 nm attracts. Major goals of this proposal
include the physiological characterization of swarm cells as well as an analysis
of phototactic behavior of Rsp. centenum. In addition, genetic analyses of swarm
cell formation as well as phototaxis will be undertaken to determine the number
and nature of the genetic loci involved in these processes. These studies will
also be augmented by biochemical and molecular genetic characterization of the
photoreceptor(s) involved. It is anticipated that the proposed research will
provide significant information on prokaryotic cell differentiation and in
addition, should provide the first molecular analysis of the mechanism of
phototaxis in eubacteria. We also propose to extend genetic analysis of
bacterial photosynthesis to evolutionarily divers species of eubacterial
phototrophs. The aim of this area of research is to obtain clones of
bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis genes from Chlorobium tepidum, Heliobacterium
gestii, Rhodopseudomonas viridis and cyanobacteria for the purpose of
determining the extent to which a Photosynthesis Gene Cluster is conserved among
various genera and species of phototrophic prokaryotes. The clones obtained will
also be used to generate sequence analyses of genetic loci common to bacterial
and plant chlorophyll biosynthetic pathways for use in subsequent studies of
chlorophyll biosynthesis in plant systems. ***