* 9303557
* Mathematical Sciences:  Bayesian Inference and Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1999
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 12/31/1999
* USD 1,040,000.00

Our research is oriented toward implementation of Bayesian inference. There has
been increasing interest recently in the Bayesian approach to statistics, in
part because advances in computational ability have made it feasible in many
settings, and in part because Bayesian analysis of data can make use of
information from additional sources. Our work will build on our previous
research in Bayesian statistics, part of which has been funded by NSF. Our main
concerns are: (1) review and assessment of methods for choosing prior
probability distributions by formal rules, and further development of methods
for assessing sensitivity to the choices; (2) investigation of approximate and
exact computational methods for Bayesian hypotheses testing; (3) modification
and enhancement of numerical integration techniques and Monte Carlo simulation
of posterior distributions; also, improvement of statistical computing
environments including use of animation and three dimensional rendering for
visualization of uncertainty in higher dimensions; (4) further work on the
foundations of subjective probability; and (5) several other topics related to
our previous work on elicitation of priors and asymptotic approximations. When
analyzing data, it is important to combine all sources of information
effectively. Bayesian statistical methods are tailored to this purpose. Our
research focuses on finding practical ways to implement Bayesian methods and on
investigating the theoretical basis for these methods. We are concerned with the
development of computational and graphical techniques that make Bayesian
inference feasible in complicated problems. These include: simulation, animation
and the construction of statistical computing environments. We will also
investigate theoretical issues that support Bayesian techniques. These issues
include the foundations of subjective probability and the development of
mathematical approximations.