* 9303837
* Structure of Quasi-One Dimensional Materials in High        Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Bernhard Keimer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 05/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

9303837 Keimer The goal of this project is to develop a detailed microscopic
description of the effects of magnetic fields on the static and dynamic lattice
distortions of materials with quasi-one dimensional electronic structures. Using
a superconducting split-coil magnet system capable of generating magnetic fields
up to 13T, high- resolution x-ray scattering experiments will be performed on
compounds exhibiting spin-Peierls and spin-density wave phases at low
temperatures. Phenomena to be investigated include field- induced nonmagnetic-
magnetic transition in insulating and conducting spin-Peierls systems, the
effect of magnetic fields on the structure of semimetallic charge density wave
compounds, and possible magnetostructural effects in field induced spin density
wave phases. The structural information derived from these experiments will
contribute to a quantitative understanding in correlated quasi-one dimensional
electron systems. In particular, the microscopic origin of field-induced
transitions in such compounds will be clarified. %%% This project will develop a
unique facility which combines high- precision x-ray structure facilities with a
very high magnetic field in which samples can be cooled to ultralow
temperatures. In the presence of a magnetic field, the structural, magnetic and
electronic properties change and new phases of the materials are encountered.
The nature of these phase changes is not well understood, and essentially no
prior experiments have been performed, owing to lack of facilities. The results
of the research will be of fundamental importance to the fields of magnetism and
electronic properties of materials. ***