* 9303564
* A Fundamental Study of Sol-Gel Solid Phase Epitaxy in       Ferroelectric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1999
* Sandwip Dey, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 04/30/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9303564 Sandwip The objectives of this collaborative and interdisciplinary
research program reside in the unified exploration of a potentially useful thin-
film ferroelectric material, lead zirconate-titanate, doped with varying amounts
of niobium. The basic studies will cover the fundamental science of sol- gel
solid phase epitaxial growth (SPE)which eventually should lead to optimum
commercial processing schedules. The research will include systematic studies of
the thermodynamics and kinetics of the epitaxial amorphous-to- crystalline
transition. Specifically, the structural and morphological nature of the
microscopy (HTREM). The role of substrate orientation and aliovalent dopant
niobium shall be elucidated along with their transformation kinetics.
Additionally, capacitance measurements will be carried out to provide an
independent measure of the phase transformation. Moreover, a comparison between
in-situ and ex-situ heat treatments on SPE growth rates will be made to gain a
fundamental understanding of the basic processes involved. %%% Epitaxial thin-
film devices manufactured from these materials have enormous potential
commercial value including electrooptic, piezoelectric and pyroelectric devices.
This approach and much of the underlying science involved in this proposal on
ferroelectric thin films are new; hence, the personnel involved will gain
training in an area destined to be of great importance in emerging science and
technology. ***