* 9303779
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Numerical Problems  in Incompressible Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Weinan E, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1996
* USD 55,000.00

9303779 E The investigator studies two problems in fluid flow. (1). Statistical
behavior of two dimensional turbulence. There are two major problems in this
area. The first is concerned with the spatial (scaling) behavior and the second
the temporal scaling behavior. Classical theory attempts to answer these
questions via Kolmogorov-like arguments. Recently this classical picture is
challenged by a combination of very detailed numerical and analytical results of
E and Majda. The investigator continues this study to establish an alternative
picture for 2D turbulence. (2). Mathematical and numerical problems for
incompressible flows in the presence of boundaries. In particular, the
investigator studies the separation of boundary layers and the approximation to
Navier-Stokes equation before the separation. Recently he has shown that in the
presence of an adverse pressure gradient the steady boundary layers have to
separate and separate self-similarly. Now he takes up the unsteady Prandtl
equation, examining its validity in describing the boundary layers in the zero-
viscosity limit. Previous results of Fife et. al. are restricted to the class of
solutions satisfying some uniform bounds (independent of viscosity). The
existence of such a class is in doubt. On the numerical side, the investigator
studies numerical methods with vorticity boundary conditions through the
introduction of a simple model problem that captures the essence of the full
problem and is explicitly computable. Such a program has already been carried
out for the projection method by E and Liu. One can view both problems as
preparation for studying turbulence. In reality, most turbulence is generated at
the fluid-solid boundary through friction. Large-scale computing offers another
dimension for studying such problems. But the efficient exploitation of this new
dimension also requires powerful numerical methods. At the present time, even
the basic issues in formulating a nu merical method are unsettled whenever
boundaries are present. Insight can be improved drastically if simple
representative models are introduced. This motivates the investigator's study
and design of numerical methods. Understanding of turbulence is a central
problem in applied mathematics, with broad scientific and technological
ramifications. ***