* 9304401
* Collaborative Research:  Biogeochemistry of the Oxford      Clay
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Thomas Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1996
* USD 64,996.00

9304401 Anderson A detailed study of isotopic biogeochemistry of the Jurassic
marine Oxford Clay is proposed. The goal is to further understand sedimentary
microbial processes and how they affect preservation of carbon and sulfur in
organic and inorganic phases. The relationship between those microbial processes
and depositional environments will be elucidated. Effects of specific microbial
processes and the environments in which they are prevalent will be identified.
Results of analyses of organic-sulfur compounds in these rocks should provide
new information on the role of these compounds in the carbon-sulfur-iron system.
Samples of the initial phase of this study were collected from active quarries
and a core taken in central England. The quarry exposures allowed acquisition of
large, fresh samples of this immature, organic-carbon-rich mudrock. The samples,
representing all stratigraphic horizons and biofacies, were obtained in
collaboration with experts on the vertebrate and invertebrate paleoecology of
the Lower Oxford Clay. Preliminary measurements include (i) carbon and oxygen
isotopic compositions of the extensive and well preserved biominerals in this
unit; (ii) carbon isotopic compositions of bulk organic materials; (iii)
relative abundances and carbon-isotopic compositions of organic sulfur compounds
and pyrite. These results have provided unique geochemical information which we
will build upon in our continued study. Further goals in the continuation of
this project include (i) confirming a phytoplanktonic origin for pristane and
phytane; (ii)reconstructing the structure of the community of consumer organisms
using compound-specific isotopic analyses; (iii) expanding the scope of the
study stratigraphically to include the Middle and Upper Oxford Clay; (iv)
elucidating the timing of organic sulfur formation in the widely varying
paleoenvironments of the Oxford Clay. The work proposed will test hypotheses
developed during our preliminary study and should provide new insights on the
coupling of the carbon and sulfur biogeochemical cycles in organic- rich marine
sediments. ***