* 9304152
* Fundamental Study of Aerosol Charging by Ions and Free      Electrons in the Transition and Free-Molecule Regimes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* David Y.H. Pui, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1997
* USD 234,092.00

9304152 Pui The proposed study deals with experimental and theoretical
investigations of aerosol charging by ions and free electrons in the transition
and free-molecule regimes. It is aimed to resolve existing discrepancies between
theories and experiments. Aerosol charging and the subsequent manipulation of
the particles in an electric field are effective means of measuring, classifying
and collecting them. The project will first focus on developing an aerosol
charger of low particle-loss, capable of operating under vacuum and in high
purity gases. It will be followed by experimental studies of aerosol charging by
ions and free electrons. Aerosol charge distributions will be measured. This
method of testing charging theories is more sensitive than the traditional
charged fraction measurement. A numerical solution to the Boltzmann collision
equation will be obtained to compare with the existing theories and with data
obtained. The results of this study should provide a better understanding of
fundamental transfer processes and the needed knowledge base towards improving
the collection efficiency of electrostatic precipitations in the air pollution
control industry, measuring and classifying nanometer particles in the materials
industry, and controlling particulate contaminants in plasma reactors in the
microelectronics industry. ***