* 9304567
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Magnetic       Properties of Metallic Multilayers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Susan Mini, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1994
* USD 36,050.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susan Mini to the
Universite Paris-Sud to work with Dr. Alain Fontaine. The aim of their research
will be to study the magnetic properties of metallic multilayers using magnetic
circular x-ray dichroism spectroscopy (MCXD). The importance of this new
spectroscopic technique is that each atomic species can be probed selectively.
MCXD is a high energy spectroscopic method which has been used for the study of
localized and itinerant magnetism in ordered magnetic systems. It is a powerful
tool for the study of the local magnetic properties because it takes advantage
of the selectivity of x-ray absorption spectroscopy and the polarization
properties of synchrotron radiation. Because it can selectively probe each core
orbital of each atomic species in a material, the magnetic contribution of each
species in a multilayer may be deduced. Multilayers of interest include Fe/Pd
systems because the Fe-Pd(l00) interface appears to experience minimal mixing
and unlike many other systems the Fe appears to induce a magnet moment in the
interfacial Pd atomic layer Ä±C.Liu et al., J.Appl. Phys 67, 5758 '90!. Since
MCXD is element specific, the magnetic moment contributions of the Fe and Pd may
be observed separately. MCXD can be used to address specific problems concerning
the magnetism of multilayer interfaces. The award recommendation provides funds
to cover international travel, a stipend for twelve months, and $1,000 for
travel to Grenoble to conduct experiments and a small allowance for language
training.