* 9304758
* Characterization of Clathrin-Coated Vesicles
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Leonard Beevers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

It has been demonstrated that cotyledons from developing peas provide a rich
source of clathrin coated vesicles (ccvs). It appears that, in similarity to
mammalian ccvs, those from plants are composed of a clathrin cage consisting of
heavy and light chains, adaptors, and a membrane vesicle component containing
receptors to which cargo proteins are complexed. The ccvs isolated from
cotyledons are primarily of trans-Golgi origin, and their adaptors are expected
to differ from those of the better characterized mammalian ccvs which are
principally of plasma membrane origin. It is planned to extend on the
preliminary findings which have shown a different peptide composition of the
adaptor fraction from plant ccvs. A potential receptor protein which interacts
with the N-terminal targeting peptide of vacuolar proteins has been identified.
This receptor will be characterized and its role in selecting protein body
proteins, along with its interaction with ccv components, will be investigated.
The information accumulated will provide crucial information to the
understanding of vesicular transport of proteins in plants and will provide a
basis for extended comparative studies with animal and other systems. %%% A key
feature of all eukaryotic cells is that they are physically compartmentalized.
That is, cytoplasm is not a uniform mixture of cellular components, but rather
it is highly organized in such a way that specific functions, and the components
that carry out those functions, are localized in discrete regions of the cell,
or even external to the cell (e.g., secreted materials, cell walls, etc.). Some
of these functionally distinct compartments are bounded by membranes. It follows
that there must be mechanisms to ensure that specific proteins get to their
particular subcellular locations. The coated vesicle system is part of this
mechanism. Coated vesicles are shuttle vesicles, or transporters, of proteins
contained within them. In mammalian systems, the role of coated vesicles in
endocytosis (the transport of external proteins into the cell) and in
intracellular movement of newly synthesized proteins from the Golgi apparatus to
pre-lysosomal or pre-secretory compartments is well-studied. In plants,
relatively little is known about coated vesicle function or structure, and some
of the available information is the subject of controversy in the field. Coated
vesicles are very likely to play significant roles in the transport of specific
proteins to the vacuole, to seed storage bodies, and to the growing cell wall.
As such, a detailed understanding of their structure and function will be
critical to agricultural biotechnology. This project promises to yield solid,
reliable information about a very important plant biology subject.