* 9304222
* Hurricane Wind Hazards and Design Risks in the United       States
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Lawrence Twisdale, Applied Research Associates, Inc. Headquarters (Albuquerque)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1997
* USD 250,266.00

The Phase 1 of the project investigated basic assumptions used in hurricane risk
assessment, with emphasis on developing and evaluating hurricane windfield
models. A new windfield model, based on the results of a numerical hurricane
boundary layer model, was developed with gust factor information derived
exclusively for hurricanes. The model includes the effect of storm translation
in a more realistic fashion than does the windfield model used to develop ASCE
7-88 design windspeeds. Using the new model and analyses, site- specific
numerical simulations of hurricane windspeeds at Miami and New York City have
been performed. These simulations indicate that the selection of the subregion
used to derive statistical distributions of key parameters is critical. In
addition, the new windfield model was found to have a pronounced effect on the
predicted windspeeds, particularly in the New York area, where the asymmetries
in fast- moving storms are significant. The Phase II of the project centers on
research leading to fundamental improvements in hurricane risk analysis and the
reduction of the biases and uncertainties associated with the prediction of
hurricane windspeeds. Particular emphasis will have nationwide significance and,
if successful, influence future wind load design criteria in the United States
and other countries where hurricanes are important contributors to extreme wind
frequencies. Some potential application of results from this research will be:
wind loading recommendations by region; specialized structural loading and
analysis products for specific categories of structures, such as transmission
towers; risk analyses for offshore facilities; site-specific analysis and design
recommendations.