* 9304662
* The Components of the CO2 Concentrating Mechanism of        Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* James Moroney, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1997
* USD 320,000.00

9304662 Moroney Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, have
the capacity to concentrate carbon dioxide internally, allowing these organisms
to grow photoautotrophically at carbon dioxide concentrations lower than most
higher plants can tolerate. This carbon dioxide concentrating mechanism is
inducible; it is present only in cells that have been grown with limiting carbon
dioxide conditions. An important aspect of this Ci (Ci = CO2 + HCO3- + CO3-2)
accumulation system is located in the chloroplasts. Intact chloroplasts isolated
from low carbon dioxide-grown C. reinhardtii cells retain the ability to
accumulate Ci to much higher levels than intact chloroplasts isolated from high
carbon dioxide-grown cells. During the last grant period, Dr. Moroney has
identified at least six polypeptides that are specifically induced by growth on
low carbon dioxide and are missing in the high carbon dioxide- requiring strain
cia-5. One of these inducible proteins is a carbonic anhydrase located in the
periplasmic space and another is a 36 kDa polypeptide localized to the
chloroplast envelope. The locations of other inducible proteins and their
functions are unknown. In the past year, a cDNA library to C. reinhardtii cells
adapting to low carbon dioxide conditions has been constructed. By differential
hybridization, four classes of recombinant phages have been identified that
contain genes that are preferentially expressed under four classes low carbon
dioxide conditions. It is proposed to study the carbon dioxide concentrating
mechanism in C. reinhardtii by characterizing the components of this transport
system and by delineating the role of the chloroplast in carbon dioxide
acquisition. Dr. Moroney will first characterize the low carbon dioxide-
inducible genes recently identified and connect these genes with the
polypeptides known to be induced by low carbon dioxide growth conditions.
Antibodies will be raised against fusion proteins consisting of t he lacZ
protein linked to the product of the inducible gene. These antibodies will then
be used to localize the proteins within the C. reinhardtii cell using organelle
preparations outlined within the proposal. Dr. Moroney will also generate
mutants that require high carbon dioxide, focussing on strains that are missing
only one of the inducible polypeptides. It is hoped to eventually link a
specific gene with its gene product and with a strain deficient in that gene
product. The characterization of the proteins of this transport system will
increase our understanding of the low carbon dioxide adjustment in algae and the
role of the chloroplast in this photosynthetic adaptation. ***