* 9304602
* Charaterization of L-myc Expression and analysis of the     Homozygous Null L-myc Phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Kimi Hatton, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 02/28/1997
* USD 199,772.00

9304602 Hatton Myc family genes are transcription factors that are likely to
regulate genes important in growth control and differentiation. Recently, I have
been successful in generating a germline null L- myc mutant mouse derived from
gene targeting and embryonic stem cell methodology. The working hypothesis is
that since myc-family gene expression changes at key development transitions in
cultured cells and in the organism, absent L-myc expression will lead to the
aberrant expression of phenotypic markers of differentiation. In this proposal,
questions concerning the role of L-myc in differentiation and growth control are
addressed in vitro using cell culture systems and during development in vivo
using homozygous null L-myc mutant embryonic stem cell lines and a null L-myc
mouse mutant. Changes in L-myc expression at key developmental transitions would
lead to altered morphology in the developing or adult mouse, or to changes in
the expression of genes regulated by L-myc. The phenotype of the null L-myc
mutant mouse will be characterized. Experiments will be performed to test the
hypothesis that L-myc is an essential gene during embryonic development.
Heterozygous null L-myc mice will be mated to each other and the offspring will
be genotyped. If no homozygous null L-myc mutant mice are born, embryos will be
harvested at different gestational stages and be prepared for histological
examination. In this specific aim, the goal is to identify changes in morphology
in developing tissues and organ systems by histological analysis. In order to
characterize further the expression pattern of the c-, N- and L-myc genes in
early embryonic development, the expression of L-myc will be examined in the
earliest differentiation event in the mouse embryo: the formation of
trophectoderm and inner cell mass. Blastocyst and later developmental stages
will also be examined by in situ hybridization. The earliest time in development
at which myc genes are expressed i n a cell type specific manner will be
identified. Another important outcome will be the potential correlation of the
phenotype with the expression pattern of L-myc. The goal of this section is to
identify and examine changes in L-myc expression in developing tissues in order
to identify changes in the expression of gene products in the absence of L-myc
expression in the null mutant. The characterization of L-myc gene expression and
phenotype of a null L-myc mouse will lead to a significant advancement in our
understanding of myc gene biology. ***