* 9304083
* C-signal Perception in Myxococcus Xanthus
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Lawrence Shimkets, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 05/31/1997
* USD 314,000.00

9304083 Shimkets Cell-cell interactions are essential for the development of
many organisms and the myxobacteria provide a model system with which to use
genetic approaches to determine the biological roles and molecular mechanisms of
intercellular communication. The CsgA gene product, the C-signal, is a novel
type of developmental timer whose extracellular concentration rises steadily
during fruiting body formation of the myxobacterium Myxococcus xanthus and
induces successive stages of the developmental pathway at successively higher
concentrations. These studies are expected to reveal how the C-signal is
perceived by developing cells to express rippling, aggregation, and sporulation
genes. The CsgA receptor gene will be identified and cloned using one of four
approaches : dosage suppression, construction of heterologous signaling systems
containing components from different myxobacterial species, reverse genetics
following purification of the receptor protein, or molecular recognition.
Putative receptor genes will be sequenced and examined for amino acid homology
with known receptors. The chromosomal wild type allele will be replaced with a
disrupted allele to determine if a receptor null mutation blocks development at
the same point as a csgA null mutant. Radiolabeled CsgA will be used in binding
studies to determine the associate constant and receptor number during different
stages of development. The cellular location of the CsgA receptor will be
determined by colloidal gold electron microscopy. Genetic analysis of the socA
(for suppressor of CsgA), and socB suppressor loci will continue, to learn the
normal developmental roles of the wild type suppressor genes as well as the
mechanisms by which the mutant alleles suppress csgA mutations. %%% This
research allows the techniques of bacterial molecular genetics to be used to
answer fundamental questions about how cell differentiate. Dr. Shimkets is
studying a type of cell- to cell communication that up until know was only known
in higher organisms. ****