* 9304360
* High-resolution Stratigraphy:  Application to Hydrologic-   Climatic Reconstruction in Southwestern United States
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Roger Anderson, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 224,236.00

This is a renewal of research to establish a climatic reference section for
examining the synchroneity of the exceptionally large and rapid changes in
climate that occurred before, during, and after the last glacial maximum (~35Ka
to 12.5ka). The hydrologically closed Estancia basin in central New Mexico is
especially well suited as a reference section because of its previous location
under the Polar Front Jet Stream, because of its uninterrupted high-resolution
stratigraphic and paleontologic record, and because it recorded a strong, clear,
and measurable response to climate forcing. Abundant ostracodes and pollen are
available for AMS dating. The sampling interval, owing to a high accumulation
rate and weak bioturbation, has a practical resolution for changes in climate of
less than a decade. Closely spaced (~50- yr) analyses of sediment composition,
oxygen 18 and carbon 13, and hydrochemistry (ostracode species abundance), along
with mass- balance calculations and a hydrologic model will be used to quantify
P-E on the time scale of centuries to millennia. Gray- scale images linked to
compositional and other changes analyzed at more closely spaced intervals will
characterize interannual to century-scale climatic variability. Patterns of
recorded climatic variability include ~2000-yr highstand and lowstands, very
strong ~200-to 250-yr, Maunder-scale oscillations, and ~20-years cycles. A more
accurate age model and chronostratigraphy based on AMS dating of abundant
ostracodes will determine the timing of the unusually large and rapid climatic
fluctuations recorded at the Estancia site during the glacial maximum and during
the later part of isotope stage 3. The Estancia reference section will be the
first complete, land-based high-resolution chronology for changes in climate
during this important time interval. It will serve as the basis for correlating
and interpreting regional shifts in climate as well as hemispheric and global
climatic events.