* 9304867
* Developmental and Environmental Regulation of the Nopaline Synthases Promoter
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Gynheung An, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 06/30/1997
* USD 270,000.00

Our long term goals are to understand the regulatory mechanisms of gene
expression and the molecular basis of differentiation in plants using the
nopaline synthase (nos) promoter as a model system. We will study the nos
promoter to further understand the regulatory mechanisms controlling activation
of the promoter in response to a variety of developmental and environmental
signals. We have shown that the nos upstream regulatory region consists of two
hexamer motifs and eight nucleotide spacer sequence and that this nos element is
essential for promoter activity in various cells and for inducibility by
wounding auxin, salicylic acid and methyljasmonate. During this grant period, we
plan to further characterize the structure and role of the spacer sequence of
the nos element by the synthetic oligonucleotide mutagenesis and the random site
selection method which is based on the selection of specific protein binding
sites from a pool of randomized DNA sequences. The sequences immediately
upstream or downstream of the hexamer motif-containing region will also be
studied by deletion analysis. Interaction between the hexamer motif-containing
region and transcription factor will be investigated. We have isolated two cDNA
and four genomic clones transcription factors which specifically interact with
the hexamer motif-containing elements. Using gene specific probes of these
clones, we will conduct Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization
experiments to study whether induction of the nos promoter by wounding or the
chemical stimuli occurs by increasing the amount of a specific transcription
factor. Preliminary data induction of the nos promoter is mediated at least in
part by the level of the transcription factor. It will be necessary to
investigate whether the increase is occurring at the transcriptional of post-
transcription level. We also plan to study the promoter regions of the bZIP
transcription factor genes by deletion and site specific mutation analyses. %%%
The nos gene originated from Agrobacterium is strongly expressed in most plant
cells and regulation of this promoter is controlled by plant transcriptional
factors which are important for a variety of developmental and environmental
signals. We proposed to study molecular mechanisms controlling the nos promoter
by these factors. The information obtained from this study will be useful for
understanding the structure and function of complex regulatory mechanisms
involved in plant gene expression.