* 9304394
* RUI:  Reactivation of Sperm Nucleus at Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Dominic Poccia, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 02/28/1997
* USD 149,812.00

9304394 Poccia The long term goal of this work is to understand the
inactivation/activation of the sperm nucleus that occurs during spermatogenesis
and following fertilization. Successful genetic reactivation of the dormant
sperm nucleus by egg cytoplasm is essential to successful biparental embryonic
development. Male pronuclear reactivation is preceded by decondensation of
chromatin and alteration of DNA associated basic proteins. Dr. Poccia will test
the abilities of two sperm specific histones of the sea urchin (Sp H1 and Sp
H2B) to determine first order structure of sperm chromatin and its alteration
following fertilization. His model predicts that phosphorylation of "SPKK" sites
in the N-terminal domains of these molecules controls average nucleosomal repeat
length and accessibility of linker DNA to enzymatic digestion. These properties
have been previously correlated in vivo, but whether N-terminal phosphorylation
plays a role in determining repeat lengths or sensitivity to MNase digestion is
a major untested postulate. Novel features of his experiments include the use of
identical histone variants which differ in degree of phosphorylation, employment
of N- and C-terminal peptide as well as intact molecules to assess the
contribution of those domains, and evaluation of the contributions of H2B as
well as H1. Relevance of "SPKK" phosphorylation extends beyond Sp histones.
Similar sites occur in most H1's and in several nucleic acid packaging proteins
and regulators, some of which are phosphorylated in a cell cycle dependent
manner. Moreover, positioning of nucleosomes and alteration of histone-DNA
binding affinities is critically important in replication and transcriptional
control mechanisms. ***