* 9304790
* Immunoglobulin Flexibility in the Generation of Immune      Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Kenneth Roux, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1998
* USD 405,000.00

9304790 Roux Immune complexes will be generated by reaction of monoclonal
antibodies representing the various human and mouse Ig classes and subclasses
with specific antibodies directed against topologically defined determinants.
Extensive use will be made of previously investigated systems in which mapped
idiotypic and isotypic determinants will serve as probe sites. molecules with
altered or mutant hinge regions will be similarly complexed for comparison.
Electron micrographic images will be scored for angular relationships and
rotational orientations between the various Fab and Fc segments of target and
probe molecules. These data will be interpreted in the context of the location
of the reactive sites and the class and subclass (i.e., the degree and modes of
hinge flexibility) of the reactants. When reaction mixtures are sampled at
defined time intervals, a kinetic profile of the formation of immune complexes
can also be documented. The goals are: 1) To conduct a comprehensive comparative
structural analyses of (a) uncomplexed, and (b) tethered Ig classes and
subclasses by EM with emphasis on hinge-imparted flexibility of Fab and Fc arms.
2) To determine the correlation of idiotopes or isotypic determinants to (a) the
geometry and (b) the kinetics of immune complex formation as a result of
interaction with ligands. 3) To determine the role of specific hinge structures
(or other flexibility-imparting segments) of native Ig in the generation of
defined immune complex configurations. 4) To determine the effect of genetically
engineered alterations of the hinge regions on the formation and geometry of
immune complexes. %%% A detailed understanding of the structural and functional
aspects of antibodies is of fundamental importance to a wide range of
immunological phenomena. One key element that is rarely defined in an antigen-
antibody interaction is the relationship between the geometry of the immune
complex and its functional attributes. This pro posal describes a series of
investigations aimed at studying the three-dimensional geometry of immune
complexes as a function of both segmental flexibility and the location of
reactive sites (i.e., idiotopes and isotypic determinants). Additional knowledge
on the limitations of Ig flexibility and geometry should enhance the conceptual
framework in which many basic observations are interpreted. Such information may
also have practical applications such as aiding in the development of rational
approaches to the design of Ig-based pharmaceuticals. ***