* 9304939
* Global Climatic Consequence of CO2 Released During          Eocene Regional Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Kenneth Caldeira, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1997
* USD 241,700.00

9304939 Kerrick Collisional orogenesis may provide a climatically important
source of CO2, thus requiring a re-examination of the role of mountain building
and orogenic metamorphism in long-term global change. The elevated
paleoatmospheric CO2 levels proposed for the Eocene may have resulted from CO2
released during Eocene regional metamorphism that affected extensive segments of
the Tethys and Circum-Pacific orogenic belts. Based on the geologic record, the
regional metamorphism in the Tethyan Himalayan orogen alone may have provided
enough CO2 to produce a significant Eocene climatic impact. The quantities and
fluxes of CO2 released to the atmosphere by decarbonation reactions in carbonate
and carbonaceous lithologies (e.g., siliceous dolomites, marls, black shales)
during prograde regional metamorphism represents a much neglected problem. From
estimates of the size of the Himalayan orogen affected by Eocene metamorphism,
the proportion of metacarbonate and graphitic rocks involved in this
metamorphism, and geochronologic analysis of the duration of prograde
metamorphism, and Eocene atmosphere could have received a large flux of
metamorphic CO2 (&gt; 1019 moles/Ma). Geochronologic analyses reveal a
remarkable similarity in peak metamorphic ages (i.e., 40-50 Ma) for many areas
within the Tethys and Circum-Pacific orogens, thus supporting the concept of a
major, world-wide Eocene regional metamorphism. There are two primary thrusts of
our proposed interdisciplinary research: (1) analysis of the geologic record to
quantify the amount and rate of metamorphic CO2 production during the Eocene,
and (2) modeling the impact of metamorphic CO2 fluxes on the Eocene atmosphere.
***