* 9304053
* Petrogenesis of Mantle Eclogites from Yakutia, Siberia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Lawrence Taylor, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 01/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

This is a proposal to study the petrogenesis of mantle eclogites and the
dynamics of their emplacement within the framework of the evolution of ancient
sub-cratonic mantle and the early evolution of the Earth. In this proposed
research, work concerning two localities will continue, and study extended to
two additional kimberlite localities in Yakutia, Siberia. These occurrences are
postulated to have sampled a wide range of depths in the mantle and are situated
at varying distances from the craton edge. The proposed study would continue the
NSF-sponsored US/Russia Cooperative Research Program and agreement between Prof.
L.A. Taylor of the University of Tennessee and Academician N.V. Sobolev of the
Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences. This multi-national approach
will include petrographic and mineral-chemical analyses of selected xenoliths
from the aforementioned kimberlite pipes in Siberia. This study will include an
exchange of scientific personnel between the United States and Russia. O, Rb-Sr,
Sm-Nd, and Re-Os analyses will be performed on mineral separates in diamonds to
determine the involvement of mantle and crustal reservoirs in eclogite genesis.
A new and exciting direction involves a study of major- and trace- element
chemistry of eclogite minerals found in several of the Yakutian diamonds. The
results will be used to achieve a more complete and global picture of the
formation of mantle eclogites, the structure and evolution of old cratons, and
the differentiation of the early Earth.