* 9304561
* US-Russian Research on Investigations in HTSC, Nonlinear    Oxides and Unconventional Superfluids
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 10,009.00

This US-Russia Joint Cooperative Research on Investigations in HTSC, Nonlinear
Oxides and Unconventional Superfluids will be conducted by Drs. John Ketterson
and R.P.H. Chang, Northwestern University and Dr. Peter Brusov, Rostov-on-Don
State University. Their cooperation will feature three areas of research: (1)
nonlinear optical oxide materials, where newly developed sputtering techniques
will be applied; (2) unconventional superconductors and superfluids, where
tunneling and atomic force microscopy will be used to study the magnetic field
distribution in the vicinity of a vortex in HFS; and (3) high temperature
superconductors (HTSC), where ribbon conductors will be produced using a novel
sputtering system constructed at Northwestern University and targets made at
Rostov-on-Don State University. Progress in the fields of high temperature
superconductivity and nonlinear optics is intimately coupled to advances in
oxide materials. Interest in nonlinear oxide materials developed only recently
at Northwestern, while Rostov is a leading Russian supplier and developer of
oxide ceramic materials. This research in materials research fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the United States and Russia to combine complementary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field of
basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality
of benefit.