* 9304562
* US-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Computer Simulations of Polydisperse Polymer Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* David Landau, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1997
* USD 23,128.00

This proposal, "US-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Computer Simulations of
Polydisperse Polymer Systems," will be carried out by Dr. David P. Landau,
University of Georgia and Dr. Andrey I. Milchev, University of Sofia. It
envisages an ambitious program of research, designed to shed light on the
complex cooperative behavior of a polydisperse system of semiflexible polymer
chains in the presence of an adsorbing surface. Since the thermodynamic
properties of such a system are so far largely unknown, the researchers believe
that in a collaboration of three years they can produce a sufficient number of
results in order to get a complete picture of the phenomena in question. The
program of research should focus on: (1) Determination of the order of the
disorientation phase transition in 2D; (2) Establishment of a total phase
diagram in the multiparameter space of the energy interactions, temperature and
density; (3) Investigation of adsorption isotherms and the adsorption-
description phase transition for polydisperse systems with different average
chain length and stiffness; (4) Study of the density profile and the structure
of the polymer solution as a function of the distance from the adsorbing
surface; (5) Investigation of the impact of impurities on the thermodynamic and
structural properties of the system. The problem is of major practical
importance since it has broad implications in lubrication, adhesion, surface
protection, etc. technology. Polymers, adsorbed at the surface of colloid
particles, lead to (steric) stabilization of the colloid suspension which is
important for dyes production. This research in materials theory fulfills the
program objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Bulgaria to combine complementary talents and pool research resources
in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.