* 9304771
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Domestic Services,         Migration, and the Transformation of Local Labor Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1994
* USD 8,795.00

Although women have been playing increasingly important roles in the
restructuring of the contemporary American economy, relatively little research
in geography or other fields has focused on the impact of individual decision
making by women trying to reconcile responsibilities both at work and at home on
their patterns of employment. This doctoral dissertation research project will
examine the role that acquisition of domestic services has on the women who
provide such services as well as on women in the middle- and upper-income
households that employ domestic servants. Primary quantitative and qualitative
data will be gathered through surveys and interviews with domestic workers and
employers of domestic workers in three different neighborhoods in the San Diego
metropolitan area. Longitudinal and cross-sectional analyses of these data will
be undertaken using a range of statistical procedures. This project will provide
valuable new insights into the dynamics of employment and locational decision
making among two groups of women -- professional women who have entered labor
markets in increasing numbers in recent decades, and domestic servants, most of
whom are recent immigrants from developing nations whose migration to the U.S.
was spurred by other dimensions of global economic change. This project will
contribute to understandings of the interplay between paid employment and
domestic responsibilities, the role of women's paid and unpaid work in local
labor-market dynamics, and the role of gender in international migration and the
operation of immigrant labor markets. As a doctoral dissertation improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.