* 9304512
* Structure and Function of Yeast Spindle Pole Bodies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Christopher Akey, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/29/1996
* USD 180,000.00

9304512 Akey Comparative studies of yeast and mammalian nuclei are providing
important insights into complex cellular processes such as control of the cell
cycle, mitosis, meiosis and nucleocytoplasmic transport. Moreover, the well
established area of yeast genetics allows rapid correlation between structural
alterations at the genetic level with changes in cell behavior and functions of
supra-molecular assemblies. In this project, the structure and function of a
supra-molecular assembly which resides within pores in the yeast nuclear
envelope will be studied: the spindle pole body (SPB). Electron microscopy of
partially enriched cell fractions will be employed, together with three-
dimensional (3D) image analyses, to reveal structural principles which govern
the assembly and functions of these complex supra molecular structures. In the
case of SPBs, it has recently been shown that these are highly ordered and
amenable to structural studies. Moreover, there are two lateral size classes
present in in vitro isolates. These will be studied using 3D tomography of both
thin sectioned and frozen-hydrated specimens. These studies should reveal the
architectural principles which govern the assembly and fusion pathways traversed
by the SPB during normal cell growth and mating, and should also reveal
molecular details of how the yeast microtubule organizing center anchors and
nucleates microtubules. The work will complement ongoing biochemical and genetic
analyses being carried out in other laboratories, and may broaden our
understanding of centrosomal functions in other species. %%% In eukaryotic
cells, the genetic material (DNA) is sequestered from the bulk cytoplasm, in a
structure called the nucleus, by a double-membrane boundary, the nuclear
envelope. In Saccharomyces yeast, the nuclear envelope does not break down at
the time of mitosis (cell division); instead, the mitotic spindle (the
microtubular structure responsible for the separation of daughter chromosomes
during the mitotic p rocess) forms inside the nucleus. In these yeast cells, the
spindle pole bodies (microtubule organizing centers), which are essential
structures for the assembly of the mitotic spindle and the mitotic process
itself, are associated with the nuclear pores. In this project, advanced methods
for studying the morphology of yeast spindle pole bodies at high resolution will
be used to study the structure of this cellular component. Yeast are amenable to
genetic analysis, and both genetic and biochemical analyses of spindle pole body
assembly are ongoing in other laboratories. The powerful combination of
structural and genetic analyses in yeast will lead to an increased understanding
of the essential process of cell division, and may broaden our understanding of
centrosomal functions during mitosis in other eukaryotes. ***