* 9304504
* The Potential for High Resolution Climate Records From      Ice Deposits in Saline Lakes of the Central Andes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Geoffrey Seltzer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 58,290.00

Layered ice deposits found in shallow saline lakes in southern Bolivia and
northern Chile may provide the first high-resolution record of climatic change
from the arid-subtropical region of the Andes. The ice deposits rise as much as
7 m above the surface of shallow saline lakes and extend to unknown depths. The
deposits are covered by a white carbonate crust and the layers alternate between
freshwater ice and ice mixed with sediment. The sites are located in a very arid
region (<100 mm a.1 mean annual precipitation) where mean annual temperatures
range from 3.6o to 9.6oC. The deposits are presently melting, which indicates
they are not in equilibrium with the modern climatic regime. Ice cores will be
retrieved from the ice deposits beginning with the largest deposit, which is
found in Laguna Colorada (22o10'S,4289m), to determine the potential of these
deposits as archives of high- resolution climatic change. A transect of cores
across the deposits will indicate whether or not the layers are horizontally
continuous. The cores will also provide the material for isotopic, chemical, and
mineral analyses, which are needed to determine when and how the layers formed.
Mono-pulse radar soundings will help to determine how thick the deposits are and
the potential need for a mechanical drill to obtain a long record. High lake
levels and glacial advances indicate there was a significant change in the
hydrologic budget in the subtropical region of the Andes during the late
Pleistocene. This change was probably caused by two factors: a southward shift
of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, which lengthened the rainy season, and
colder temperatures. Pr1eliminary results indicate that the layered ice deposits
may have started to form during this late-Pleistocene interval and therefore
could provide a unique record of climatic change for this region.