* 9304124
* Dissertation Research:  Resettlement and Adjustment of      Southeast Asian Refugees in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Kevin McHugh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 09/30/1995
* USD 10,000.00

9304124 McHugh Between 1975 and 1989, over 750,000 Southeast Asian refugees were
resettled in the United States through a series of scatter policies designed to
disperse the refugees throughout the nation. The goal was to inhibit the
development of enclaves in order to bring about rapid assimilation into host
communities. Family reunification and secondary migration led to a concentration
of Southeast Asians in nine states, however. Communities which responded to the
initial call for sponsors developed large enclaves, while other areas
experienced a net out migration of refugees to other locations. Still other
regions saw development of large refugee communities through secondary
migration. This research project will examine the evolution of the national
geography of the various Southeast Asian refugee groups since 1975 and determine
the role of voluntary agencies in defining settlement patterns through sponsor
recruitment practices. Primary data from the office of refugee resettlement will
be analyzed to trace the development of spatial enclaves over time and to
isolate the process by which enclaves came into being. Community-based
organizations will be surveyed in four central California cities in order to
determine their role in the differential adjustment experiences of refugees who
have settled or resettled in those communities. Ethnic enclaves exist, but how,
where, and why they form are complex and incompletely understood processes. This
study captures the settlement and adjustment process of immigrants and first-
born generations in locations where there were no pre- exiting enclaves.
Analysis of the roles of active sponsors, community-based organizations, and
community response will contribute to an understanding of ethnic enclave
formation and development. At the national level, the study will show the
influence of voluntary organizations in delimiting the geography of sponsorship
and primary resettlement and the effects of secondary mi gration in channeling
refugees to emerging enclaves. At a local level, the research examines community
organizations as facilitators of cultural exchange between various Southeast
Asian groups and host communities. In addition to contributing to the
theoretical literature on immigration, acculturation, and enclave formation,
results of this research will aid in the development of informed immigration and
refugee policy in the United States. ***