* 9304983
* Genetic &amp; Developmental Analysis of Internal Initiation of  Translation in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Douglas Cavener, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 382,000.00

9304983 Cavener The cap-dependent scanning model for translation initiation in
eukaryotes was previously argued to be used by all eukaryotic mRNAs. Recently
the poliovirus, EMCV, immunoglobulin binding protein, and Drosophila
Antennapedia mRNAs were shown to use a novel cap-independent mechanism for
translation initiation in cultured cells. These mRNAs contain internal ribosome
entry the sites (IRES) in their 5' untranslated region (UTR) leader sequences.
This proposal will examine the developmental regulation of internal initiation
using transgenic Drosophila. The 5" UTR sequences of the Antennapedia (Antp),
Ultrabithorax (Ubx), and seven in absentia (sina) will be tested for IRES
activity using a dicistronic assay system. The ability translation of the distal
cistron will be assessed in transgenic Drosophila. Since the dicistronic gene
will be driven by a constitutive promoter, the potential translation by the
internal initiation mechanism can be assessed for all tissues and stages.
Internal deletion experiments will examine whether the putative IRES elements of
Antp, Ubx, and sina are necessary for translation in the context of their full
5' UTRs. %%% Initiation of protein synthesis in eukaryotes is preceded by a
series of complex reactions primarily involving the ribosome, initiation
factors, Net-tRNA, and a mRNA. The cap dependent scanning model was proposed by
Kozak in 1989 to explain the order and nature of these reactions. It was first
challenged by the discovery that the picornaviruses do not have a terminal cap
and are translated by internal ribosome binding. This work will examine the
developmental regulation of internal initiation using transgenic Drosophila and
should allow insight into the elucidation of alternative initiation mechanisms
and also to a possible mode of development gene regulation. ***