* 9304485
* Buoyancy-Dominated Turbulent Transport in Separated Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Ta-Shen Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 287,361.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS-9304485 PI -- Ta-Shen Chen The proposed research is a
coordinated experimental and numerical study on buoyancy-dominated, turbulent
separated flows over backward-facing and forward-facing step geometries that are
oriented in vertical and horizontal positions. It is aimed at providing
quantitative results for the momentum and thermal transport in the separates and
reattached flow regions under the effect of strong buoyancy forces and low flow
velocities. Emphasis will be placed on the experimental study to examine the
turbulent transport characteristics (including momentum and heat transfer) in
natural convection and in buoyancy-dominated mixed convection adjacent to these
geometries. The existing turbulence models, such as the k-E models for high and
low Reynolds numbers, the algebraic stress model, and the RNG k-E model have
been applied with success to forced convection, but they have not been fully
tested and validated for buoyancy- dominated or buoyancy-affected complex flows
involving flow separation and reattachment. This is because at the present time
there is a lack of experimental measurements of buoyancy-dominated turbulent
separated flows, even for such simple geometry as a backward-facing or forward-
facing step. Such measurements are needed in order to test, validate, and/or
improve the existing turbulence models for applications in strong turbulent
buoyant flows involving flow separation. Simple geometries of backward-facing
and forward-facing steps are chosen for the proposed research in order to
establish a benchmark of experimental and numerical data for these geometries in
buoyancy-dominated turbulent mixed convection flows, similar to what has been
done for the same geometries in laminar mixed convection flows by the authors.
Measurements of the mean and turbulent quantities of the momentum and thermal
transport under buoyancy-dominated flow conditions for these benchmark
geometries will be carried out and these measured data will be used in the numer
ical phase of the proposed study, with the hope of validating or optimizing, and
maybe, if needed, modifying the existing turbulence models. These measurements
will also be of great value for future studies by others in modeling turbulent
transport in buoyancy-dominated separated flows. Results from the proposed
research will be correlated to provide the building blocks that are needed in
dealing with turbulent transport phenomena in complex, buoyancy-dominated
separated flows that are prevalent in many engineering devices.