* 9304219
* Collaborative Research:  A New Approach to Understanding    Prey Selection and Nutrition in Scyphomedusae
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Barbara Sullivan, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1997
* USD 225,960.00

9304219 SULLIVAN While the importance of scyphomedusae as predators in
planktonic communities has ben amply demonstrated, we are not presently able to
clearly predict which components of planktonic populations will be affected by
scyphomedusan predation. Conventional methodologies such as laboratory "black
box" feeding studies or gut contents from field samples have been valuable but
insufficient approaches to resolve this issue because they do not reveal how the
feeding interactions occur. The how is necessary to predict which prey will be
consumed in novel situations. A new approach will be developed in this project
that combines the separate expertise of two investigators specializing in video
and conventional methods for the study of prey selection. First, laboratory work
will quantify relationships between medusan body plan, fluid motions and prey
capture. Second, field studies of prey selection by gut analyses will determine
congruence of an evolving model with in situ selection patterns. Third, mesocosm
studies with controlled predator-prey conditions will critically evaluate the
model via hypothesis testing. The research will center on the ephyral through
young adult transition period of two abundant and cosmopolitan scyphomedusae,
Auerlia aurita and Cyanea capillata. While sharing similar ephyral morphologies,
the adult forms diverge widely in body plan. The results of this work will
contribute to our understanding of these specific predators, the ephyral form
shared by most scyphomedusae and, ultimately, to the mechanics of predator-prey
interactions in planktonic communities.