* 9304992
* Orientation of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Cells in Spatial Gradients of Mating Factor
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Jeffrey Segall, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 60,000.00

9304992 Segall A new method (termed the micropipet assay) has been developed to
demonstrate that Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells direct growth of mating
projections towards higher concentrations of mating pheromone. Current work
studying yeast mating has focussed on components that are absolutely required
for mating formation. The micropipet assay allows analysis of a new aspect of
this pathway, gradient sensing, and thus provides the potential for identifying
proteins specifically involved in this process. The work described here focuses
on the signal transduction pathway that allows yeast cells to determine the
direction of an external spatial gradient of mating factor. The first objective
is to use this new method to assay mutants in genes potentially involved in
gradient sensing. The second objective is to identify new mutants specifically
defective in this orientation. The first objective will utilize the micropipet
assay to characterize mutants in genes potentially involved in sensing gradients
of mating factor. For example, mutants in the mating pathway, bud site
selection, and cytoskeletal proteins could have altered abilities to sense and
orient in spatial gradients. The second objective, identification of mutants
defective in orientation in spatial gradients, will involve a two stage process.
The first stage is a genetic screen for mutants with altered partner selection
during mating. The phenotype expected for cells that no longer can determine the
direction of spatial gradients of mating factor is a more random selection of
mating partners. A simple, visual color assay of colonies on a plate will be
used to identify mutants that are still able to mate, but whose choice of mating
partner is no longer determined by the amount of mating factor produced by that
partner. Strains that reproducibly show reduced discrimination in this assay
will then be directly assayed using the micropipet assay for orientation.
Strains with reduced orientati on in the micropipet assay will be grouped into
complementation groups, with the eventual goal of cloning the genes via
complementation with a genomic library. %%% This research is expected to provide
insight into the sensing of spatial gradients of chemicals in a wide variety of
organisms. ***