* 9304603
* Cytoarchitecture of Living Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Katherine Luby-Phelps, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1997
* USD 349,125.00

A detailed view of cytoarchitecture is essential to understanding kinetics and
mechanisms of biochemical reactions in living cells, and for understanding
transport and localization of intracellular components. Rheological,
biochemical, and electron microscopic evidence suggests that cytoskeletal
elements interact to form a three-dimensional cytoplasmic network. Measurements
of solvent viscosity in living cells indicate that rotational diffusion of
molecules in cytoplasm is essentially the same as in dilute solution, while
their translational diffusion is significantly hindered, apparently by a
combination of collisions with other solute molecules and sieving by the
cytoskeletal network. Even very small solutes such as ions and metabolites may
diffuse 3 to 4 times slower in cytoplasm than in dilute aqueous solution. The
diffusion of particles >26 nm in diameter is further constrained by exclusion
from some subcompartments. Many of the intracellular components involved in
protein synthesis, respiration and particle transport are also absent from such
compartments, raising the possibility that they represent functional as well as
structural differentiations of the cytoplasm. Excluding compartments are filled
with bundles and meshworks of actin microfilaments. An actin-binding protein,
ABP280, that crosslinks F-actin into isotropic networks is also concentrated in
excluding compartments. Since F-actin / ABP280 networks in vitro are very
elastic and stable, the presence of these two cytoskeletal proteins in excluding
compartments suggests they are specialized for a mechanical function. The
objectives of this proposal are to test several models for the organization of
the cytoskeletal network that hinders the diffusion of macromolecules, to test
the hypothesis that exclusion of large particles from excluding compartments is
due to molecular sieving by a gel network, to identify actin-binding proteins
that may be components of the cytoarchitecture of excluding compartments, and to
attempt to implicate F-actin and ABP280 more directly in the exclusion of
particles by selectively disrupting their function. A multidisciplinary approach
will be employed, combining microinjection of proteins and inert fluorescent
tracer particles into living cells, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
to measure intracellular diffusion coefficients, digital fluorescence microscopy
to study the dynamic localization of injected molecules and the response of the
cells to them, fluorescent antibody localization of endogenous molecules in
cells that have been fixed, gold antibody localization to obtain a high
resolution picture of the three-dimensional organization of molecules in the
cytoskeleton of excluding compartments, and molecular genetics techniques to
disrupt the function of ABP280. Ultimately, information obtained from this
research should lead to an understanding of the effects of cytoarchitecture on
diffusion and localization of intracellular components, and stimulate testable
hypotheses regarding the function and regulation of excluding compartments. %%%
Much current thinking about cellular biochemistry and metabolism is extrapolated
from assays performed in homogeneous, dilute solution. However, the interior of
a cell is neither dilute, nor homogeneous. The intracellular concentration of
certain enzymes is orders of magnitude higher than the concentrations commonly
used to assay enzyme activity in vitro, and the total protein concentration may
be as high as 200 to 300 mg/ml. Sophisticated experiments employing a variety of
biophysical and other techniques have demonstrated the existence of "structure"
(other than the better- understood membrane-bound compartmentation) within what
has until recently been considered an amorphous cytoplasm. This project will
further define the nature and function of this cytoplasmic structure. The work
is significant not only for what it can help us understand about the function of
the living cell, but also potentially as a model for a new generation of
synthetic materials of functionally defined porosities.