* 9304091
* Workshop on an Infrastructure for Temporal Databases;       Arlington, Texas; June 14-16, 1993
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Niki Pissinou, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Program Director
* 05/31/1996
* USD 27,590.00

Workshop on an Infrastructure for Temporal Databases The objective of this
workshop is to define and establish a common infrastructure for temporal
databases. The infrastructure establishes a common technical vocabulary,
identifies specific data modeling and query language needs arising from
potential temporal DBMS users, identifies concepts and technologies from other
data handling areas that could be profitably applied to temporal databases,
specifies a single temporal relational data model, lists the specific language
features that should be included in a temporal query language, specifies a
database schema and example queries that will aid in comparing query language
proposals, outlines and populates a DBMS architecture with established query
processing approaches, storage structures, and access methods, states the
features that should be present in next-generation temporal data models and
query languages, characterizes the research questions that are most pressing,
and includes recommendations for funding and for building additional
infrastructure in the temporal DBMS community. The workshop participants will
communicate this infrastructure through a consensus document that will be widely
circulated to the research, development, management and planning communities and
funding agencies. This document will contain technical results and
recommendations and will provide a foundation for implementation,
standardization and future research.