* 9304725
* Development of APS Synchrotron Instrumentation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1998
* Katherine Faber, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,450,474.00

Cohen 9304725 Northwestern University, E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and Dow Chemical
have formed a Collaborative Access Team, known as DUNU, and are proposing to
instrument and operate a sector at the Advanced Photon Source. A funding
schedule, with costs to be shared equally by both parties has been agreed upon,
covering both a five year construction phase, as well as a ten year minimum
operations phase. Currently DUNU employs three full-time senior scientists and
engineers headquartered at Northwestern (a nationwide search is on for a fourth
senior scientist), with extensive experience in beam line construction and
operations both at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and the
National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS Brookhaven), plus management of one of
the largest x-ray diffraction laboratories in the country. The purpose of this
Collaborative Access Team is to carry out research on the structure of advanced
materials. Our understanding of the structure (atomic to micron level) is a
crucial prerequisite to the development of new materials with enhanced
properties. Synchrotron radiation has become an essential tool in every aspect
of structural analysis and has revolutionized many subfields of science and
engineering. Many members of our CAT have been very active users of our national
facilities. The vastly increased capabilities of "third generation" machines,
such as the APS and similar storage rings in Europe and Japan, promise a second
revolution. A broad research program has been formulated, involving currently
more than 30 principal investigators from Du Pont and Northwestern. At least
fifty other scientists and engineers, students and post-doctoral fellows will
ultimately be involved. Although many fields of materials science and
engineering are represented in this research program, the research to be
supported by the instrumentation in this project has a particular focus: It
deals with materials, whose intermediate scale structure (nanometer to
micrometer) has a profound influence on their properties. Such materials are of
immense technological importance and include precipitation-hardening alloys,
ceramics, polymers, cement and composite materials. Many elements of this
research program are totally beyond current capabilities at available x-ray
sources (conventional and synchrotron). The instrumentation that we will develop
depends heavily (or crucially) on the characteristics of the APS. It is grouped
in two experimental stations, both utilizing undulator radiation: 1. General
purpose scattering instrument, suitable for all types of diffraction experiments
(amorphous, powder and single crystal work, surface and interface diffraction,
standing waves etc.). Collimated beams (0.1-1 mm) and microbeams will be
available for diffraction and microprobe work. The microbeam capability is of
particular interest in the context of this proposal. 2. Small Angle X-ray
Scattering microtomography instrument equipped with 2-D position sensitive
detector and environmental chamber with multiple attachments (low and high
temperature, UHV, sample changer). This may be the first x-ray instrument with
sufficient imaging and scattering resolution to allow the two techniques to
overlap in studying micron- sized structural features. We believe that DUNU
possesses all the key ingredients of a productive and strong Collaborative
Access Team. Northwestern University anchors an interactive research community
through its interdisciplinary research centers (many of which, such as the
Materials Research Center and the Center for Advanced CementBased Materials are
supported by the National Science Foundation) and individual faculty research.
E.I. Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co. brings its immense capabilities in scientific
research and development. It is a world leader in process chemistry and
engineering and t he manufacturing of high technology products. It is the intent
of this collaboration not only to share a station at this major facility, but to
develop interactive, collaborative research between the two institutions (we
have installed a videoconferencing link to aid this interaction).