* 9304794
* Landscape-Scale Determinants of the Hydrological and        Hydrochemical Responses of Mountainous Catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Kenneth Bencala, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/1997
* USD 333,549.00

A quantitative understanding of the hydrochemical response of upland catchments
is a fundamental goal of hydrologists and environmental chemists. Such knowledge
is needed to ascertain the potential and realized effects, for example, of
atmospheric deposition of acids and agricultural chemicals on the catchment
(terrestrial and aquatic) ecosystems, of changes of climate on water quality,
and of the role of hydrology in the transport of heavy metals and other trace
contaminants. In particular, an improved understanding of the factors
controlling the variation of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in headwater streams
is of scientific concern for at least two reasons. First, the overall carbon
budget of lotic systems is of primary interest to aquatic ecologists seeking a
fundamental scientific understanding of these systems. Second, DOC interacts
strongly with other dissolved substances (heavy metals in particular) and
therefore plays an important role in the transport of contaminants in streams.
Heterogeneities in the amount of precipitation delivered to the surface of a
catchment, in soil properties and vegetation coverage, and in incident solar
radiation can pay an important role in the hydrological response of mountainous
catchments. These heterogeneities may be particularly important in influencing
how chemicals (e.g., DOC) are delivered from the terrestrial catchment to the
stream. Complete characterization of heterogeneities over a catchment is
essentially impossible, but is likely to be unnecessary for descriptions of
hydrochemical dynamics at the scale of a whole catchment. A possibly fruitful
hypothesis is that the heterogeneities that dominate the catchment response are
relatively large scale and hence can be identified from readily available data--
topography, aerial photography, and satellite imagery -- in conjunction with a
modest data-collection program in the field. The proposed work will explore this
idea. The effects of spatial patterns in topography, vegetation cover, snow
accumulation and melt, and soil transmissivity on the hydrochemical response of
the Snake River in Summit County, Colorado will be determined. Spatial data will
be analyzed using techniques embodied within geographic information systems
(GIS) and synthesized in the context of a hydrological model (TOPMODEL) that
will be modified to take into account the identified landscape-scale
heterogeneities. Field data on precipitation, flow, hydraulic conductivity, and
dissolved constituents (sulfate and DOC, in particular) will be used to evaluate
the working hypothesis of the links between large-scale heterogeneity,
hydrology, and hydrochemical response.