* 9304570
* Novel Oxide Materials, Indo-U.S. Collaborative Research,    Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* C. N. R. Rao, Indian Institute of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/1996
* USD 37,544.00

Description: This proposal requests renewal of a previously approved and active
research project "INDO-US Collaborative Research on Novel Oxide Materials." The
collaborators are C.N.R. Rao, Professor, Solid State and Structural Chemistry
Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, and J.M. Honig, Materials Research
Center, Purdue University. The research will continue development of novel oxide
materials with special attention to high temperature superconductors. The
research includes synthesis of interesting oxide systems and examination of
structure-property relations. Included are selected studies of high Tc 214-oxide
superconductors with the K2NiF4 structure and related normal properties of this
class of materials. Scope: The collaboration of Professor Rao's team at
Bangalore and Professor Honig's team at Purdue has been successful and resulted
in a number of significant publications. Rao is one of India's most
distinguished scientists. He has done pioneering research in numerous areas of
materials and structural chemistry. It is likely that this project will result
in significant advances in the field of new materials and better material
characterization. Dr. Honig is a participant in a newly established Indiana
Center for Innovative Superconductivity Technology, which was provided $500,000
for the first year of operation by the State of Indiana. His work with Dr. Rao
would fit well with the objectives of that center, and with enhancing materials
science research in the U.S.