* 9304873
* Groundwater Flow, Normal Fault Block Motion, and Brine      Evolution Within the Rio Grande Rift System, New Mexico:    Implications  for Potassium Metasomatism
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Peter Hudleston, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1996
* USD 86,066.00

It is now well established that potassic hydrothermal alteration of igneous and
sedimentary rocks is intimately associated with extensional tectonics and the
evolution of regional groundwater flow systems within continental rift basins.
While the paleohydrology of compressional tectonic systems has received
considerable attention in the literature in recent years, the hydrodynamics of
extensional terrains remains poorly understood in a quantitative sense. Little
is know, for example, about the effects of listric fault block motion, the
relative importance of different fluid flow inducing mechanisms, and the
evolution of brines on basin hydrodynamics. In this proposal a methodology is
presented for investigating crustal scale groundwater flow within continental
rift basins using mathematical modelling. The approach will be used to study the
giant potassium anomaly within the Rio Grande Rift system near Socorro, New
mexico, a site where sufficient geologic and hydrologic data are available to
evaluate the utility of the analysis. Finite element models of hydrothermal
fluid flow brine evolution, and the kinematics of normal fault block motion will
be constructed along cross-sectional transects through the rift. Special
emphasis will be place on assessing the hydrologic connection between shallow
(0-5 km) and deep (5-15 km) flow systems as well as the relative importance of
compaction-, topography-, density-, and seismogenically-induced groundwater
motion. The quantitative results will be compared with observed potassic
hydrothermal alteration of igneous and sedimentary rocks within the Rio Grande
Rift system in cooperation with Dr. Charles Chapin, Director of the New Mexico
Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources, Socorro, New Mexico.