* 9304092
* Superoxide Response Regulon of E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Bernard Weiss, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 430,000.00

9304092 Weiss The soxRS (superoxide response) regulon of Escherichia coli an
adaptation to oxidative stress. It includes the genes for a superoxide
dismutase, endonuclease IV (a DNA repair enzyme), and glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase. Induction occurs in two stages. SoxR is first altered by an
oxidative signal to become a transcriptional activator of SoxS. The
overexpressed SoxS then activates the target genes of the regulon. The first
question to be answered is whether or not the two-stage mechanism provides a
temporally programmed response; i.e., are there genes other than soxS that are
turned on directly by the activated SoxR and that are therefore expressed before
those genes targeted by SoxS? To answer this question, 2-D gel protein patterns
are being examined in regulon-constitutive (soxR) mutants that have a soxS
deletion. The major part of this research deals with purification of SoxS and
SoxR proteins from overproducing strains and a study of their interactions with
their DNA binding sites and with RNA polymerase. Because the Sox S protein is a
member of the large AraC family, so many analogs of which are being separately
studied, investigations is limited to examining only its unique properties;
thus, its specific recognition sequence will be delineated via DNA footprinting
and mutational analysis of the for promoter region. SoxR, which is activated
directly and/or indirectly by superoxide, will be studied more extensively. An
attempt will be made to reconstruct SoxR-mediated soxS induction in vitro an to
use it to identify the possible effector (s). The physical traits of the native
SoxR protein will be compared with both mutationally activated and chemically
activated forms to provide an insight into the mechanism of induction. The
physical traits to be examined will include evidence of phosphorylation or
proteolysis and changes in metal content, DNA footprint, titratable thiols,
absorption spectrum, fluorescence, and multimer formation. %%% Because bacterial
regulons are controlled in diverse ways, they provide many useful models for the
coordinate regulation of dispersed genes in all organisms. Ultimate goals of the
studies on the soxRS regulon are (a) the understanding of an additional system
of multigene regulation and (b) the elaboration of the mechanism whereby
organisms that grow in the presence of oxygen can deal with toxic by products of
oxidative growth. ***