* 9304439
* Routing of Dictyostelium Beta-Hexosaminidase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Arnold Kaplan, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1997
* USD 330,000.00

The study of mechanisms by which lysosomal enzymes are sorted is teaching us
about the relationship of protein structure to protein transport. In complex
organisms, lysosomal enzymes serve a key role in embryonic re-sculpting. Their
sorting is regulated during development. The long range goal of this project is
to discover the molecular details of this regulation. Dictyostelium discoideum
is a simpler organism whose development is well studied. A complete CDNA copy of
the Dictyostelium MRNA which encodes beta- hexosaminidase (beta-hex), a
lysosomal enzyme, has already been cloned and sequenced. This was used to
transform the organism with a vector designed to express proteins accurately. It
was shown that the transformants overproduce active enzyme, which is
appropriately sorted. Also, a beta-hex-invertase fusion system was developed for
evaluation of candidate signals. That study led to the discovery of a signal
which sorts proteins to a vesicle whose contents are stored during growth and
secreted during development. It also led to the hypothesis that lysosomal
enzymes may be directed from organelle to organelle by more than one receptor,
or by the combination of one receptor ligand interaction and other features of
the enzyme structure. This will be pursued through the following specific aims.
The first is to determine the exact chemical nature of the signal which is
required to sort protein to the lysosomal pathway. This includes: a,
determination of the minimal biologically functional sequence and the extent to
which that sequence can be varied but still lead to proper sorting; b,
confirmation that the sequence acts as a ligand for a receptor and purification
of the receptor; and c, analysis of the specificity of the ligand-receptor
interaction with synthetic peptides. The second is to test the idea that
features of proteins, other than recognition markers, are required for proper
sorting to lysosomes, specifically, to test theories that explain why a terminal
beta-hex sequence is necessary. %%% A key feature of eukaryotes is that their
cells are physically compartmentalized; that is, the cytoplasm is not a uniform
mixture of cellular components, but rather, is highly organized in such a way
that specific cellular functions, and the components that carry out those
functions, are localized in discrete regions of the cell. Some of these
functionally-distinct compartments are bounded by membranes, and can be
considered to be "organelles." Since most of the cell's proteins are produced on
cytoplasmic ribosomes, it follows that there must be mechanisms to ensure that
specific proteins get to their specific subcellular locations. One well- studied
example of this is the problem of how newly-synthesized lysosomal (degradative)
enzymes get to the lysosomes (specialized membrane-bounded compartments
responsible for enzymatic degradation of macromolecules). Nature seems to have
provided multiple mechanisms for this to occur. Although the best-studied
mechanism involves membrane-bound receptors which recognize mannosyl-6-
phosphate residues at the terminal position of asparagine-linked
oligosaccharides on lysosomal enzymes, it is not the only mechanism for proper
targeting of lysosomal enzymes. In the slime mold Dictyostelium discoidum,
mannosyl-6-phosphate receptors have been looked for but not found; therefore
lysosomal enzyme targeting in these cells must be via one or more alternative
mechanisms. This project holds the promise of elucidating details of at least
one of these alternative mechanisms. Detailed understanding of the structural
requirements for a protein to be targeted to a specific subcellular location is
of basic importance to the biotechnology industry; it is expected that the
information learned from this project will allow molecular engineers to design
proteins more intelligently for production in bioreactors.