* 9304579
* LTREB: Cost of Reproduction and Evolution of Seabird Reproductive Life Histories
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1999
* David Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1999
* USD 200,023.00

The concept of tradeoff between current and future reproduction ("cost of
reproduction") is central to life history theory, and so to our understanding of
the evolution of reproductive characteristics. For birds, existing empirical
demonstrations of this tradeoff are all flawed by poor choice of experimental
species, short-term experiments, and drastic manipulations. Hence a fundamental
tenet of evolutionary theory remains to be tested rigorously in this group. This
proposal describes an experimental test of the hypothesis that the cost of
reproduction is a significant selective agent in the evolution of reproductive
rate. Specifically, the study can test the hypothesis that adding only one
additional offspring to a brood imposes a cost of reproduction large enough to
impose natural selection against that experimental brood size. By using an
appropriate study species yielding large samples and adopting a long-term
perspective this study avoids the flaws of previous work in this area. This
study builds on 10 years of field work by the principal investigator with the
study species on related problems. %%% Research of this type, in addition to
being of fundamental importance to theoretical and empirical population biology,
should have positive bearing upon such emergent modern themes as species
conservation and biological diversity. As well it may yield information useful
in the commercial breeding of fowl for food.