* 9304623
* Fourier Transform Spectrometer for High-Pressure SynchrotronInfrared Spectroscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 02/29/1996
* USD 124,512.00

9304623 Hemley This award provides one-half the funding required for the
acquisition of a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer system (FTIR) that will
be installed at the infrared beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source
(NSLS), Brookhaven National Laboratory. The Principal Investigator's
institution, the Carnegie Institution of Washington, is committed to providing
the remaining funds necessary for the acquisition of this system. The FTIR
system will be used in a wide variety of ultra-high pressure studies done in
diamond-anvil cells at the NSLS IR beamline. The high brilliance and broad
spectral distribution (from the visible to the far infrared), and the pulsed-
time structure of the radiation will make possible a new class of spectroscopic
measurements on materials at the ultra-high pressures attainable in the diamond-
anvil cell. Studies made possible by this system will include infrared
measurements of the electronic and vibrational excitations associated with the
metallization of hydrogen above 150 GPa. Similar measurements will also be
performed on the other planetary gases and ices, including binary and more
complex mixtures. These investigations will provide key constraints on models of
the interiors of the large planets. Electronic spectra, including band-gap
closure phenomena, in iron-bearing silicates and oxides will be studied over the
entire pressure range of the Earth's lower mantle (to 135 GPa). ***