* 9304447
* Development of the Genetic Map of Volvox
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1999
* David Kirk, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1999
* USD 610,080.00

9300047 Kirk Volvox carteri is a potentially powerful model system for analysis
of the genetics of differentiation and development. It is a eukaryotic
multicellular organism but it contains only two cell types, mortal somatic cells
and immortal germ cells, which are arranged in a predictable pattern within a
simple spheroid. The organism is normally haploid, reproduction is usually
asexual and mutations are phenotypically obvious but because sexual reproduction
is readily induced, formal genetic analysis is possible. Mutations which cause
organizational abnormalities are viable because cell development is autonomous.
Because there are close relatives of Volvox that lack cellular differentiation,
the potential for evolutionary studies exists. One limitation of this organism
as a model system has been the lack of a genetic map and an inability to
transform it. The latter procedure has been recently developed in our laboratory
and we are embarking upon the former. The genetic map has been expanded by the
incorporation of many restriction-fragment-length-polymorphism (RFLP) and drug
resistance markers. Methods for tagging and recovering genes of interest via
transposon mutagenesis have been developed. The goals for the next five years
are to tag, identify and map genes that regulate development and differentiation
of germ and somatic cells as well as morphogenetic movements and cellular
senescence and programmed cell death. %%% The achievement of the goals of this
project will provide a bridge organism between simpler single cell organisms and
much more complex multicellular organisms for the study and understanding of
development and differentiation as well as evolution.