* 9304782
* Structural Basis for Electron Transfer Between the BacterialReaction Center and Cytochrome c2 in Rhodobacter Sphaeroide studied by Site Directed Mutagenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Melvin Okamura, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1996
* USD 285,000.00

9304782 Okamura Photosynthetic bacteria convert light energy into chemical
energy by photo-induced electron transfer reactions in a pigment protein complex
called the reaction center (RC). The initial charge separation within the RC is
coupled to electron transfer across the membrane by electron transfer from a
mobile electron carrier, cytochrome c2. Important features of the reaction
between the RC and cytochrome c2 are the high rate of electron transfer and also
the molecular recognition of electron transfer partners. The structural basis
for these two properties will be investigated by studying the effects of
mutating the following types of residues: (1) Charged residues on the RC and
cytochrome will be modified to investigate electrostatic interactions between
the two redox partners. Complementary charge changes on the RC (negative to
positive charged residues) and cytochrome (negative to positive charged
residues) will be made to map out the specific ion pairing interactions in the
cytochrome RC complex. (2) Uncharged residues on the RC surface near the
cytochrome binding site will be mutated to residues having different molecular
sizes and hydrophobicity. The pattern of changes in binding and electron
transfer observed will be used to map out the binding interaction and possible
pathways for electron transfer. %%% Biological systems derive much of their
energy from electron transfer between proteins in biological membranes. Two
major questions of electron transfer that are currently not understood are: How
do electron donor and acceptor proteins recognize and bind to each other? and
what is the pathway for electron transfer though proteins? The answers to both
of these questions will be studied for the reaction between the bacterial
reaction center and cytochrome c2, from the photosynthetic bacterium Rb.
sphaeroides. ***