* 9304751
* Protein Surface Mutations: Denatured State Stability Effects
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Bruce Bowler, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9304751 Bowler The research to be undertaken focuses on the role of the
denatured state of a protein in modulating the thermodynamics equilibrium
between the native and denatured state. Mutation at highly solvent-exposed amino
acids on the surface of iso-1- cytochrome c is proposed as a means of probing
the energetics of the denatured state with reduced interference from native
state energetic relative to mutation at buried amino acids. Hydrophilic to
hydrophobic mutations at such sites will be used to test the prediction of
heteropolymer theory that such mutations should stabilize the denatured state.
Hydrophobic to hydrophilic surface mutations will also be investigated to see if
they have the opposite effect on the denatured state energy. Histidines are
believed to ligate to the heme of cytochrome c in the denatured state. Using
mutagenesis methods to vary the sequence position of the histidine we will
attempt to modulate the size and shape of the denatured state. The
thermodynamics of all mutants will be characterized by both guanidine-HC1 and
thermal denaturation techniques. A reversible disulfide mutation method and
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy will be used to directly assess the
impact of our mutations on the denatured state of the protein. %%% Understanding
the factors that stabilize the folded state of a protein relative to the
unfolded state is a central issue in Biochemistry. Being able to rationally
control the stability of a protein would be of great importance to the
pharmaceutical industry which is increasingly developing protein
pharmaceuticals. The work to be undertaken will explore methods of selectively
perturbing the unfolded state of a protein, by focussing on mutation of amino
acids that are exposed on the surface of a protein. The work will be carried out
with the protein iso-1-cytochrome c which will be isolated from Baker's yeast.
Standard thermal and chemical methods will be used to characterize the energy
requir ed to unfold the mutant forms of the protein. Two methods, reversible
disulfide mutation and infrared spectroscopy, will be used to evaluate the
degree to which stability changes originate from the unfolded state of the
protein. These experiments have the potential to provide methods of stabilizing
or destabilizing a protein which do not affect the folded structure of a protein
and thus would have minimal impact on biological activity. ***