* 9304328
* Adsorption Dynamics of Mixed Surfactants and Proteins at    Air/Water Interfaces:  Applications to Foams and Lung Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Elias Franses, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

9304328 Frances The project examines the dynamic surface tension and adsorption
behavior of surfactants, lipids, and proteins at the air/water interface.
Dynamic adsorption is important in foam-based separations of toxic or useful
chemicals from dilute solutions. It is also important in coasting flows,
pesticide spray efficiency, downstream bioprocessing of hydrophobic molecules,
and in lung surfactant formulations for treating the respiratory distress
syndrome of premature infants. The objectives are to study how different kinds
of molecular interactions of various surfactants and proteins affect the
competitive adsorption behavior. Dynamic surface tensions area measured either
at constant area or at pulsating area conditions. Surface adsorption densities
are estimated from surface electrical potential measurements, from using
radiotracers, and from sampling the surface monolayers by the use of Langmuir-
Blodgett deposition method. Moreover, an apparatus is being built for probing
dynamic concentration profiles. The results are correlated with transport-
adsorption description models and are used in interpreting foam - concentration
and foam fractionation experiments of octanol, sodium dodecylsulfate, bovine
serum albumin, lysozyme, and other molecules. Finally, hexadecanol,
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, tyloxapol, and SP-A, SP-B, and SP-C (lung
specific proteins) are studied for their importance in lung surfactant
formulations.