* 9304207
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Adapting       Higher-Order Encodings to Sophisticated User Interfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Penny Anderson, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1994
* USD 27,000.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Penny Anderson to work
with Dr Gilles Kahn, at INRIA Sophia-Antipolis, France. This research will
explore how the wealth of theoretical work in formal logic, proof theory,
logical frameworks, and related topics can be used to improve programming
practice. Dr. Anderson will investigate the use of higher- order abstract syntax
and related techniques in systems based on formal deduction that have efficient
and well-designed user interfaces. Effective user interfaces are essential for
most of the activities one might wish to undertake with the support of automated
deductive systems: theorem proving, language prototyping, semantic analysis,
program development, etc. These tasks require the management of large amounts of
detail, and for even medium-sized problems they become infeasible without
extensive support for presenting information to the user. In order to carry out
experiments with deductive systems that are needed to bring theoretical work to
practical application, one needs user interface tools that are general in the
same sense that logical frameworks are. The use of higher- order encoding
techniques has the potential to simplify the task of tailoring user interface
tools to particular formal deduction systems. The purpose of this research is to
bring together research in the application of logical frameworks with research
in user interfaces to deduction-based systems. This should result in better
understanding of implementation techniques and useful refinements of the
underlying framework; the use of these encodings should clarify the semantic
basis of the interaction with the user.