* 9304481
* Stochastic Modeling of Reactive Solute Transport in         Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1998
* Yoram Rubin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9304481 Rubin Predictions of contaminant transport by groundwater, as well as
monitoring and management, are based on quantitative models of solute motion.
Present methods for prediction of contaminant transport are inadequate because
they fail to account explicitly for measured data at its locations. They also do
not account realistically for the effects of heterogeneity in the conductivity
and temporal variability in pressure (or only under some simplifying
assumptions), and they do not offer an economic means of designing a monitoring
scheme where the observed data are used to update the predictive models.
Furthermore, little attempt has been directed so far to obtain a better
understanding of transport in highly heterogeneous geologic formations and the
effects of chemical reactions on transport at the field scale. Lastly, current
predictive methods fail to link the predictions with any criterion of goodness
of fit. In this study, we propose to develop a modeling strategy which considers
the aquifer hydraulic properties, the velocity field, and the solute
concentration as random space functions, expressed in terms of initial/boundary
conditions and various physical parameters, and which allow, both spatial
variability and prediction uncertainty to be analyzed with probabilistic,
quantitative tools. Three-dimensional random function models will be obtained
for steady and unsteady nonuniform velocity fields and will be used for
predicting the various moments of the concentration of reactive and non-reactive
contaminants for anisotropic conductivity fields. Bayesian analysis will make
the predictions locally conditioned. The model will be applied to two field
studies. We plan to achieve a better understanding of transport phenomena at the
fundamental level and obtain risk- qualified, locally-conditioned estimates of
solute spreading in applications. We plan to generalize existing stochastic
transport theories to account for higher-order variability i n the flow field,
to investigate the influence of flow unsteadiness and nonuniformity, to evaluate
the relevance of unsteadiness to the prediction of solute transport under
typical conditions, and finally to suggest simplified methods to incorporate
flow unsteadiness, flow nonuniformity and chemical reactions into predictions.
***