* 9304581
* Clastic Dikes as Conduits for Episodic Fluid Flow           in the Upper Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1996
* James Boles, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1996
* USD 157,762.00

9304581 Boles The proposed study seeks to identify and quantify processes by
which clastic dikes serve as conduits for episodic and rapid fluid flow in the
upper crust. This study will investigate transport mechanisms for breccia
components in clastic dikes in silicious shales of the Miocene Monterey
Formation, coastal California, and in Paleozoic limestones both in Titus Canyon,
Death Valley, and in the Shell Creek Range, NE Nevada. Minimum velocities of
fluid flow will be calculated using relations among flow velocity, clast size,
viscosity, and fluid and clast densities in fluidized beds. These parameters
will be estimated based on field and thin section investigators, fluid inclusion
studies, and published density values of similar rock types. Episodic fluid flow
through the dike can be inferred if the calculated flow velocity through the
dike is much faster than seepage by darcian flow. In addition, mechanism leading
to fragmentation of wall rock and breccia components in clastic dikes will be
investigated. Identification of the latter process would allow estimated on the
magnitude and rate of drops in pore pressure. Rapid drops are considered as
characteristic for clastic dikes serving as conduits for large scale, episodic
fluid flow. Stable isotope and trace element measurements across crack seal
veins associated with clastic dikes will determine if the dikes were chemically
closed or open systems. Strontium isotope analyses of wall rock and vein filling
minerals will indicate if vein cementation occurred in a closed or open system.
The proposed investigations will increase the present understanding of fluid
flow mechanisms within the upper crust. Findings of this study may influence
research in applied fields such as transport of contaminants and heat in
fractured rocks of earthquake hazard analysis. ***