* 9304646
* Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Patricia Wadsworth, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1997
* USD 484,000.00

Microtubules are intracellular polymers that participate in a variety of events
in eukaryotic cells, including mitosis, intracellular particle transport and the
maintenance of asymmetric cell shape. Microtubules are inherently dynamic, and
are observed to alternate between periods of growth and rapid shortening. The
transition from growth to rapid shortening is termed catastrophe; the reverse
transition, rescue. To directly observe the dynamic behavior of microtubules in
living cells, a fluorescent analog of tubulin, the subunit protein of the
microtubule, will be injected into cells and allowed to incorporate into the
microtubule polymer. The fluorescent microtubules will be detected using low-
light-level fluorescence microscopy. The rates of microtubule growth and
shortening and the frequencies of transitions between these two states will be
quantified from video records of the living cells. The dynamic behavior of
microtubules will be determined as cells progress through the cell cycle.
Previously characterized molecules which bind microtubules will be injected into
living cells and the resulting behavior of the microtubules measured. The
parameters of microtubule dynamics in epithelial cells will be determined and
factors which promote microtubule rescue events will be isolated from these
cells. A wound model will be used to induce the reorientation and motility of
fibroblasts. Under these conditions, a new lamella is extended; the formation of
stable, paused microtubules and the contribution of microtubules to the
formation of focal contacts in the newly formed lamella will be measured. The
results of these experiments will provide new information concerning the
mechanisms that cells utilize to modify and regulate the dynamic behavior of
microtubules during these various events. Finally, using cell fractionation and
functional assays for microtubule behavior, the regulatory factors which
modulate microtubule behavior will be characterized. %%% Microtubules are
ubiquitous in the eukaryotic world and fundamental to life as we know it. They
are scaffolding for cell shape, road maps for intracellular motility, and
determinants of post-cleavage cell fate; they form the mitotic spindle apparatus
which is responsible for chromosome segregation to daughter cells, and they are
the stuff of cilia and flagella, responsible for cellular locomotion.
Microtubules are polymeric cytoskeletal structures made up of the protein
tubulin. In most situations, the polymers are dynamic, that is, they are
continuously undergoing polymerization and depolymerization. Understanding their
dynamic behavior and the molecular basis for this dynamism are important goals
for understanding microtubule functions in nature, as well as for harnessing
microtubules either directly or indirectly for nonbiological practical
applications e.g., molecular switches).