* 9304264
* Researching and Developing Custom Keyboard Overlays for     Computer Users with Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Arjan Khalsa, IntelliTools, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1995
* USD 271,512.00

Alternative computer input devices are a critical component of the important
role computer technology plays in meeting the needs of individuals with
disabilities or other challenges. In February 1992, a special alternative
computer keyboard, IntelliKeys, was given the coveted first prize in The Johns
Hopkins University National Search for Computing to Assist Persons with
Disabilities. Results of the Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
study by the creators of Intellikeys establish the technical basis for the
development custom overlays for IntelliKeys, a new set of educational tools that
has as its purpose increasing the accessibility of computers and computer
software for individuals with disabilities. The research objectives of the Phase
II study focus on (1) identifying the characteristics of effective custom
overlays; and (2) developing and testing materials based upon those
characteristics, including custom mathematics and science overlays; mathematics
and science Curriculum Activity Booklets; and a teachers' "how-to" manual so
that teachers will be able to create their own curriculum-based custom overlays
that will be of maximum benefit to each particular student. The project will
make an important contribution to the mandate of Public Law 94-142 which
stipulates that to the greatest degree possible students with disabilities
should have access to educational opportunities equal to those of their able-
bodied peers.