* 9304086
* Symposia on Protistan Cell Surfaces; Ames, Iowa; August 1993
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Robert Andersen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 16,000.00

9304086 Andersen Advances in electron microscopy and in molecular analyses of
DNA have renewed interest in many aspects of the biology of protists
(unicellular algae, fungi, and protozoa). Two primary reasons are their roles in
bridging the evolutionary gap between prokaryotes (bacteria) and the
multicellular plants and animals, and their roles as model experimental systems
in cell and molecular biology. Despite the interest of many biologists in the
phylogeny of protists, few scientists have addressed the basic problems in
terminology and homology that were created by the classical academic separation
of the fields of phycology, mycology, and protozoology. In an attempt to resolve
problems in communication and synthesis, a NSF sponsored task force was
established in 1987. The Cell Surface Components Task Force will complete its
studies this year, and it will present its findings at the 1993 American
Institute of Biological Sciences annual meeting. Leading national and
international scientists will participate in two symposia that summarize recent
advances in the study of protistan cell surfaces. Proceedings of the meetings
and additional solicited review papers will be published in international
journals. %%% Experts in the biology of unicellular algae, fungi, and protozoa
will meet at the annual meetings of the American Institute of Biological
Sciences to synthesize recent ultrastructural and molecular data on protis tan
organisms. The principal goal is to synthesize a single, coherent terminology
for homologous features of protistan cell surfaces, hitherto obscured by the
separate academic traditions of studying these organisms in phycology, mycology,
and protozoology departments.