* 9304971
* Design of Efficient Algorithms for Multicommodity Flow and  Related Combinatorial Optimization Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Serge Plotkin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 205,159.00

The project studies combinatorial optimization, with emphasis on problems
related to commodity flow and minimum-ratio cuts. Deeper understanding of the
combinatorial structure of these problems will result in improved algorithms for
a variety of applications, including graph bisection, small area VLSI layout,
scheduling, and routing. All of the currently known algorithms for finding exact
solutions to multicommodity flow are very slow. These algorithms are based on
general linear programming (LP) techniques and do not take advantage of the
underlying combinatorial structure of the problem. Applying general LP
techniques to solving such problems leads to even slower algorithms. The main
goal of this project is to find alternative approaches to solving multicommodity
flow and related problems. The goal is to improve both sequential and parallel
complexity. In many applications, solving a multicommodity flow is only a first
step in approximately solving an NP-complete problem; in the majority of such
cases there is no need to have an exact solution of the multicommodity flow
problem. One of the focuses of the project is to develop the design of efficient
approximation algorithms. Another natural application of the multicommodity flow
methods is in the area of routing in distributed communication networks. For
example, problems related to managing available bandwidth can be stated as
variants of multicommodity flow, where the information rate corresponds to flow
and the bandwidth of every link corresponds to its capacity. The distributed,
real-time nature of communication networks presents several challenging
obstacles that do not exist in an off-line, sequential setting. Among them is
the fact that not all the information is known in advance, which means that the
algorithms have to work on-line. Second, there is usually no `manager` node that
has a complete information about the network and that makes all the decisions.
Therefore, the algorithms should work with partial information.