* 9304637
* Molecular Structure of the Multienzyme Complex Responsible  for Acetate Cleavage in Methanosarcina barkeri
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* David Grahame, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 282,000.00

9304637 Grahame This project will obtain information needed to define the
quaternary structure of a multienzyme complex that catalyzes metabolism of
acetate in Methanosarcina barkeri, a methanogenic bacterium . The structural
study proposed is fundamental to achieve a detailed understanding of the
mechanisms by which the multienzyme complex catalyzes cleavage of the acetyl-CoA
acetate carbon-carbon bond. The specific objectives of this study follow. 1)
Establish the molecular mass, subunit structure, and overall symmetry of the
protein complex by physical methods of dynamic light scattering, electron
microscopy, rate zonal ultracentrifugation and gel filtration. 2) Identify the
subunit that specifically binds the corrinoid (vitamin B12-like) cofactor used
for methyl-group transfer during acetyl-CoA cleavage. Minimally disruptive
methods will be used, followed by chromatography, to obtain the single subunit,
or protein component, that binds the corrinoid cofactor. 3) Identify the
component that binds tetrahydro-sarcinapterin. This component will be purified
from chromatographic fractions of the disrupted protein complex and identified
as the enzyme that catalyzes methyl group transfer between methyl-corrinoid and
tetrahydro-sarcinapterin. 4) Obtain additional information about nearest-
neighbor relationships among subunit types from chemical cross-linking
experiments on the intact complex. A major outcome of the research will be to
develop a three-dimensional model of the complex. The overall structure will
display the corrinoid and the tetrahydro-sarcinapterin-binding subunits placed
in approximate relative position to one another and to all other subunits of the
complex. %%% Microbial conversion processes involving both the production and
the consumption of acetic acid in nature are biological reactions of major
importance. It is estimated that in nature 1010 metric tons of acetic acid are
produced per year. Subsequent conversion of acetic acid to gase ous products as
carbon dioxide and methane occurs in both natural ecosystems and in systems
created by man for waste treatment and biomass conversion. In conversion of
acetic acid to methane and carbon dioxide, the methanogenic bacterium,
Methanosarcina barkeri is very important. This research is designed to learn how
a multienzyme structure responsible for acetic acid metabolism in M. barkeri
works at the molecular level. Physical, biochemical, and immunological methods
are used to determine the arrangement of protein subunits and certain organic
cofactor binding sites within the architecture of the protein complex. The
structural details provided from this research will provide fundamental
information needed for a complete understanding of the molecular mechanism of
acetate cleavage. ***