* 9304556
* Regulation of Phosphatidylinositol 4-Kinase Activity:  A    Plant Perspective of Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Wendy Boss, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1997
* USD 353,013.00

9304556 Boss The polyphosphorylated inositol phospholipids, phosphatidylinositol
monophosphate (PIP) are present in the plasma membranes of higher plant cells;
however, their functions in signal transduction are not well understood. PIP and
PIP2 levels are relatively low in higher plants. This laboratory has isolated a
49 kDa protein from carrot cells that activates phosphatidylinositol (PI)
4-kinase, the enzyme that synthesizes PIP. The 49 kDa PI kinase activator,
designated PIK-A49, is a multifunctional protein. It binds and bundles actin and
has translational elongation factor-1-alpha activity. This research is based on
the working hypothesis that PIK-A49 plays an important role in coordinating the
status of PIP metabolism, the actin cytoskeleton, and protein synthesis within
the cell. PIK-A49 and PI kinase are present in the plasma membrane, actin
cytoskeleton and soluble fractions of carrot cells. Changes in the membrane and
cytoskeletal PI kinase activity have been observed within seconds of exposing
carrot cells to external stimuli. Whether PIP and PIP2 serve as precursors of
second messengers or as direct membrane effectors, understanding the mechanism
of regulation of PIP and PIP2 biosynthesis is essential in order to understand
their roles in signal transduction. The goals of this research are to understand
the mechanism of regulation of PIP biosynthesis in response to environmental
stimuli and to understand how these changes in PIP metabolism might affect cell
physiology. For these studies, carrot suspension culture cells will be used as a
model system and two stimuli, one that increases PI 4-kinase activity and one
that decreases PI 4-kinase activity. Specific questions to be addressed are:
What is the mechanism of activation of PI 4-kinase by PIK-A49? Is there a change
in the distribution of PIK-A49, PI kinase or F-actin in response to stimuli, and
if so, what causes the change in distribution? This work provides a different
perspective of PIP metabolism--one focused on PIP synthesis. In addition, the
fact that the PIK-A49 activates PI 4-kinase, binds and bundles actin, and has
elongation factor activity adds a new dimension to the potential for cross-talk
among the plasma membrane, cytoskeleton, and protein synthesis machinery within
plant cells during responses to environmental stimuli. %%% Little is known about
the mechanisms used by plants to sense environmental signals. This investigator
has shown that a subset of very negatively charged lipids in the outer membranes
of plant cells undergo chemical changes in response to environmental stimuli.
The biosynthesis of these lipids is regulated by an activator protein that can
also regulate the structure of the cytoskeleton and protein synthesis within the
cell. This finding suggested that the activator protein may serve to communicate
the changes in the plant's environment from the outer membrane to the rest of
the cell. The goals of this research are to understand how biosynthesis of these
lipids is regulated and to determine whether the activator protein acts as a
sensor to communicate environmental signals to the interior of the plant
cell.***