* 9304295
* Compiler Algorithms to Maximize Data Locality on Massively Parallel Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Joan Lukas, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1995
* USD 17,966.00

9304295 Lukas This is a planning grant for research in concurrent software
systems. It addresses the specification phase with a formal specification
language family that utilizes the object as the basic model. The long-term
objective of the research is to define a hierarchy of formal specification
languages that address, in increasing specificity, the requirements of
concurrent systems. This family of languages is based on the concept of a base
language that serves as the parent class and subclasses that represent
increasingly specific features of concurrent systems. The preliminary approach
is to first develop a hierarchical description of the classes and their
relationships and then to formally define the base class, both syntactically and
semantically. Using inheritance, subclasses will then be defined for categories
of programming languages that support specific language features. This approach
to the specification of concurrent object-oriented systems promotes the use of
abstraction and assists the specifier with the transformation of a problem to a
language-specific form. The hierarchy of specifications also has potential for
specification reuse. The planing activities include comprehensive study of
research in areas that are fundamental to the proposed research, including
formal specification languages, concurrent object oriented languages, and
algebraic specifications. The planning activities also include the development
of a mini-language to provide a mechanism for experimentation and for expansion
of the proposed research. ***