* 9304967
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Landscape Transformation   in Aztec and Spanish Colonial Periods in Central Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Karl Butzer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 02/28/1995
* USD 9,335.00

9304957 BUTZER The need for clearer understanding of the complex ways that
humans have altered and responded to changes in their natural environments has
become more important as increasing attention is devoted to understanding the
complex dynamics of global environmental change. The relative ecological impact
of indigenous and early colonial land use has been a matter of controversial
discussion in recent years, with special attention having focused on the degree
to which native people altered the environment and the nature of the impact that
early European settlers had on natural systems. This doctoral dissertation
research project will examine landscape changes over the last millennium in the
Texcoco region of central Mexico, with emphasis given to the land-use changes
and environmental impacts from late prehistoric times through the period of
Spanish conquest and colonization. A major goal of the project is explanation of
the causes and antiquity of eroded landscapes and evaluation of changes in
stream networks. Through archival and field work, data will be gathered from a
variety of different sources, including historical written and pictorial
documents; field surveys; interpretation of aerial photography; and
sedimentological, stratigraphic, chemical, palynological, and radiocarbon
analyses of soil samples. A primary hypotheses being tested by the investigator
is the conjecture that the main causes of landscape evolution, soil erosion in
piedmont areas, and alluvial accumulation in lake margins were rapid increases
in population levels and the intensity of land use during Aztec dominance
followed by the abandonment of lands and introduction of new forms of land use
during Spanish colonial times. This project will use an integrated methodology
to explain the relative environmental implications of both indigenous and
colonial land-use systems. In addition to enhancing understandings of the
historical evolution of land-use change under differe nt cultural and economic
regimes, thereby expanding general knowledge about the human dimensions of
global environmental change, the project will record human and natural features
in the landscape that are being destroyed by contemporary urbanization and
mechanized agriculture. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career. ***