* 9304109
* Quantitation of Cathepsins B, S, and L in Cells and         Organelles
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Mason, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 11/30/1995
* USD 174,000.00

The lysosomal cysteine proteinases, cathepsins B, S, and L, have been purified
from a number of mammalian species and are known to exist in multiple forms.
Quantitation of these enzymes is difficult due to their instability and
inhibition by naturally occurring inhibitors. The objectives of this proposal
are to quantitate the relative concentrations of the different molecular forms
of cathepsins in cells and to determine which ones are involved in the
degradation of endocytosed proteins such a albumin and .2-macroglobulin.
Experimental procedures will employ a specific radio-labeled inhibitor in either
a free membrane-permeant form or conjugated to proteins in cell culture systems.
A pure form of Z-ı125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 will be used in conjunction with
specific antibodies and SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis/autoradiography
to quantitate different molecular forms of each enzyme in living cells. These
procedures circumvent the problems of inactivation or inhibition during
isolation and have the added advantage of being able to quantitate different
molecular forms of each of the enzymes. The relative concentrations of each
enzyme will indicate the relative importance of these enzymes in protein
turnover in a given cell. ı125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 conjugated to a range of
proteins will be used as a unique tool for the identification of the enzymes
that first meet endocytosed proteins. the types of enzymes that first react with
such reagents in intact cells will indicate which are involved in the
degradation of endocytosed proteins. It is known that lysosomal proteinases are
synthesized as precursors in the endoplasmic reticulum and processed to
intermediate forms as they enter the lysosome and finally are processed to lower
M, mature forms in the mature lysosome. the molecular forms of the enzymes that
react with ı125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 conjugated to proteins will permit the
differentiation between fusion of endosomes with early lysosomes and fusion of
endosomes with late (mature) lysosomes. Such a direct method of identifying the
enzymes in endosomes is required to unequivocally determine which enzymes are
involved in endocytic proteolysis, and by which route the enzymes are packaged
into the endocytic compartment. %%% This project is aimed at determining the
quantities of a number of important proteinases in cells using a novel technique
with a membrane permeant radio-labeled inhibitor. Results from this study will
identify which of the four lysosomal cysteine proteases predominate in which
cells and enable us to determine the significance of these enzymes in cell
function. A second aim is to determine the molecular forms of the enzymes that
are involved in the degradation of endocytosed proteins. Results from this part
of the study will show which enzymes are involved in the degradation of proteins
taken up into the cell, and will also indicate the site at which endocytosed
proteins first meet with lysosomal enzymes during their biosynthesis. The
procedures to be developed provide a series of new techniques to study the
biological roles of lysosomal proteases.