* 9304912
* Crystallographic Disorder in Surfaces and Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1999
* Max Lagally, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/1999
* USD 780,000.00

9304912 Lagally The proposed effort aims to combine scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) with diffraction techniques to investigate diffusion,
interactions with steps, initial film formation, and a number of other aspects
of the kinetics and thermodynamics of film formation. Measurements are planned
both in real time and in a quench-and-look mode. Epitaxial, Stranski-Krastanov,
and Volmer-Weber systems will be investigated. From a combination of theoretical
and experimental effort, quantitative values of energies, barriers, and rates
will be extracted. Systems include Si, Ge, and a number of metals on SI(001)
substrates. Stress effects will be investigated using also Si whiskers as
substrates. Because in STM measurements the electric field from the tip may
influence rates of kinetic mechanisms, a comprehensive investigation of this
phenomenon will be undertaken. %%% In this research diffraction methods and
scanning tunneling microscopy are used to investigate atomic scale mechanisms
involved in film growth. These mechansisms all have some sort of morphological
or microstructural consequence. An analysis of the changing morphology can be
interpreted in terms of the responsible mechanisms. There are in principle two
ways of doing this: 1) real-time measurements or 2) quench-and-look
measurements. In the former, one attempts to follow the changing positions of
atoms or the shape and size of particular structures. The latter is effectively
a series of snapshots of the morphologies that are frozen in at different times.
The proposed work is important because crystal growth is at the basis of all
thin-film technology. ***