* 9304258
* Craft Manufacture and Exchange in Oaxaca:  The Residential  Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Gary Feinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 79,974.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Gary Feinman will continue his
archaeological research at the site of Ejutla which is located in Oaxaca Mexico.
During his 1992 field season Dr. Feinman discovered the corner of what he
believes to be a 4-6 room structure. He will now excavate the entire compound,
collect the cultural materials it contains and produce a detailed map. His goal
is to reconstruct the range of activities which took place in this family
context and especially focus on the craft or manufacturing activities
represented. Prior work has indicated that a wide range of materials including
onyx and at least 80 taxa of Pacific shell were worked at the site. Dr. Feinman
believes that specialists produced materials for trade and that the great
majority of the elaborate shell and stone ornaments made were not consumed
locally. Most of the shell recovered in prior excavations consisted of by-
products and defective pieces. In the early first millennium much of central
Mexico was incorporated into an empire which, archaeologists believe, had its
center at Monte Alban. The site with its large impressive ruins has been
extensively excavated and its importance in a broader regional context is clear.
However what is less well understood is how this empire functioned and how
outlying areas such as Ejutla were controlled and tied to the core. Dr. Feinman
believes that the development of structured trade networks and the
interdependencies which thus developed may have played a central role. In this
context Ejutla is extremely interesting because it appears to be involved in
specialized manufacturing which focussed on shell carving. What makes this
unusual is that the site is located far from the ocean. The proposed excavation
will provide additional insight into how Ejutla functioned and the immediate
social context in which this work took place. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will also increase our understanding of the processes which underlie the
development of state level societies.