* 9304393
* Signaling Mechanisms and Mobility of the EGF Receptor
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Linda Slakey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1996
* USD 261,000.00

9304393 Gross This project focuses on the regulation of binding of epidermal
growth factor (EGF) by its receptor (EGF-R). The time course of binding of a
fluorescent derivative of EGF (f-EGF) to the EGF-R will be studied at the level
of single cells by the use of quantitative optical microscopy. Preliminary data
indicates that the binding of f-EGF to cultured A431 cells proceeds over a
biphasic time course that is not consistent with the commonly accepted model of
EGF/EGF-R in which two EGF-R affinity classes are postulated to exist at fixed
densities on the cell surface. A ternary complex model has been developed that
is consistent with the individual cell binding data. It is proposed that
actin/EGF-R interaction through specific binding domains modulates the affinity
state of the receptor. Recent studies have shown that the EGF-R is an actin-
binding protein. Microinjection of HL-33, a peptide that competes for the actin
binding site with the EGF-R, will be used as a probe of this interaction.
Preliminary f-EGF binding data to individual A431 cells also indicates that the
kinetics of binding are variable between cells. The consequences of this
variable timing and degree of primary signal input on subsequent individual cell
responses will also be examined by quantitative, single-cell fluorescence
imaging. A consequence of the predicted interaction of the EGF-R with actin is
that some individual EGF-Rs will be immobilized in the plasma membrane, and that
the immobile receptors will be preferentially of the high-affinity class.
Measurement of the mobilities of individual EGF receptors on stimulated and
unstimulated cells forms an important test of the actin-regulation model. Single
receptors will be labeled by biotinylated anti- receptor Fab' fragments and
fluorescent streptavidin-latex nanoparticles or streptavidin-colloidal gold
particles as visualization probes. The lateral mobility of individual EGF-Rs
will be followed before and during EGF challen ge, and will be examined in
individual cells microinjected with the HL-33 competing peptide. Correlations
between individual EGF receptor movements and the affinity state of the receptor
will be examined. The lateral mobilities of individual EGF-Rs will be compared
to those for individual LDL receptors. (The LDL receptor system is thus far the
only one in which individual receptor movements have been described; in this
system three classes of lateral movement were characterized including random,
directed, and no mobility.) %%% The goal of this research is to better
understand the molecular interactions between a cell surface protein that is
known to regulate cell growth, the epidermal growth factor receptor, and the
signal molecule that activates it, epidermal growth factor (EGF). The
interaction of these two molecules on individual cultured cells will be studies
using fluorescently labeled EGF and quantitative optical microscopy. The results
of this study of the EGF receptor system will add much to knowledge about
molecular details of the mechanism by which growth factors signal cells to
divide. ***