* 9304250
* Mathematical Sciences:  Statistical Inference on Synaptic   Release Mechanisms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Mike West, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 02/29/1996
* USD 40,000.00

This project will develop methods of Bayesian statistical analysis for mixture
distributions in studies of mechanisms of neuronal synaptic activity.
Physiological analysis of synaptic mechanisms (such as short- or long-term
potentiation) is based on presumptions regarding activity at individual synaptic
sites, yet such individual sites can rarely be analyzed directly. Thus, to infer
baseline activity and dynamic changes at individual sites from physiological
recordings, statistical/neurophysiological models have been developed which
include the output from multiple sites and cater for background noise. These
models assume that the recorded cell output represents a random mixture
distribution composed of synaptic signal 'components,' where each 'component'
represents one or more synaptic sites. Bayesian mixture models and methods of
analysis using (uncertain) mixtures of (uncertain numbers of) components will be
explored in this context. This pilot project will aim to benchmark and validate
the novel Bayesian approaches in the context of experimental data from synapses
with small numbers of neural transmitter sites. Technically, research will
formulate prior distributions for model parameters based on available synaptic
noise data, physiological evidence, and experimental conditions; study
simulations to examine operating characteristics and explore the sensitivity and
robustness to prior and model specifications; derive inferences about
physiological parameters; determine methods of assessment of goodness of fit;
make comparisons with existing and traditional approaches; and develop computer
software development for implementation of the modelling techniques. The project
represents a collaborative, cross-disciplinary initiative to develop novel
methods for analysis and statistical inference concerning the mechanisms
governing electrochemical signal transmission at neural junctions in animal
nervous systems. Interaction between the theoretical development and
physiological data will play a critical role in identifying and resolving
uncertainties about physiological processes and mechanisms in nervous systems,
assessing site to site variability in neural signals, synaptic output,
identifying critical synaptic characteristics, and assessing changes under
differing experimental and physiological conditions. The project will involve
substantial analysis of existing and forthcoming physiological data sets in
order to provide assessments of the validity of the statistical models and the
derived inferences with respect to underlying physiology. The immediate
objective is to validate the new statistical approaches proposed by
demonstrating their application and improvements over existing statistical
analyses in synaptic response analysis. Ultimately these methods are expected to
contribute to fundamental understanding of signalling mechanisms in human and
other nervous systems.