* 9304259
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Institutional and          Environmental Change in Rajasthan, India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Douglas Johnson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1995
* USD 9,000.00

9304259 JOHNSON One of the most critical uncertainties regarding relationships
between the use of natural resources and environmental conditions is the role
and impact of institutions and their rule systems. Demographic, technological,
socio- economic, and legal pressures have resulted in disintegration of
traditional institutional arrangements in many parts of the world in recent
decades. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the nature and
impact of these changes on environmental conditions in Rajasthan, an arid state
in northwestern India. The research will consist of integration of information
from a number of different sources. Remotely sensed images will be interpreted
as part of a time-series analysis of land-use change in the region, and
information about the structure and rule systems of institutions will be
assembled from surveys and written sources. Analyses of these data will form the
foundation for a more intensive comparative evaluation of three representative
villages in the region. Ethnographic methods will be used to identify
institutional formation and adaptations within different rule systems, and
ecological surveys will be used to test quantitatively the impact of changing
institution arrangements on resource management and changes in natural
environmental conditions. This project will provide valuable insights into a
number of important relationships, including links among changing land uses and
institutional systems as well as among regional environmental changes and
patterns of local resource use. The project will enhance understandings of the
historical evolution of land-use change under different cultural and economic
regimes, thereby expanding general knowledge about the human dimensions of
global environmental change. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career. ***