* 9304108
* International Symposium "Pollination Biology in the Tropics"August 8-13, 1993, Bangalore, India, Group Travel Award in  U.S. and Indian Currency
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1994
* Kamaljit Bawa, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1994
* USD 16,500.00

Description: This project will support the participation of a U.S. scientific
delegation in a symposium to be held in Bangalore, India, August 8-13, 1993. The
symposium "Pollination Biology in the Tropics" would review recent advances and
bring together scientists working on various aspects of pollination. specific
attention is to be paid to conservation and management of pollinator populations
and to problems in the pollination of tropical crops. The following sessions
will be held: flower biology in reaction to pollination; insect behavior in
relation to pollination; pollination by insects and other animals in natural
communities; insect pollination in commercial production of seeds and fruits;
pollination problems in tropical crops; conservation and management of
pollinating insects; and population dynamics of pollinators. Participation is
expected from countries in South Asia, Southeast Asia, Europe, and the U.S. A
book covering extended abstracts of the presentation will be available in the
meeting. Scope: This project addresses a number of scientific objectives
including disseminating and increasing availability of pollination especially in
the tropical environment, increasing interaction of scientists from the U.S.
with those from other countries in Asia, and exposing young U.S. scientists to
researchers in India in the same field of interest.