* 9304187
* Critical Studies of Uranium and Trace Element Coral-        Geochemistry to Determine their Reliability as              Paleoclimate Recorders
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Devendra Lal, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 38,243.00

The proposal seeks to carry out basic studies to determine the siting of U, Be,
Sr and other cations in recent and old corals. A specific aim of the work is to
determine whether these elements exist partly or primarily as adsorbed onto
organic matter, or are exclusively sited within the lattice. This knowledge is
an essential prerequisite for using corals as paleorecorders of wide- ranging
geophysical and geochemical information, e.g., oceanic 234U/238U and 10Be/9Be
ratios, seawater metal concentrations and atmospheric 14C/12C ratios. Our
studies will attempt to assess whether coral compositions can be used for
examining variability in the geophysical parameter(s) of interest, and should
help determine the reliability of coral 14C/12C ratios, and also suggest
suitable methods to extract such information in a reliable manner, free of
effects due to diagenesis. For example, if our studies show that certain cations
in corals are primarily adsorbed on organic matter, the concentrations of those
cations would be subject to exchange with the environment. To use such elements
for paleoenvironment studies, it would be necessary to extract cations from the
aragonite lattice only. We also propose to examine the suitability of corals for
determining surface oceanic 10Be/9Be ratios in the past. 10Be is produced by
cosmic ray nuclear interactions in the atmosphere. The 10Be half-life of 1.5 my
promises to allow dating corals of several millions of years' age from analyses
of samples of &lt;50 gm weight. The proposal is clearly exploratory in
character, aiming at enhancing the potential of corals as recorders of global
paleoclimatic and paleo-oceanographic parameters.