* 9304331
* Orthonormal Wavelet Analysis of Space-Scale Relationships   in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer Over Complex Terrain
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Marc Parlange, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/1996
* USD 112,051.00

Research is proposed to improve our understanding of atmosphere- land surface
relationships at local and regional scales. The project will involve analysis of
the atmospheric boundary layer to study turbulent space-scale relationships.
Parameterizations of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) transport are critical
for quantifying surface fluxes over heterogeneous regions since the ABL
integrates regional scale fluxes. The experimental data necessary to carry out
the analysis have already been collected: 1) Field (1 km length scale)
experiments near UC Davis, 2) Basin (15 km length scale) experiments in Ojai
Valley southern California, 3) Regional (100 km length scale) experiments in the
Landes Regional in southwestern France as part of HAPEX-MOBILHY. The data
collected over the different regions will be analyzed using compactly supported
orthonormal wavelet expansions to study spatial intermittency of the surface
heat fluxes for various wave numbers in the inertial subrange. In addition dual
spectra, which enable a space-scale representation of the turbulent energy,
shall be applied to sensible and latent heat fluxes for different atmospheric
stability conditions. The spatial probability distribution of the heat fluxes at
various scales will be also analyzed. Ultimately this project will provide basic
information for the development of models of the ABL to parameterize surface
fluxes in general circulation models.