* 9304691
* Transient Stimulated Emission Pumping Studies of            Photodissociation Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Yongqin Chen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/1996
* USD 272,896.00

9304691 Chen In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Y. Chen of the University of California at Berkeley will pursue
a program of research to provide a systematic understanding of the interplay
between intramolecular energy transfer and chemical reactions. To this end the
new technique of femtosecond time-domain Transient Stimulated Emission Pumping
(TSEP) spectroscopy invented by him will be applied to two model systems, ozone
and methylnitrite to obtain real-time emission spectra during the
photofragmentation of these species. %%% The details of chemical reaction and
dissociation processes occur at pico- to femtosecond time scales and research in
this field is at the forefront of contemporary physical chemistry. Among the
questions posed by these processes is how the energy which excites a specific
molecular vibrational state redistributes itself within the molecule to result
in the dissociation of the molecule by the breaking of a specific chemical bond
or in the molecular rearrangement into a different conformational structure. The
STEP method possesses several distinct advantages over other techniques
currently in use: it is capable of furnishing both time and frequency
information, the spectral assignments are unambiguous, and it has high
sensitivity. These make the STEP method an ideal tool for studying the energy
transfer and chemical reactions in polyatomic systems. ***