* 9304734
* A Two-Stage Geometric Approach to Planning Robotic Tasks    Involving Sliding and Rolling Contacts in Uncertain         Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Jeffrey Trinkle, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1997
* USD 309,000.00

9304734 Trinkle This is the first year of a three year continuing award. The
research addresses automatic planning for robotic systems performing contact
tasks with movable objects in uncertain environments. Tasks in this class
include mechanical assembly operations, dexterous manipulation, and fine motion
tasks. The objective of this research project is to develop a practical,
reliable planner for robotic contact tasks. The planner will operate in two
stages. In the first stage, parameter uncertainty will be ignored to reduce the
dimension of the space to be searched for a manipulation plan. The geometry of
that space will be determined and regions in which the multibody contact model
admits multiple solutions will be identified and avoided. In the second stage,
the plan found in the first stage will be modified to make it robust with
respect to variations in the uncertain parameters. The second stage will not
involve a search, so its computational complexity will be relatively low. It
will however involve understanding the geometric variation in the space as a
function of the uncertain parameters. To demonstrate the results of the proposed
research, a planner for planar manipulation systems will be implemented in a
distributed computing environment, with parallel computers used where
appropriate. A prototype manipulator system with position, torque, and tactile
sensors will be designed and built to test generated plans. ***