* 9304028
* Simple Molecular Solids at Ultrahigh Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 379,500.00

9304028 Hemley This research sill involve the study of the structural, optical,
electronic, and vibrational properties of dense solid hydrogen and related
molecular systems at ultrahigh pressures (above 100 GPa) in order to identify,
characterize, and understand their transformations to high-density states,
including metallic phases. The experiments to be performed will use specially
designed diamond-anvil cells coupled with recently developed synchrotron
infrared, Raman, and Brilloouin spectroscopic techniques. These will permit
detailed study of electronic and vibrational transitions to pressures above 300
GPa and at low temperatures (5 K). Synchrotron x-ray diffraction is to be used
to directly determine crystal structure and phase transitions as a function of
pressure (50-100 GPa) and tempeature (5-300 K). It will provide additional
information on acoustic velocities and anisotropy, the equation of state, and
constraints on chemical effects (including impurities and dopants). Finally, the
research will continue the development of new methods for probing samples at
ultrahigh pressures with the diamond cell. %%% The prediction that hydrogen will
transform to a metallic solid a extremely high pressure is a fundamental problem
in solid-state physics, materials science, and planetary science. During the
past several years, there have been major advances in the ability to produce
sustained pressures in the laboratory in excess of those found at the center of
the Earth (&gt;300 Giga-Pascals) using the diamond-anvil cell. The present
research involves studies of the structura, optical, electronic, and vibrational
properties of dense solid hydrogen and related molecular solids at these
pressures with these high-pressure devices. Particular emphasis will be given to
the application of recently developed infrared spectroscopic techniques that use
high intensity synchrotron radiation. These measurements are crucial for
identifying the onset of metallization and other electronic transitions in these
materials. This work will be complemented by parallel studies using light
scattering methods and synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements of crystal
structure. The research will also involve continued development of new high-
pressure techniques for a wide variety of studies of the behavior of matter
under extreme pressure conditions, including the synthesis of new materials. ***