* 9304307
* Radiogenic Isotopic Study of Diagenesis and Low-Grade       Metamorphism of Pelites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Chris Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 154,494.00

This research is designed to develop applications of radiogenic isotope
analysis to pelitic sediments that have been affected by a wide range of fluid-
mediated diagenesis through low- grade metamorphism. Although data for clay-rich
sediments imply that they have a memory for fluid-rock interactions owing to
their limited permeability as compared with other basin sediments, much isotope
data lead to ambiguous results in part because analyzed samples are
heterogeneous and contain unknown proportions of more than one generation of
fine-grained clay mineral. This proposal is a renewal of our current support, in
which high resolution scanning electron microscopy (STEM) is combined with
isotopic analysis of equivalent pelitic rocks. The ultimate aim of these studies
is to determine the timing and extent of water-pelite interactions and thus of
basin- to regional-scale fluid/rock interactions. Having previously focused on
Rb-Sr and development of Sm-Nk methods, we now propose to develop the 40Ar/39Ar
laser technique for pelitic sediments, using well characterized samples (thin
sections and separates), and other isotopic techniques to provide supporting
data. We intend to determine the limitations of the methods, both with respect
to spatial resolution and age. Based on our previous observations of shales and
slates from a wide variety of occurrences, we have chosen to obtain data from
bentonites (as standards having clays of a single origin) and shales from the
Texas Gulf Coast and Welsh Sedimentary Basin, as well as other prograde
sequences. The latter is representative of diagenesis in a passive marginal
basin, whereas the former represents tectonically-induced dissolution and
crystallization over the range of diagenesis to greenschist facies conditions.
The samples from each locality represent the complete range of diagenesis
through low-grade metamorphism.