* 9305324
* Paleoclimatology of Southeast Asia:  Records From Fossil    Corals on Sumba Island, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1994
* USD 31,153.00

9305324 DePaolo This research comprises a field expedition to collect samples of
massive corals from uplifted terraces on Sumba, Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia, and
isotope analyses of those samples. The objective is to produce several 30-to-150
year proxy records of seasonal climate variability in Indonesia for different
time intervals in the last 150,000 years. The data will be used to assess the
influence of paleogeography caused by changes in sea level on the intensity of
seasonal climate variability, as well as the frequency and intensity of El Nino
events as they are manifested in Southeast Asia. The effects of the El
Nino/Southern Oscillation have important economic and social consequences on
both sides of the Pacific Ocean. Data produced from this study will help unravel
specific mechanisms of how oceanographic change affects regional and global
climate change. *** 1 9305324 DePaolo This proposal seeks funds to conduct a
field expedition to collect samples of massive corals from uplifted terraces on
Sumba, Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia. The objective is to produce several 30-to-150
year proxy records of seasonal climate variability in Indonesia for different
time intervals in the last 150,000 years. The data will be used to assess the
influence of paleogeography caused by changes in sea level on the intensity of
seasonal climate variability, as well as the frequency and intensity of El Nino
events as they are manifested in Southeast Asia. Preliminary analyses of hand
samples collected during a reconnaissance trip to Sumba last summer indicate
that the proposed study is feasi ble; massive corals on Sumba are well
preserved, and would provide reliable information on seasonal variability of
salinity and sea surface temperature. The radiocarbon ages of samples from one
of the terraces on Sumba place the growth of the coral at a time when sea level
was 50 meters lower than it is today. the data produced from this study will
help unravel the specific mechanisms of how oceanographic change affects
regional and global climate change during time period with significantly
different boundary conditions. *** ar