* 9305185
* Kinetics of the Smectite-Illite Transformation:             An Experimental Study
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Lee Kump, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1996
* USD 218,695.00

A series of experiments will be undertaken on clays under differing silica,
aluminum, and potassium concentrations, at temperatures from 25oC up to 300oC.
The new experimental technique for the proposed research has been thoroughly
tested. It incorporates the dual pumping of solutions through two feeder-bombs
containing quartz or boehmite which provide, by their equilibrium solubilities
at controlled temperatures, fixed but adjustable silica and aluminum
concentrations in the input solutions. In the proposed experiments, the narrowly
sized clay samples will be suspended as fluidized bed within the reactor.
Samples of both the solid and the solutions will then be extracted during each
run to track the reaction progress, and a variety of analytical techniques will
be used to evaluate compositional changes in the fluids and solids and the
structural state of the illite/smectite sample. The results of these experiments
will be important in several respects. First, they will provide kinetic data for
modeling fluid-flow and diagenesis on a basin scale. In such models the release
of water, reduction in porosity, and change in fluid chemistry and pressure
associated with illitization are important processes that have to date been
highly parameterized. Secondly, they should resolve the mechanism of the
smectite to illite transformation. An active controversy persists as to whether
illitization proceeds via a solid-state or a dissolution-reprecipitation path.
In our experiments, the ability to control the fluid composition and flow rate
(hence "closedness" of the system) allows us to assess whether these factors
affect the rates and energetics of the reaction and whether they are dominated
by mass transport of surface kinetics through an elemental reaction or through
multiple pathways. In addition to its significance to the kinetics of
illitization, the work proposed here will extend the valuable equilibrium
solubility results of May et al. (1986)and of Aja et al. (1991a, b) on the
stabilities of phases in the K2O-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2-H2O system. The experimental
results should also resolve whether the fundamental particle explanation is
solution or a mixture of multiple phases (e.g., Tardy and Fritz, 1981; Aagaard
and Helgeson, 1983; Nadeau et al., 1984; Garrels, 1984; and Altaner, 1988).