* 9305325
* RUI:  Pressure-temperature Constraints and Fluid Evolution  for Sediment-hosted Gold and Intrusion-related              Mineralization, Getchell, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Jean Cline, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 06/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

The primary goals of this proposal are: 1) to determine the formation conditions
of a Carlin-type gold deposit, and 2) to either link or separate in time the
Getchell gold system and an adjacent 90 Ma granodiorite intrusion and related
mineralization. These goals will be accomplished by 1) a detailed petrographic
and fluid inclusion study of the gold system to constrain formation pressures
and temperature and aqueous fluid chemistry, and 2) a detailed petrographic and
fluid inclusion study of quartz veins and tungsten skarn mineralization related
to the granodiorite intrusion, to obtain similar constraints. Fluid inclusions
will be evaluated by microthermometry and microanalyses including Raman
spectroscopy, quadrupole mass spectrometry, and ion chromatography. The Getchell
system provides a unique opportunity to examine, in detail, the
physical/chemical evolution of a Carlin-type deposit. Preliminary results
demonstrate that fluid inclusions present are suitable for microthermometry,
Raman spectroscopy, and quadrupole mass spectrometry. This study will document
the physical/chemical conditions conducive to gold precipitation and the
relationship between gold mineralization and igneous activity in Carlin-type
systems. Results will link or separate in time the gold- and intrusion-related
mineralization and may place important constraints on the age of gold
mineralization in a Carlin-type deposit.