* 9305071
* Brillouin Scattering Studies of Glasses, Melts, and Aqueous Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Jay Bass, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/1997
* USD 112,512.00

9305071 Bass A qualitative understanding of fluid migration in the Earth
requires accurate values of viscoelastic properties and the compressibility of
fluids. We propose an experimental and theoretical study of the elastic
properties (compressibility), relaxational properties (attenuation, viscosity),
and the equation of state of fluids of geological importance, in particular,
silicate melts and supercritical aqueous solutions. Physical mechanisms of these
properties and data reduction methodologies are largely the same for both groups
of materials, as is the experimental data to be obtained for each. In this
sense, it is natural and appropriate for silicate melts and aqueous solutions to
be encompasses in a single study of geological fluids. Specifically, we will
measure the compressibility and viscosity of silicate glasses and melts up to
1600oC using the Brillouin light scattering technique. Experiments will be done
under both dry conditions and in the presence of H2O in order to investigate the
effect of water on the high T viscosity and elasticity of melts. Similar
measurement on aqueous fluids will be made at lower temperatures (T&lt;700oC)
and at high pressures up to 10 GPa using an externally heated diamond anvil
cell. These experiments will require a full analysis of the lineshape of the
Brillouin spectra. Although the Brillouin technique yields directly high
frequency, unrelaxed properties, a full analysis of the lineshapes allows the
low frequency, relaxed properties of the fluids to be extracted from the
measurements. We can therefore investigate the frequency dependence of the
observed properties. In addition, for some of the systems investigated we will
obtain data sufficiently high temperature that the relaxed properties ar
obtained directly. Molecular dynamics (MD) computer simulations of the fluid
properties will be used to identify specific atomic mechanisms with the features
displayed in the light scattering spectra, and to extrapol ate the properties
beyond the range of measurements. High frequency dielectric permittivity of
aqueous fluids will also be obtained from the proposed optical measurements and
compared with results of MD simulations over a wide range of frequencies. These
studies will allow more quantitative models of fluid thermodynamic and transport
properties and fluid-rock interactions to be constructed.