* 9305583
* SGER: The Initiation of Mammalian Puberty: Transcriptional  Regulation by POU-Domain Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1995
* Sergio Ojeda, Oregon Regional Primate Rsearch Center
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 04/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

There is very little doubt that one of the most meaningful events in the life
span of an individual is the acquisition of puberty. Over the years, extensive
efforts have been devoted to unravel the neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying
this stage of development. Because the neuroendocrine mechanisms involved in the
control of puberty are exceedingly complex, progress, to date, has been slow. It
is clear, however, that the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis is the
anatomical and functional core of the process. Moreover, puberty does not result
from an isolated event, but is rather the consequence of a cascade of
interdependent processes initiated very early in development. Within this
framework, the initiating events are thought to occur in the brain, where they
result in the synchronous activation of neurons that secrete luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH). Although the onset and progression of puberty
depends upon the increased production and secretion of LHRH, little is known
about the molecular and cellular events that activate this event. Dr. Ojeda is
one of the few scientists attempting to tackle this intricate and perplexing
problem. With this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER), he will define
the gene hierarchy controlling within the brain the events underlying the
initiation of puberty. Dr. Ojeda will examine whether the POU-domain family of
homeobox genes are "upstream" components of the hierarchy of genes controlling
neuronal functions relevant to the pubertal activation of the LHRH neuronal
network. The genes are likely candidates because they are abundantly expressed
in the embryonic hypothalamus, the brain region where LHRH neurons are primarily
localized. Moreover, the expression of some of the genes persist in this LHRH
region during post-natal development and even in adulthood. Dr. Ojeda will use
an experimental model in which hypothalamic lesions are used to accelerate
puberty in immature females. The results will not only impact greatly on our
understanding of mammalian puberty but would open new avenues for exploring the
fundamental role that regulatory genes play in the nervous system.