* 9305714
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Spatial Dynamics       of the U.S. Investment - Management Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Rodney Erickson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1995
* USD 4,850.00

9305714 ERICKSON The tremendous growth of producer-services employment in the
United States in the last few decades has resulted in a proliferation of
research on the location of producer-service activities. General theories of
producer-services locations have been evolving, with special attention in recent
years given to two divergent perspectives regarding the relative importance and
impact of factors like market size, agglomeration economies, labor costs and
quality, infrastructure, and amenities. One perspective holds that the
knowledge-intensive nature of many producer services requires frequent face-to-
face contact and sophisticated telecommunications equipment usually found in
higher-density urban concentrations. The other perspective posits that producer
services follow firms in the goods-producing sector and gravitate to lower-cost
sites outside higher-ordered urban centers. This doctoral dissertation project
will examine the spatial dynamics over the last decade of one set of firms, the
U.S. investment-management industry. Special attention will be given to
examining the spatial distribution of firms and their assets, to assessing the
impact of communications and information- handling technologies on locational
tendencies, and to identifying the factors that account for the location of
different types of firms. Both primary and secondary data will be used to
examine the pattern and structure of investment- management industry location in
1983, 1987, 1990, and 1993, and a mail questionnaire will elicit from leaders of
firms factors that influence their locational decisions. Follow-up interviews
will explore important issues in greater depth, especially the extent to which
information transfer via telecommunications links has become a viable substitute
for face-to-face communications. This industry-specific research will contribute
to the emerging body of knowledge about producer-services location, and it will
provide the basis for furthe ring analyses of the impacts of telecommunication
technologies and infrastructure on the spatial concentration of financial
services. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career. ***