* 9305780
* NMR Studies of Defects in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* William Warren, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 12/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

This research involves the application of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to
the study of specific classes of defects in semiconducting materials. Studies of
hydrogen complexed with dopants will be carried out in collaboration with
industrial partners concerned about the effects of hydrogen introduced into
semiconductors during processing and device fabrication. The program will focus
on three specific goals: The location and dynamics of hydrogen complexed with
dopants in gallium arsenide and silicon semiconductors will be determined using
double resonance techniques to selectively probe the complex. The identification
and characterization of thermally generated paramagnetic defects in gallium
arsenide and related materials will be undertaken using in situ high temperature
NMR techniques. The sites occupied by indium impurities and characterization of
vacancy-impurity complexes in II-VI materials, including correlation of the
results with concurrent studies of these defects using perturbed angular
correlation techniques, will be studied. %%% The performance of semiconducting
materials used in electronic devices is dominated by the effects of impurities
and crystalline defects. These effects can be constructive, as in the case of
"doping," where specific impurities can be used to obtain desired electrical
properties. On the other hand, the incidental introduction of hydrogen into
semiconductors from organic materials used during material processing can be
highly deleterious. Hydrogen can "passivate," or neutralize dopant impurities,
rendering them electrically inactive. Undesired and poorly characterized defects
in semiconducting materials lead to poor yields and device failures.
Exploitation of well-understood defects holds the potential for development of
advanced semiconducting materials with improved characteristics. Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) will be used to characterize the location and motional
properties of defects on the atomic scale in various materials of technological
importance including silicon, gallium arsenide, and cadmium telluride. This
technique is highly selective and is capable of probing individual chemical
species in specific locations in a crystalline semiconductor. Recent
improvements in NMR techniques and the use of high field superconducting magnets
make it possible to investigate certain defect species at concentrations as low
as a few tens of parts per million.