* 9305165
* Novel Proteins of the Pollen Extracellular Matrix
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Patricia Bedinger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

9305165 Bedinger Plant cell walls are dynamic structures that both determine
morphological structure and mediate cell-cell interactions in plant development.
Cell wall proteins are likely to participate actively in both roles. The
relatively simple structure of pollen and the known pollen "recognition
partners" for cell-cell interactions (stigma and stylar canal) make pollen an
ideal system for the study of plant cell wall proteins and cell-cell
recognition. Dr. Bedinger has identified two novel classes of extracellular
matrix proteins specific to pollen. One class of proteins is tightly associated
with the outer pollen wall, or exine, and may be involved with establishing the
species specific pattern of exine ornamentation, or in pollen-pistil
recognition. The second class of protein(s) may be structural components of the
pollen tube wall, or may act as sexual agglutinins to mediate the interaction of
the pollen tube with female tissues. Dr. Bedinger proposes to isolate full
length genes encoding these proteins, localize the proteins within the pollen or
pollen tube, and investigate the role of the proteins in male-female
recognition. The data obtained from the proposed studies will enable us to
propose testable models for the functions of these proteins in plant
reproduction. ***