* 9305643
* CAA:  Using Statistical and Exploratory Data Analysis in    Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Winifred Creamer, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 58,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Winifred Creamer will analyze a
large series of ceramic materials collected through archaeological excavation in
the U.S. Southwest. She will also take a series of computer, statistical and
mathematics courses, mostly at the University of Northern Illinois, to improve
her analytic skill. This will permit her to approach her study using the most
appropriate techniques. Anthropologists generally believe that Native American
population size decreased dramatically around the time of European contact.
However the exact nature, timing and cause of this decline probably varied from
area to area. It is also possible that in some regions population was not
affected. The Southwest is a particularly interesting both because of the high
level of social complexity achieved before European contact and because decline
seems to date well before Spanish influence was felt. The largest ruins in the
Anasazi region were abandoned before Columbus arrived in the New World. Dr.
Creamer wishes to reconstruct Anasazi population size both pre and post contact
and learn how it changed over time. On this basis she will try to understand the
causal mechanisms involved. To do this however a fine-scale chronological
control is necessary and at the present time it is not possible to date sites
with sufficient accuracy. Dr. Creamer will study ceramic remains which have been
recovered in secure stratigraphic contexts, examine how this body of material
culture changes over time and then use the ceramic sequence to date individual
sites. In this Career Advancement Award, Dr. Creamer will also expand her own
skills. Research of this kind requires computer, statistical and mathematic
expertise which Dr. Creamer does not possess. Through a series of university
courses and hands on learning she will acquire the necessary expertise. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide information of
interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of the
processes of culture change and contact and finally it will assist in the
training of an accomplished scientist.