* 9305498
* Inheritance of Mitochondrial DNA in Didymiun iridis, an     Isogamous, Coenocytic Organism with Multiple Sexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Margaret Silliker, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1996
* USD 160,000.00

9305498 Silliker These experiments will determine the pattern of inheritance of
mitochondrial genomes in the acellular slime mold Didymiym iridis (Ditmar) Fries
(class Myxomycetes). The mitochondrial DNA of one strain of D. iridis will be
characterized by cloning and restriction enzyme mapping. Mitochondrial DNA
variation will be assessed within strains of the largest heterothallic
interbreeding group by comparison of probe hybridization patterns between
strains. Once probes diagnostic for a mitochondrial type are identified they
will be used to follow the fate of mitochondria in crosses. The results will be
interpreted with special attention to the probable relatedness of these strains
based on mitochondrial restriction fragment length polymorphism, geographical
origin, and nuclear isozyme and mating type data. Uniparental organelle
inheritance is an emerging rule for organelle behavior. Transmittance patterns
are a result of unequal parental contribution (anisogamy) or mating type control
in isogamous organisms with binary mating systems. Heterothallic myxomycetes
have multiple-allelic mating systems. The pattern of mitochondrial inheritance
in the myxomycete Physarum polycephalum was found to be determined by a mating
type hierarchy. Preliminary evidence suggests that this is not the case with D.
iridis. When compatible strains (different mating types) were crossed, about
half the individuals inherited one mitochondrial type and half the other type.
Replicate crosses with ten strains will be made in all possible combinations and
the pattern of mitochondrial inheritance will be determined by hybridization of
strain diagnostic probes to DNA samples from individuals. %%% Determining the
pattern of mitochondrial transmittance in Didymium should allow development of
hypotheses about the mechanism of inheritance. One working hypothesis predicts
that mitochondrial inheritance will be more tightly regulated in closely related
strains. The results of this research could be of major importance to
evolutionary genetics. The involvement of undergraduate students in the project
will be beneficial to the training of molecular geneticists. ***