* 9305703
* The Role of Kinesin-like Motor Proteins in Astral and Spindle Forces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,01/31/1995
* B. Gillian Turgeon, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

This project focuses on how the chromosomes of a fungus, Nectria haematococca,
are separated during mitosis. Previously, the time- course and ultrastructural
details of mitosis were determined and the presence of pulling forces in the
asters and pushing forces in the spindle was demonstrated, both of which
contribute to chromosome separation during anaphase B. The present objectives
are to determine how these mitotic forces are generated. To do this, advanced
technologies of cytology and molecular biology will be combined to examine the
role of kinesin-like, microtubule- associated motor proteins (KLPs) in mitosis.
The strategy is to clone as many KLP-encoding genes from an N. haematococca
genomic DNA library as possible, localize the gene products in the mitotic
apparatus in situ using immunofluorescence microscopy, determine the polarity of
force produced by each gene product in an in vitro motility assay and then
disrupt each of these genes in the genome by site-specific mutation. The effect
of each mutation on progression through mitosis will be observed in vivo by
video microscopy. For each gene, the hypothesis that (1) elimination of the KLP
blocks or inhibits mitosis, and (2) overproduction of the KLP increases the rate
of mitotic movements will be tested. Laser microbeam experiments will then be
used as a confirmation of the suspected roles of the KLPs in mitotic force
generation. %%% The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is a complex system of structural,
chemomechanical (motor), and regulatory proteins which serve as both an internal
scaffolding for cells and as the machinery for virtually all cellular and
intracellular movement, including the movement of chromosomes at the time of
cell division (mitosis). This work represents a unique opportunity to correlate
specific motor proteins with in vivo-demonstrated mitotic forces of known
polarity (i.e., the pushing and pulling forces that result in chromosome
movements). The strategy of testing functional inferences by performing laser
microbeam experiments on KLP- deficient mutants is unique and should lead to
unequivocal conclusions as to which KLP is responsible for which mitotic force.
Thus, the work has the potential to be the first to fully elucidate the
molecular basis of both the astral pulling force and the spindle pushing force
during anaphase B. In doing so, it would contribute substantially to our
understanding of the mechanisms of microtubule-mediated movement of chromosomes
during mitosis. In addition, it will add substantially to the information base
needed in order to exploit biological motors as novel biomolecular materials for
bio(nano)fabrication and biomimetic reverse engineering.