* 9305180
* Analysis of Seismic Data From Pinatubo Volcano, Philippines
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Michael Hamburger, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 06/30/1996
* USD 79,482.00

This research is to analyze seismic data collected during and after the
eruption of Pinatubo Volcano, Luzon, Philippines. This cataclysmic 1991 eruption
of Mt. Pinatubo was among the largest volcanic eruptions of the century, with
profound effects on the people, landscape, and economic infrastructure of the
Philippines and the climate of the world. The eruption was also one of the best
recorded natural disasters in history, providing a rich and voluminous
collection of seismological data that can be used both for understanding the
dynamics of an explosive volcanic system and as a basis for predicting future
volcanic eruptions. The primary objectives are to study the pre- and post-
eruptive seismicity patterns, including the ongoing 1992-93 volcanic crisis; to
study the wave-form characteristics of seismic events; to relate these studies
to volcanic processes including the 1991 phreatic and paroxsysmal eruptions, the
1992 dome-forming event, secondary explosions on the pyroclastic flows, lahars,
and steam jetting. The research involves close collaboration between scientists
at Indiana University, the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology,
the U.S. Geological Survey, and other groups involved in volcanological research
at Mt. Pinatubo. This research is a component of the National Earthquake Hazard
Reduction Program.