* 9305544
* Hormonal Control of Lipid Metabolism in Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Mark Sheridan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1995
* USD 61,080.00

9305554 Sheridan Recent studies have indicated the existence of multiple forms
of somatostatin, a peptide originally isolated from the brain and found to
contain 14-amino acid (from gene I) and to inhibit growth hormone secretion, but
subsequently found to be located in the pancreas, gastrointestinal tract and
elsewhere of many vertebrates. The special significance of multiple forms
(14-amino acid forms and N-terminally extended forms) of somatostatins, and the
roles of these factors in regulation of lipid metabolism, have yet to be
determined. With the proposed work, Dr. Sheridan seeks to evaluate the role of
somatostatins in the coordination of lipid metabolism in fish. Fish offer a
unique system for the study of these questions because of their evolutionary
position, diversified lipid storage strategy (partitioning of lipid reserves
among several depots: mesenteric fat, liver and dark muscle), and segregated
endocrine pancreas (Brockman body) possessing abundant amounts of N-terminally
extended somatostatin (somatostatin-25; from gene II). He will demonstrate for
the first time the differential effects of gene I and gene II somatostatins on
lipid metabolism. This analysis will demonstrate important interactions among
the various pancreatic hormones (e.g., somatostatins, insulin, glucagon,
pancreatic polypeptide) and evaluate the direct effects, including cellular mode
of action, of somatostatins on hepatic lipolysis. He also will evaluate for the
first time the binding of somatostatin to liver, a major lipid depot of fish,
and examine alterations in somatostatin binding characteristic (affinity,
capacity) in response to nutrient (glucose) and hormonal (INS, GLU) treatment.
While pertaining specifically to fish, this research will provide novel
information concerning somatostatin phsyiology generally. These results will
contribute significantly to the basic understanding of hormonal control of
hepatic lipid metabolism and provide important insight into the evolution of
lipid metabolism control schemes. ***