* 9305449
* Workshop:  "Developmental Instability:  Origins and         Evolutionary Implications;" Tempe, AZ; June 14-15, 1993
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1993,02/28/1994
* Therese Markow, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 16,082.00

Developmental instability (DI) is the failure of an organism to develop
normally, in ways ranging from physical anomalies and disease to abnormal
behavior. The causes of DI include genetic and environmental factors and their
interactions. In man, DIs include cleft lip, congenital heart disease,
schizophrenia and chromosomal abnormalities as well as exposure to teratogens
such as alcohol and isoretinoin. However, despite extensive theoretical
explanations, it is not known how developmental homeostasis breaks down to
produce abnormal phenotypes. This award supports a workshop titled
"Developmental Instability: Its Origins and Evolutionary Significance". This
conference will discuss ways to measure developmental instability, genetic and
developmental origins of instability, human health and phenotypic variation, and
DI's relevance to population biology and evolution in general. The coonference
breaks new ground and has a strong interdisciplinary approach, joining the
fields of evolutionary and developmental biology. %%% DI has far-reaching
implications for population biology, environmental biology and human health. DI
is reported to increase in populations of organisms whose habitats are polluted
or otherwise altered, as well as in those experiencing bottlenecks and
subsequent inbreeding. Despite this lack of knowledge, DI is already employed as
the basis for decisions regarding whether species are endangered or humans are
at risk.