* 9305344
* Low Temperature Nuclear Spin Relaxation and the Structure   and Dynamics of Defects in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Richard Norberg, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 12/31/1996
* USD 405,000.00

9305344 Norberg This project will provide support for a joint theoretical and
low temperature experimental study of quantum solids and films and of defects in
materials. Theoretical and pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance investigations will
be carried out on molecular hydrogen and deuterium and rare gas atoms
physisorbed as thin films on magnesium oxide, boron nitride, and silicon. These
molecules and atoms will also be studied as matrix-isolated species in non-
magnetic hosts and at high pressures in a cryogenic nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) diamond anvil cell. Multiple spin echoes unique to adsorbed species will
be used to examine dynamics and phase transitions at high densities and under
restricted dimensionality. A closely related effort will examine hydrogen and
deuterium in amorphous semiconducting films under conditions where light-induced
metastable changes in the electronic properties of the materials occur. The
theoretical effort will include first principles molecular dynamics simulations
on large supercells of amorphous silicon containing various dopants. %%% This
project will provide support for a joint theoretical and low temperature
experimental study of quantum solids and films and of defects in materials.
Theoretical and pulsed nuclear magnetic resonance investigations will be carried
out on molecular hydrogen and deuterium and rare gas atoms physisorbed as thin
films on magnesium oxide, boron nitride, and silicon. These materials will also
be examined at high pressures. The research involves fundamental topics as well
as technologically important subjects related to defects in materials and the
role these defects play in determining materials properties. For example,
amorphous semiconductors doped with various atoms will be investigated to learn
more about the properties of these materials which are used in photoconducting
solar cells. The research should shed light on the metastable properties of the
photocells which at present li mit their efficiency and practical utility. ***