* 9305121
* Low Latitude Glaciations in the Precambrian?  Paleomagnetic Constraints from Southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1994
* Joseph Kirschvink, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1994
* USD 17,552.00

The Late Proterozoic glacial sequences are known from almost all of the major
cratonic areas, including North America, the Gondwana continents, and the Baltic
Platform. A major controversy involves the probable latitude of formation for
these deposits--were they formed at relatively high latitudes as were those of
the Permian and our modern glacial deposits, or were many of them formed much
closer to the equator? Arguments supporting a low depositional latitude for many
of these units have been discussed extensively for the past 30 years, beginning
with the field observations that some of the diamictites had a peculiar
abundance of carbonate fragments, as if the ice had marched over carbonate
platforms. Paleomagnetic data have been involved to both support and attack the
low-latitude interpretations of these deposits. However, much of the older
paleomagnetic data is not as convincing as it should be, particularly in terms
of using geological stability tests to constrain the time that the remanent
magnetization was acquired. A recent and important exception to this is the
paleomagnetic work on the varved sediments of the Elatina formation of South
Australia, which formed during the uppermost Marinoan glaciation. At least on
one continent, these extensive, sea-level deposits were formed by widespread
continental glaciers which came to within a few degrees of the equator. If this
is also true of other continents such as Africa, the results would be difficult
to interpret in any fashion other than that of a widespread equatorial
glaciation of global extent. This Australian example demonstrates the need for
similar, rigorous paleomagnetic studies on other Proterozoic glacial units.
During the past 10 years, geological work on Proterozoic glacial sequences in
Southern Africa has clarified their regional stratigraphic framework and
tectonic setting. Several new targets for paleomagnetic work are now available
which are of exceptionally low metamorphic grade and lend themselves to detailed
micro-fold and conglomerate tests. Funds are requested in this proposal to
support the field sampling of these units in Southern Africa and Namibia during
June and July of l993, and to support the laboratory paleomagnetic analyses in
the first half of 1994.