* 9305846
* Rex-Induced Recombination in the Ribosomal DNA of Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Leonard Robbins, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 335,000.00

9305846 Robbins Heterochromatin is a substantial fraction of every eukaryotic
genome and has a number or remarkable characteristics. Nevertheless, few
heterochromatic functions have been identified. Among those few are the
ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA)and Rex (Ribosomal exchange), a maternal-effect
cominant that induces rDNA recombination during early mitotic divisions in
embryos produced by Rex females. Rex has now been shown to be a repeated element
located within the rDNA array. Deletion of rDNA repeats at the sites of Rex
induced exchange suggests that chromosome breakage is involved. An endonuclease
produced by an active variant of one of the insertion sequences found in all
rDNA arrays could be the basis of active variant of one of the insertion
sequences found in all rDNA arrays could be the basis of Rex. Analysis of this
system will continue in three areas: 1) Molecular and genetic analysis of the
nature and action of Rex, 2) Rapid mapping of rDNA arrays by use of Rex-induced
recombination, 3) Analysis of the properties of recombinant rDNA arrays. %%%
Roughly thirty percent of the genome of the fruit fly is constitutive
heterochromatin and yet little is known about either its structure or function.
Rex can provide a tool for learning more about these chromosomal regions in the
fruit fly, which knowledge can be then extrapolated to other eukaryotic
organisms in which these type of experiments cannot be done. ***