* 9305825
* RUI:  Cystallography of Magnetic and Non-Magnetic           Subperiodic Groups
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Daniel Litvin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1995
* USD 66,000.00

This is a theoretical renewal grant under the Research at Undergraduate
Institutions program. The principal investigator will complete the theory and
derivation of the group theoretical and crystallographic properties of the non-
magnetic subperiodic groups, i.e., the layer, rod and frieze groups, and the
relationships between the subperiodic groups and space groups. In particular, so
called scanning tables will provide the relationship between space groups and
layer groups. This work will be published by the International Union of
Crystallography in their series of International Tables For Crystallography, and
set the standards for these groups for the international crystallographic and
physics communities. The tensorial physical properties which distinguish domains
of ferroic crystals will be determined. The scanning tables will provide a basis
for a study to determine the layer group symmetry and properties of domain
twins. The study of these groups will be extended to include the theory and
derivation of the group theoretical and crystallographic properties of magnetic
subperiodic groups. The tensorial physical property distinction of domains based
on their magnetic symmetry will then be considered. This will provide the basis
for a study of the magnetic layer group symmetry and properties of magnetic
domain twins. %%% The research funded through the NSF program for Research at
Undergraduate Institutions involves developing the theory and deriving the
properties associated with certain types of symmetry groups. These results will
be readily available through the tables to be published as a result of this work
and will assist researchers in group theory, crystallography, condensed matter
physics and materials science.