* 9305503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Human - Environmental      Interaction and Sustainability in an East African           Agricultural Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1995
* B. Turner, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,120.00

9305503 TURNER Few issues focus on the dynamic nature of human- environmental
interaction as completely as does the relationship between economic development
and environmental change. In Africa, the development-environment interface has
been considered as a "crisis" of Africa, especially in eastern Africa, where
incorporation of farming systems into the global economy and unprecedented
population growth have created intensive pressures on people, land, and
resources. This doctoral dissertation research project will provide a case study
of one dramatic area of contemporary human-environmental interaction by
exploring processes of landscape change in the Olmotonyi watershed of Mount
Meru, a densely populated agricultural region in northern Tanzania. The
investigator will document the social and ecological history of the landscape
from colonial to present times. She also will inventory current land-use
patterns and practices and elicit the perceptions of land users about future
prospects. Detailed interviews with land users will explore social and
environmental changes and individuals views about past, present, and future
land-use and livelihood alternatives. This project constitutes a holistic and
historical examination of the complex dynamics of human-environmental
interaction in a region undergoing significant change. It will expand general
knowledge about the human dimensions of global environmental change, especially
the through identification of the perceptions of local residents of current and
future options, a factor that often has been ignored in examination of possible
forms of "sustainable development." As a doctoral dissertation improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career. ***