* 9305492
* Solution Thermochemical Investigation of Iron and           Ruthenium Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Steven Nolan, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 12/31/1996
* USD 277,500.00

9305492 Nolan With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program provides support for determining bond enthalpies of
organometallic compounds by Dr. Steven P. Nolan of the Chemistry Department,
University of New Orleans. Metal-hydride, metal-alkyl, metal-arene, metal-diene,
metal-phosphine, and metal-metal bond energies of group 8 metals will be found
using solution calorimetric methods. Special emphasis will be placed on iron and
ruthenium complexes of interest in homogeneous catalysis. For example,
tetracarbonyliron derivatives will be used in the determination of olefin-iron
bond strengths and cyclopentadienylruthenium species will be used to investigate
a series of diene-ruthenium bonds. Attempts will be made to determine bond
strengths of ruthenium with heterocyclic compounds which are relevant to
hydrodenitrogenation, hydrodesulfurization, and hydrosilation. %%% Thermodynamic
data are fundamentally important for both theoretical and applied research in
organometallic chemistry and catalysis, yet relatively little data are available
on Group 8 organometallic bond strengths. Knowing the energetics of steps in a
catalytic reaction is valuable for the development of new and more effective
catalysts useful, for example, in hydroformylation or alkene isomerization
reactions in the chemical industry. ***