* 9305856
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Spectral Properties of          Structured Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,04/30/1997
* William Trench, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 04/30/1997
* USD 73,835.00

9305856 Trench A square matrix is said to be persymmetric if reversing the
orders of its rows and columns produces the transpose of the matrix. Toeplitz
matrices, in which the elements along each stripe parallel to the main diagonal
are constant, are the most important persymmetric matrices. Reversing the order
of the elements of an eigenvector of a Hermitian Toeplitz matrix produces the
conjugate of the eigenvector. A real symmetric matrix of order 2n (2n+1) has n
(n+1) linearly independent eigenvectors such that reversing the order of their
elements leaves the eigenvectors unchanged, and n linearly independent
eigenvectors such that reversing the order of the elements is equivalent to
multiplying the eigenvector by -1. The sets of eigenvalues associated with these
two kinds of eigenvectors are called the even and odd spectra of the matrix,
respectively. The polynomials having the elements of eigenvectors as
coefficients are called the eigenpolynomials of the matrix. The investigator
studies the interlacement properties of the even and odd spectra of real
symmetric Toeplitz matrices, the location of the zeros of the eigenpolynomials
of Hermitian Toeplitz matrices, numerical solution of the inverse eigenvalue
problem for real symmetric Toeplitz matrices, and analogous problems for more
general Hermitian persymmetric matrices and real symmetric persymmetric
matrices. Structured matrices of the kind considered here have important
applications in statistics and signal processing. The matrices occurring in
these applications are usually very large. This research attempts to exploit the
peculiar structure of these matrices in order to solve problems in these areas
efficiently. The main applications of the results will be in the area of signal
processing, the science of extracting information from transmitted signals. ***