* 9305391
* Bioarchaeological Investigation of Native Responses to      European Colonization of La Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Clark Larsen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 08/31/1996
* USD 133,930.00

Abstract P.I. Clark Larsen SBR-9305391 It has become a truism that the Spanish
Conquistadores had a devastating effect on the health of Native Americans
throughout the New World, as documented in various locales by dramatic
population declines. However, the extensive findings to date from Spanish
Florida (La Florida) indicate that, although the catastrophic effects of Old
World pathogens on native populations were important and very common
consequences of contact, these effects should be viewed as a single facet of a
complex, multifaceted problem. Equally important for understanding the contact
issue are questions relating to how native populations responded and adapted to
great social, dietary, and behavioral changes in a number of settings over
relatively long periods of time. Besides the immediate declines in many areas
due to epidemics, in many regions, generations of survivors continued to respond
to new and novel challenges despite deteriorating circumstances. It is essential
to move away from single cause explanations of population change to reach a
broad-based understanding of decline in health, diet, the social fabric of
Native American groups after 1492. This study will undertake detailed and
extensive bioarchaeological analyses of remains from a large region of La
Florida, and over a long time interval. In particular, the impact of European
arrival and the establishment of missions will be studied, along with how native
populations accommodated new demands associated with changes in activity (eg.
demands for labor) and died (eg. more reliance on maize as a dietary staple) .
*** P:\anthro\jfried\9305391.abs u ~ PJPx PJ&amp;JPP.JP(Px ~ x G (I 4:V4:V:xP ı
ı ı p$ pp%$ $@ M G kNH G pkG $ $ @$ $@ i ıı ıı v ı ı ı rFTV V 4V \: 4V VV%$ $ %
$ $ % U V$ $ $ $ $ Gr(rPPIPPP(PIP(PPx ~VUx xN k (r VV~ V:V M ı k i ı G $ GGGGG G
HqN G HG j @ $ $@$ G ı ı q i ı ı ı ııı MVV:\ \ . &lt; A C " $ &amp; ( * , . $ $
$ $ F . &lt; . : 1 Courier Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Courier 1 MS LineDraw v h Q % e
e = Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender