* 9305619
* Theoretical Studies of Heme Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Gilda Loew, Molecular Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed studies involve the theoretical characterization of the
relationship between structure, spectra, and function of heme proteins- focusing
on peroxidases, a family of metabolizing heme enzymes that catalyzes the
oxidation of a variety of substrates by hydrogen peroxide. Specifically, a
variety of techniques of computational chemistry will be used to continue to
address three major themes: (1) elucidation of the common steps and key
intermediates in the enzymatic cycle of all peroxidases, leading from the
resting state to the biologically active species. Although the bioactive species
formed is common to all peroxidases, it is subsequently involved in two
different types of oxidations. These differences will be probed by:
characterization of substrate/enzyme interactions using lignin peroxidase (LiP),
an isozyme typical of the family of peroxidases that oxidizes surface- bound
substrates by long range electron transfer and by characterization of
substrate/enzyme interactions using horse radish peroxidase (HRP), an isozyme
belonging to the second type of peroxidase that oxidizes substrates near the
heme unit by chemical transformations. Since no X-ray crystal structure has been
reported for any member of this family, a 3D model of this enzyme will be
created by completing the homology modeling of HRP begun during the current
grant period. %%% Peroxidases are ubiquitous in many living species including
bacteria, fungae, plants, and mammals. They are involved in transforming and
eliminating potentially toxic species as well as of potential use in
biodegradation. Understanding the underlying mechanisms of their two types of
oxidations will lead to the identification of the stereoelectronic properties
that modulate the efficacy of substrates that undergo long range electron
transfer as well as those that are chemically transformed. Moreover, key
residues of the enzymes that are involved in both of these types of catalytic
oxidation will be identified and mutations suggested that will increase enzyme
efficacy. These combined results can then be used to guide in protein
engineering of optimum mutant enzymes for use in biodegradation of specific
products as well as in enhancing the understanding of the role that peroxidases
play in regulating toxicity.