* 9305896
* How Do Phytoplankton Adapt To Fluctuating Light? Response   Of The Photosynthetic Apparatus To Intermittent Exposure    To Bright Light.
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Todd Kana, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1996
* USD 101,148.00

Studies have demonstrated that photosynthesis rates at any given irradiance
depend critically on the light history over time scales of minutes to hours and
days. However, these studies have failed to provide a predictive understanding
of photosynthesis in variable light. New technology makes it possible to examine
the roles of photosynthetic, photoprotective and photoinhibitory processes in
controlling the instantaneous rate of photosynthesis. This technology includes
fast repetition rate (FRR) fluorescence for examining photoprotection,
photoinhibition and photosynthesis, and 18O mass spectrometry for measuring the
rate gross photosynthesis and oxygen cycling in the light. In the laboratory,
this study will calibrate FRR fluorescence-based estimate of gross
photosynthesis against measured rates of gross photosynthesis obtained from 18O2
exchange and quantify the roles of photoprotection and photoinhibition in
controlling the rate of photosynthesis. In field research, in situ FRR
fluorescence measurements will be used to establish a two-dimensional (i.e.
depth and time) description of the photochemical and non- photochemical
quenching coefficients, calculate the instantaneous rate of photosynthesis and
examine the roles of the photoprotection and photoinhibition in controlling
phytoplankton photosynthesis in situ.