* 9305395
* Intracellular Trafficking of Plant Peroxisomal Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Richard Trelease, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1997
* USD 322,386.00

Three specific objectives are proposed. The first is to develop an in-vivo
plant cell import system for experimentally determining necessary and sufficient
C-terminal targeting signals on plant peroxisome proteins. Preliminary data
indicate that the GUS gene with an appended S-K-L-COOH and delivered
biolistically to cultured tobacco cells, is directed to putative peroxisomes.
Histochemical and double indirect immunofluorescent staining suggest this system
will be worth pursuing. The second objective is to discover whether the
C-terminal tripeptides on plant peroxisome proteins are necessary and/or
sufficient for import in vivo into peroxisomes of cultured mammalian cells. In
preliminary studies, the C-terminal tripeptide A-R-M of cottonseed isocitrate
lyase was found necessary for import into CV-1 monkey kidney and CHO cells. The
third objective is to discover the targeting signal(s) necessary and sufficient
for import of catalases into peroxisomes of plant and mammalian cells. There are
essentially no data elucidating the specific putative targeting signal(s) for
any eukaryotic catalase, the basic constitutive enzyme of all peroxisomes.
Through unexpected preliminary results, a means was discovered whereby it is
possible to distinguish experimentally-imported, native catalase from endogenous
peroxisomal catalase. This breakthrough will permit the determination of whether
internal signal(s) within C- or N-terminal domains direct catalase to eukaryotic
peroxisomes. %%% Compartmentation of enzyme reactions and/or entire metabolic
pathways within organelles is essential to the overall coordination of cellular
processes and functions of all eukaryotic cells. Understanding biogenesis,
differentiation, and function(s) of each organelle is essential before we can
comprehend the complex, integrated functions of cells. One of the most active
areas of cell biological research which pertains directly to cell regulation and
function is intracellular protein trafficking to organelles. The overall goal of
the proposed research is to discover and elucidate molecular targeting signals
on enzymes which are directed to, and translocated into, plant cell peroxisomes.
Peroxisomes occur in virtually all eukaryotic cells and conduct a variety of
essential metabolic function(s) related to the cell type in which the peroxisome
resides. Recent experimental research on peroxisome targeting signals revealed
that a C-terminal tripeptide motif was necessary and sufficient for import into
mammalian and yeast peroxisomes. Surveys of published DNA sequences and western
blot screens with antisera to a "consensus" tripeptide (S-K-L) indicated that
the motif was common for most, but clearly not all, peroxisome enzymes among a
variety of eukaryotic organisms. Evidence also exists for some internal and
N-terminal cleavable peroxisome signals. A primary reason that experimental data
do not exist for targeting signals on any native plant peroxisome enzyme is that
import systems, either in vitro or in vivo, have not been developed for plant
cells. The aim of this project is to close that informational gap by developing
and exploiting an experimentally manipulable in vivo plant peroxisomal import
assay system.