* 9305031
* Studies in Mineral Surface Reactivity and Geochemistry to   the Atomic Level
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Michael Hochella, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 11/30/1996
* USD 165,000.00

We propose an ambitious mineral surface chemistry project that will proceed on
two parallel and complementary fronts. One project deals with the study of the
electronic structure of individual atomic sites on mineral surfaces. The other
project deals with heterogeneous redox reactions. Theoretical, experimental, and
analytic methods will be employed . Including scanning tunneling microscopy,
electron tunneling spectroscopy, scanning (atomic) force microscopy, x-ray and
ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopies, Auger electron spectroscopy and
scanning Auger microscopy, low energy electron diffraction, and secondary
electron microscopy. Theoretical aspects of this study will deal primarily with
electron tunneling and the electronic properties of surfaces. The specific
objectives in Part I are a) to calculate the electronic structure of individual
atoms on both "perfect" and defective surfaces of hematite, pyrite, and galena,
b) to use this information to interpret tunneling images and spectra collected
in vacuum and non-vacuum environments, and c) to relate our findings to
theories/speculations on "reactive sites" on mineral surfaces. The objectives in
Part II are a) to determine the specific mechanisms by which Mn(II)aq is
oxidized on mineral surfaces, b) to determine the influence of trace amounts of
other environmentally important metals, and c) to relate our findings to other
heterogeneous redox and non-redox systems involving the interaction of aqueous
metals on oxides. If successful, our results will be applicable to nearly every
aspect of mineral surface chemistry.