* 9305881
* Novel Optical Techniques for Studying Polymer-Metal         Interfaces:  Surface Second Harmonic Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Hilary Lackritz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research represents the application of a new
approach to a "mature" research area: vinyl polymerization. This research will
characterize the gas phase photopolymerization of vinyl monomers onto metallic
substrates as a function of processing conditions. Solvent- free, gas phase
photopolymerization shows promise in creating defect-free, uniform thin films
with excellent electrical and optical properties for commercial applications
such as protective coatings and electrical insulators. The issues to be
considered in this work are how the final film quality is related to the
interface and the polymerization mechanisms and kinetics, and the
characterization of the gas phase reactions. This research will develop surface
second harmonic generation to characterize the dynamics at the metal/polymer
interface. Surface second harmonic generation techniques are powerful methods
for probing surfaces, and have general applicability in examining reaction
dynamics at many surfaces and interfaces. The ultimate goal of the work is to
show that second order nonlinear optical techniques such as surface second
harmonic generation will be excellent methods for multi-disciplinary studies of
many surface phenomena including reaction, adsorption, and adhesion. This
initial work specifically addresses polymerizations of well characterized vinyl
monomers onto well characterized metallic substrates in order to validate the
use of surface second harmonic generation as an analytical technique to perform
real-time characterization of the surface dynamics. There is a strong need to
develop novel methods for characterizing surfaces and interfaces, particularly
methods that are efficient, have high resolution, and can be used to monitor in-
situ processing.