* 9305045
* Mathematical Sciences:  Adaptive Forcasting and Bayesian    Time Series Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Ruey Tsay, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Traditional forecasting methods often assume that there is a "true" model for
the process under study. Under such an assumption, one can use maximum
likelihood method to estimate the model and then use the estimated model for
forecasting. In practice, however, there is no "true" model. Consequently, the
traditional forecasting method may fare poorly in long-term forecasts. To
overcome this difficulty, we proposed in this project an adaptive forecasting
procedure that can produce accurate long-term forecasts. The proposed procedure
selects a statistical model for each forecasting horizon. In other words, under
the proposed procedure, different models are used to produce different multi-
step ahead forecasts. Our preliminary results suggest that such an adaptive
procedure outperforms substantially the traditional forecasting 1 methods. In
this project, we plan to investigate properties of such an adaptive forecasting
procedure, to provide theoretical justifications of the procedure, and to
develop statistical criteria of model selection in adaptive forecasting. The
second part of the proposed research is concerned with Bayesian time-series
analysis. Its main objective is to develop new methodologies for Bayesian
inference that (a) make use of the recent developments in repeated stochastic
substitution such as the Gibbs sampler, (b) allow for various structural changes
in a process, and (c) provide a flexible framework for estimating common
features in a vector process. For instance, we consider a Markov switching
framework for modeling macroeconomic time series and for discriminating non-
nested non-linear time series models. We also augment a probit model to a random
variance-shift model to relate the probability of a variance change to a set of
chosen explanatory variables. These preliminary results are very encouraging as
they successfully describe many features that cannot be captured by the
traditional time-series analysis. The proposed research consists of two main
projects. In the first project, we propose to develop new methods that can
produce accurate long-term forecasts. The basic idea of the proposed research is
that different models are selected to produce forecasts of different horizons.
Under the proposed research, statistical models are used adaptively in long-term
forecasts. Advantages of the proposed new forecasting methods include (a) they
relate directly model selection to the objective of forecasts, (b) it relaxes
many "unrealistic assumptions" commonly imposed by the traditional forecasting
methods, and (c) they make use of the recent advances in statistical computing.
Our preliminary experience on forecasting the U.S. monthly consumer price index
for foods indicates that the proposed methods outperform substantially other
forecasting methods available in the literature. The second project is concerned
with time-series analysis. It emphasizes the recent developments in statistical
algorithms and the advances in computing. The main objective is to develop new
methodologies that can incorporate prior acknowledge on subject matters into
data analysis in an efficient manner. It also widens the applicability of many
statistical methods by enlarging the class of possible statistical distributions
such as using scale mixture of traditional distributions.