* 9305897
* Study of the Interaction Between Gene Flow and Selection in a Test System
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1998
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9305897 Riechert This research project is concerned with an important
evolutionary question---the degree to which population mixing can limit
adaptation. Resolution of this question is important to the maintenance of
biodiversity and the conservation of rare and endangered species. The study will
be completed on a desert spider system which shows evidence of high levels of
mating between populations that inhabit markedly different selective
environments (i.e., abundant prey and high predation vs low prey and low
predation). Interpopulation mixing (gene flow) and selection (predation pressure
by birds) will be manipulated in a series of experiments to investigate the
nature of the interaction between them. Transplant experiments will also be
completed to determine the degree to which different behavior types from the
respective populations suffer when introduced to a foreign habitat. The movement
and assortative mating patterns of the different behavioral types recorded in
the study will be quantitatively compared with the predictions of an individual-
based simulation model of the system.%%% Spiders, by their nature, have proven
to be excellent tools for study of this and other ecological and evolutionary
problems. They are readily and adequately sampled because they are present in
large numbers and are not disturbed by the human observer. They also can be
easily manipulated without disruption of their "natural" behavior. This is a
major problem when using the higher animals. Finally, spiders perform many of
the behaviors and exhibit adaptations characteristic of these higher animals,
but in a less complex, and thus, more analyzable form. It is from model systems
such as this one, that science has traditionally drawn to unravel the most
complex mysteries of the biotic universe.***