* 9305925
* Ultrastructural Description of the Family Metacystidae      (Prostomatida, Ciliophora, Protista) and a Phylogenetic     Analysis of the Prostomate Ciliates
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Diana Lipscomb, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 01/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

WPC&gt; 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , k x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP Laserjet (25-in-
one, Network) HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 OpX @ 2 2 @ Z cpi 3| x Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @
HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ 2 , &lt; F P &lt; #| x 9305925
Lipscomb During the past two decades many ultrastructural; descriptions of
ciliate genera provided new information that inspired reviews and revisions of
ciliate systematics. However, there have been only a few publications on the
ultrastructural morphology of ciliates in the order Prostomatida, and no work at
all on the suborder Prostomatina. Because these ciliates have been proposed to
be among the most primitive ciliates, a thorough morphological and taxonomic
analysis of them is necessary before a stable classification of the phylum
Ciliophora can be achieved. The primary objective of this proposal is to extend
the taxonomic scope of the PI's previous studies on the ciliates to include the
prostomate family Metacystidae Kahl 1926 by focussing on an ultrastructural
description of all the genera in the family, a description of the morphogenesis
of a species of the genus Metacystis , and a cladistic phylogenetic analysis of
the family's relationship to other prostomial ciliates. The cladistic analysis
will allow testing of hypotheses about the supposedly primitive evolutionary
position of prostomate ciliates. The broader significance of the proposed
investigation is that understanding the diversity and phylogeny of ciliate
groups will provide insight into basic evolutionary principles acting on both
the single eukaryotic cell and on microbial organisms. In analyzing the complex
ultrastructural features o f these ciliates, problems and limitations of various
methods for ordering multistate characters will be explored. Details of this
methodological exploration should be of broad value to systematists working with
different groups of organisms and confronting problems with multistate character
ordering. %%% Ciliate protozoa play an important role in temporate costal
wetlands as predators on bacteria, algae, other protozoa and small invertabrates
in the decomposer food chain. But the relationships of most of these ciliates
are poorly understood. This project will utilize detailed ultrastructural
analysis to address questions of relationships of the family Metacystidae, a
group considered to be very basal and therefore critical in understanding
relationships of these important protozoa.