* 9305742
* Mathematical Sciences: Quasiconformal and Quasiregular      Mappings and Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Frederick Gehring, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1996
* USD 36,817.00

Postdoctoral funding through this award provides support for mathematical
research on problems concerning boundary values of quasiconformal mappings and
weighted Sobolev inequalities associated with quasiregular mappings. The
problems addressed in the project contribute to the understanding of the
interplay between analytic and geometric aspects in the analysis of these
mappings. By quasiconformal mappings one understands univalent mappings between
Euclidean spaces of the same dimension in which the distortion or dilatation of
the mapping is bounded. Quasiregular mappings satisfy the same conditions but
are not required to be univalent. Both reflect a natural outgrowth of the study
of analytic functions of a complex variable. Work will be done examining the
derivative of quasiconformal mappings. It had been thought that these functions
always had powers which were locally integrable. This is not the case. However,
a recently advanced notion of average derivative suggests that it is this
function which will ultimately have the right power integrals (for conformal
maps this average and conventional derivatives agree). Also to be examined are
the radial boundary values of average derivatives in terms of the distance to
the boundary. Other work focuses on changes in elliptic equations when composed
with quasiconformal and quasiregular maps and on Sobolev mappings with
integrable dilatation. In the latter, the fundamental question is one of showing
that if powers of a derivative of an arbitrary map are bounded by the Jacobian
times a bounded function then the mapping is open and discrete. The results has
been validated in the two-dimensional case.