* 9305289
* Diffraction Studies of the Structure and Structural         Evolution in Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Michael Winokur, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 225,000.00

9305289 Winokur This project is a fundamental study of the intrachain and
interchain molecular organization existing in various prototypical conducting
polymers. The primary goals in this undertaking are to develop quantitatively
accurate models for describing the molecular organization, to identify subtle
changes in this structure which arise during synthesis or processing and to
correlate this microstructural variation with changes in the electrical or mass
transport properties. An additional goal will be to elucidate key size-scaling
relationships and other novel properties that result from the subtle interplay
of various competing interactions at the molecular level within these highly
anisotropic guest-host composites. Both x-ray and neutron scattering will be
employed in combination with highly refined modeling algorithms which have been
modified to accommodate the special structure characteristics intrinsic to
polymeric materials. %%% This project is an intensive investigation of the
fundamental submicroscopic structure of conducting polymers--a novel and
technological important class of polymers. Objectives are to develop
quantitatively accurate models for describing the molecular organization, to
identify subtle changes in this structure which arise during synthesis or
processing, and finally to correlate these microstructural variations with
changes in other physical properties (e.g., electrical conductivity, mechanical
strength, or mass diffusion). In addition to resolving issues directly related
to conducting polymers and their applications, the experimental probes and data
analysis techniques developed in this research will enable analogous studies of
structure in more conventional polymer host materials. ***