* 9305436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Post-Glacial Fire History in Yellowstone National Park
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1994
* USD 7,755.00

Fire is a major form of disturbance that influences the composition, structure,
and distribution of vegetation. Fire frequency is affected by climate, and as
climates change, so does the way that fires shape and maintain spatial patterns
of vegetation. Past changes in fire frequency have been shown to accelerate and
amplify effects of climate change, thereby producing more rapid shifts in
vegetation composition and distribution than would have otherwise occurred. The
specific links among long-term changes in climate, vegetation, and fire regimes
are not well understood, however. This doctoral dissertation research project
will analyze charcoal, magnetic susceptibility, and pollen from sediment cores
taken from lakes in three different biogeographic provinces in Yellowstone
National Park in order to reconstruct the fire history of the area over the last
14,000 years. These analyses will elucidate fire regimes for different kinds of
vegetation and will address the role of regional climatic change as an influence
on fire frequency. This project will provide information and insights of value
from a number of different perspectives. Although focusing on change in
Yellowstone National Park, the data gathered through analyses in this project
will complement data gathered from numerous other sites in the northwestern U.S.
thereby advancing knowledge of regional climate and vegetation change since the
last glacial advance. The study also will contribute to deeper understandings of
the complex involvement of fires in climatic and vegetational processes. This
type of knowledge may have increasingly significant utility for resource
managers in the park and in other environments if climatic changes forecast for
future decades occur. As a doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.