* 9305144
* SEM and Electron Microprobe Analysis of Etruscan Amphoras
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Michael Dietler, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 15,933.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Dietler will conduct
chemical analyses on a series of ceramic samples of Etruscan amphoras collected
from well dated sites in Southern France. Using techniques only recently applied
to ceramics he will conduct combined scanning electron microscope (SEM) and
electron microprobe examination. On this basis he will determine the chemical
composition of the constituent clays and hopefully separate the amphorae into
distinct groups. He will then compare these groupings to those derived from
stylistic analysis of such attributes as vessel shape and size. In this first
step of a longer term project Dr. Dietler hopes to either confirm or revise the
topology developed by archaeologists over many years. In the next stage he will
attempt to use similar chemical analysis to tie these classes to places of
origin in Etruscan Italy. Surprisingly, although archaeologists know that these
amphorae were made by Etruscan peoples in Italy, most recovered examples come
either from shipwrecks or sites in southern France. Very little information is
available from their points of origin. These vessels were used to carry wine to
France and were ultimately discarded there. The underlying issue which Dr.
Dietler wishes to examine concerns neither wine nor amphorae per se, but rather
cultural, political and economic relations between political entities at
different stages of development. During Etruscan times, from approximately the
7th to 3rd millennia BC state level societies developed in Italy while in
northern and western Europe people still lived at a less complex tribal stage of
organization. Dr. Dieter wants to understand the strategies employed by the
Etruscans in the interactions with their less developed neighbors and how groups
in southern France reacted and underwent partial, selective acculturation. In
addition to the knowledge this research will provide about European prehistory,
it is important because of the methodological contribution it will make.
Although the combined SEM electron microprobe technique is currently used in
geological studies it has not been applied in archaeological contexts. If it is
successful, it may greatly simplify ceramic analysts' work. Dr. Dieter's
research constitutes a first practical test and the methodological implications
are considerable.