* 9305591
* University-Firm Linkages for Industrial Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Dianne Rahm, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leonard L. Lederman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 71,785.00

This is a multi-stage study of university-firm linkages for industrial
innovation. A survey instrument designed and sent to the target population of
1600 units within the top 100 research universities. Surveys will be sent to
directors of offices of patents and technology licensing as well as department
chairs and selected researchers within disciplines of importance to industry and
commanding sizable R&amp;D resources (Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Electrical Engineering, and Physics). The survey data and information permit an
empirical analysis of the extent and nature of university-industry interactions.
Using these findings, a subset of approximately 12 selected participating
university-firm groups for detailed case studies. The case studies consist of
site visits to these units. Structured interviews conducted with firm managers,
industrial researchers and technicians, university officials, faculty and
research assistants, and staff personnel. Additionally, several non-
participating like-firms identified and visited to determine why they do not
involve themselves with the university. This stage of the study will have
several primary foci: to define what participating firms and universities mean
by "success", to assess the perspective of firm and university participants, to
understand why like-firms decide not to create linkages with universities, to
isolate specific factors identified as contributing to success or lack of
success of university- industry interactions, and to increase our depth of
understanding concerning how universities contribute to industrial innovation. A
final report will be written which profiles university-firm interactions and
presents students and decision makers with a systematic and generalizable
analysis of success factors.