* 9305092
* Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Specific LexA Cleavage
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* John Little, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

9305092 Little Treatment of E. coli by agents that damage DNA or inhibit
replication triggers the SOS response, a global response to the damage that
promotes cell survival by a variety of means. This response involves the action
of two regulatory proteins: LexA, which represses about 20 SOS genes during
normal growth, and RecA, which is activated by inducing treatments to a form
that catalyzes the specific cleavage of LexA repressor, inactivating it and
leading to induction of the SOS genes. Hence, specific cleavage plays a crucial
role in the SOS response. In addition to this central regulatory role of LexA
cleavage, this reaction is of considerable biochemical interest. Its mechanism
is unusual, in that LeA cleaves itself in an intramolecular reaction termed
autodigestion, and activated RecA acts to stimulate LexA self-cleavage under
physiological conditions. In these conditions, LexA cleavage is designed to
proceed slowly, but at the same time to be capable of large rate increases. This
view raises two related questions: What is the mechanism of LexA autodigestion,
and how can RecA protein facilitate this reaction? Three complementary
approaches are proposed to address these questions. The first is to continue to
isolate and characterize mutations that influence the rate of LexA cleavage. The
second approach is to continue to develop the bimolecular LexA cleavage
reaction, in which one molecule of LexA or lambda repressor acts as an enzyme to
cleave other molecules of LexA. The third approach is to look for physical
evidence that LexA can exist in two different conformational states. %%% An
increasingly large number of biologically important reactions are being
discovered that are intramolecular. These include self- splicing RNA introns,
autophosphorylation and autophosphatase activity of chemotaxis proteins, and
autophosphorylation of oncogene proteins, growth factor receptors, and other
important proteins. The proposed work is of general signifi cance for the
insights it is expected to yield regarding the properties of intramolecular
self-processing reactions, and the means by which the rated of these reactions
can be regulated by interactions with other effector molecules. ***