* 9305058
* Genetics of Sperm Migration and Gamete Recognition          in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Steven L'Hernault, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1996
* USD 310,000.00

9305058 L'Hernault Motile cells can move toward a target site, where they
interact with other cells found at this new location. Sperm migration and
subsequent sperm-egg interactions in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans offers
an attractive model system in which to study the genetic control of these
phenomena. There are mutations in seven known genes which result in motile
spermatozoa that are incapable of fertilization. Mutations in three of these
spermatogenesis- defective genes are known to produce cytologically normal sperm
that are motile, but defective in sperm migration toward the normal site of
fertilization and in sperm-egg interactions at that site. These genes will be
subjected to detailed cell biological, genetic, and molecular analyses.
Specifically, mutants will be analyzed by electron microscopic and other cell
biological techniques to reveal any obvious alterations in either sperm
structure or sperm interactions with oocytes. Additional alleles will be
recovered and the null phenotype will be defined for these three genes. Alleles
that will aid in the molecular cloning of these genes will also be sought.
Cosmid transgenic rescue will be employed to localize one of these genes on the
available C. elegans physical map and permit its molecular cloning. These
studies should reveal how sperm recognize their location in the reproductive
tract, move towards oocytes, and subsequently fertilize them. ***