* 9305123
* U.S.-Hungary Materials Research on Living Carbocationic     Copolymerization of Select Olefins
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Joseph Kennedy, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1997
* USD 38,445.00

9305123 Kennedy This U.S.-Hungary research project on "Living Carbocationic
Copolymerization of Select Olefins" is between Dr. Joseph P. Kennedy of the
University of Akron and Dr. Tibor Kelen of the Institute of Applied Chemistry,
Kossuth University, Budapest. The researchers intend to synthesize, by living
carbocationic copolymerization, three series of novel random copolymers:
isobutylene/styrene (IBu/St), isobutylene/indene (IBu/Ind), and styrene/indene
(St/Ind). In the process, they will develop conditions to demonstrate living
random copolymerizations by kinetic experiments and then, describe the
composition, molecular weight and molecular weight distribution of their
products. Building upon their findings, Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Kelen also will
investigate compositional heterogeneity as a function of molecular weight. Once
they feel they have optimized the syntheses of random living IBu/ST, IBu/Ind
copolymers, they will prepare sufficient quantities of promising copolymer
products for study of structure/property correlations. Results should yield new
insights of importance in future engineering applications such as coatings and
adhesives. This project in materials research fulfills the program objectives of
advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U. S. and Hungary to
combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence.