* 9305308
* Identification of Functionally Important Sequences in H1    Histones
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Donald Sittman, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 01/31/1997
* USD 124,000.00

9305308 Brown The H1 histones are a multigene family of chromosomal proteins
that are critically involved in organizing chromatin structure. H1s are major
substrates for growth-related protein kinases and phosphorylation of H1 proteins
has been suggested to be particularly important in regulated changes in
chromatin condensation during cell cycle progression. The objective of this
proposal is to identify and investigate some of the structural features of the
different H1 variants that are important to their function in chromatin
organization. Over the past several years we have developed a system in which
genes for different H1 variants have been cloned into inducible overexpression
vectors and transfected into homologous mouse fibroblasts. These transformants
can be induced to overexpress the different H1 genes such that the product of
the exogenous gene is the predominant H1 in chromatin. We have recently
demonstrated that a transient inhibition of DNA replication can be induced in
some of the H1 variant overproducing-cell lines. This inhibition is associated
with a high H1/nucleosome ratio. Interestingly, different H1 variants exhibit a
different ability to maintain a high H1/nucleosome ratio. For these proposed
studies the cloned mouse histone genes will be systematically mutagenized in
vitro prior to transformation. We will apply a number of in vivo and in vitro
assays to these transformed cells to determine the effects of these mutations on
replication and chromatin conformation. Particular emphasis will be placed on
modification of the putative sites of phosphorylation of the histone H1 that are
believed to be important in cell cycle-regulated alterations in chromatin
conformation. We will also attempt to identifying the domains that lead to H1
variant specific effects on the cellular capacity to replicate by constructing
hybrid genes in which the coding portions of the major structural domains of H1
and H1c have been systematically exchanged. The result s obtained will be the
basis of further studies that will define the role of H1, H1 variants, and
specific structural features of H1s, in chromatin. %%% The H1 histones are a
family of proteins involved in packaging the genetic material. Correlative data
has associated changes in histone content with alterations in cellular division.
The object of these studies is to identify structural features of various key
members of this protein family that affect a cells capacity to replicate. We
have clones of the genes for various H1proteins. We will systematically alter
sequences in these cloned genes and introduce them into cultured mouse cells in
such a manner that they are overexpressed and replace most of the cells
preexisting H1 histones. We will then determine the effects these alterations
have on the cells capacity to divide, We already know that the H1 product of one
gene inhibits replication and the H1 product of another gene has no apparent
effect on replication. Our studies will focus on the structural features of
these two genes that set them functionally apart. The results will provide a
basis for further studies that will specifically define the role various members
of the H1 protein family and their various structural features play in cell
growth. Such an understanding will extend our understanding of the mechanism of
cell division and how it relates to differentiation and unregulated cell growth
characteristic of oncogenesis. ***