* 9305835
* Computational methodology for the inference of genealogical structure from genetic data.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Elizabeth Thompson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 06/30/1997
* USD 210,957.00

Methods of Markov chain Monte Carlo are attracting great interest in many areas
of Statistics. They provide realizations from probability distributions known
only up to a normalizing constant, and thus from intractable probability
distributions of latent variables conditional upon observed data. These
realizations can be used to obtain Monte Carlo approximants too therwise
intractable likelihood functions and posterior probability distributions. The
methods permit exploration of large and complex hypothesis spaces of models and
parameters. Estimation of genealogical structure from genetic data is a long-
standing problem, recently attracting renewed interest with the advent of new
types of data that are potentially much more informative. The availability and
quantity of such data are increasing rapidly. The estimation of genealogies
becomes of increasing practical importance with the increasing necessity to
evaluate detailed population structure in the severely numerically restricted
populations of highly endangered species. The major problem in a coherent
statistical analysis of genealogical structure lies in the plethora of
alternative genealogical hypotheses that could relate a set of individuals. The
development of the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods towards the inference
of genealogies and the estimation of population structure offers a solution of
this complex problem. The current award will support research that is both
methodological and computational. Markov chain Monte CarloMethods are very
flexible; developing an effective method for a particular class of problems is
not routine. Methods will be developed and evaluated. Software to implement the
methods will be developed, and will be applied in the context of some available
data sets. This award is being supported by four programs: Statistics and
Probability, Computational Mathematics, Systematics and Population Biology, and
Computational Biology.