* 9305178
* The Interactions of Pseudomonas Syringae Harpins, HRP Secretion Proteins, and AVR Proteins in Eliciting Either theHypersensitive Response or Pathogenesis in Higher Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Alan Collmer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 289,000.00

9305178 Collmer The hypersensitive response (HR) of higher plants is
characterized by the rapid, localized death of plant cells at the site of
invasion by an "incompatible" pathogen (a microorganism that causes disease only
in another plant) and is associated with resistance against many nematodes,
fungi viruses and bacteria. Elicitation of the HR by Pseudomonas syringae and
other plant pathogenic bacteria is controlled by hrp genes, which are also
required for the multiplication and pathogenicity of these bacteria in their
respective host plants. The overall goal of the research is to use two recent
advances to dissect the functions of the hrp genes and to determine the general
basis for the phenotypic dependence of avr genes on hrp genes. We expect that
(i) harpins are needed for P. syringae strains to initiate a metabolically
active interaction with the plant, (ii) HrpH and several other Hrp proteins are
needed for the secretion of harpin, (iii) harpin production must be carefully
regulated for successful pathogenesis, and (iv) Avr proteins depend on the Hrp
secretion system and/or harpin to produce their phenotypes. The work will
involve potentially three strains of P. syringae: (i) P.s. syringae 61, whose
cloned cluster of hrp genes has been extensively characterized and is unique in
that, it functions in nonpathogens like E. coli. (ii) P.s. glycinea race 4,
which becomes incompatible with Rpg1 soybean cultivars upon acquisition of the
cloned avrB gene, and (iii) P.s. tomato DC3000, whose compatibility with
Arabidopsis thaliana is reversed by acquisition of avrB. Early work on the
project will determine whether P.s. glycinea race 4 or P.s. tomato DC3000 will
be the focus of work on Avr protein function. We intend to (1) Characterize the
P.s. syringae 61 hrpZ gene and the encoded harpin with respect to primary
sequence, elicitor-active domains, and subcellular location. (2) Determine the
relative effects of hrpH and hrpZ mutations on the initial interac tion of P.s.
syringae 61 with bean and tobacco (or of P.s. tomato DC3000 with A. thaliana or
of P.s. glycinea race 4 with soybean). (3) Clone and characterize the P.s.
glycinea race 4 (or P.s. tomato DC3000) hrpZ gene, construct derivatives that
are deficient in harpin overproduce harpin produce harpin instead of harpin or
contain a hrpZ promoter- uida fusion in trans; determine the phenotype of these
derivatives (with or without an avrB+ plasmid) on tobacco and differential host
cultivars. %%% Because homologs of Hrp secretion proteins are present in some
animal pathogens, successful testing of these hypothesis should have a broad
impact on research addressing bacterial pathogenicity. ***