* 9305354
* Acid Resistance and Stationary Phase in Escherichia coli andShigella flexneri
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 293,000.00

9305354 Slonczewski The genetic mechanisms of resistance to extreme acid and of
pH homeostasis is being investigated in Escherichia coli and its close relative
Shigella flexneri. Genes have been identified which are required for stationary-
phase induction of resistance to extreme acid (pH 2-3). These include katF and
several Tn5 insertions of unknown location. The following questions are being
addressed: What are the roles of pH and anaerobiosis is stationary-phase acid
resistance? Which gene products participate in acid resistance, and how are they
regulated? Do some acid-resistance loci also participate in pH homeostasis
during growth? Does stationary phase also confer alkaline resistance response?
The objectives are: observe pH dependence, if any, of stationary-phase acid
resistance; measure pHint homeostasis and pH-dependent growth of acid-sensitive
strains; screen E. coli Tn10 and lac fusion strains for acid- sensitivity, and
map the loci; characterize stationary-phase alkaline resistance in E. coli. %%%
pH is a major environmental parameter for bacteria, and internal pH is
significant in terms of bacterial physiology and energy transduction . This
research will lead to an understanding of how bacteria can survive and function
in extremely acidic environments. ***