* 9305029
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Analyses of Clast Fabrics  in Periglacial Mass-Movement Deposits
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1994
* USD 9,959.00

Periglacial processes are those processes that operate in near-glacial
conditions, whether along the margins of glaciers or in areas where the climates
are almost cold enough to support glaciation. In locales like the Driftless Area
of southwestern Wisconsin and parts of the northern Appalachians just beyond the
limits of Pleistocene glaciation, and in locales like those of central and
northern Alaska, periglacial processes have had significant impacts on the
landscape. Quaternary scientists long have attempted to differentiate between
the effects of various periglacial processes, but unambiguous lines of evidence
are rare, and standard analytic procedures to identify forms of mass- wasting in
periglacial environments have not been well developed. This doctoral
dissertation research process will focus on comparisons of the directional
orientation of "clast fabrics" (materials consisting of rock fragments) within
colluvium from three different sites. Two of these sites (one in central Alaska
and one in southwestern New York and northwestern Pennsylvania) are locales
where previous studies have identified formations that appear to be relics of
previous periglacial episodes. The third site (in eastern Alaska) is a site
where periglacial processes are still active. Data derived from material
extracted from these sites will be analyzed with other sedimentary and
environmental data in order to assess the validity of extant models of sediment-
transport processes operating in periglacial environments. This research project
will provide valuable new insights from a number of perspectives. Methodological
advances should be realized through refinement of new statistical approaches for
identifying and comparing orientational variations within and between deposits.
Fundamental knowledge of the processes operating in periglacial environments
also will be advanced, with special value likely to result from efforts to
relate fossil evidence to active processes. As a doctoral dissertation
improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.