* 9305184
* Mechanisms of High Pressure Phase Transformations Between   the a, B and T Polymorphs of Mg2SiO4 and (Mg,Fe)2SiO4
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Adrian Brearley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 07/31/1996
* USD 55,700.00

9305184 Brearley The principal objective of this project is to study in detail
the mechanisms of the high pressure mantle phase transformations of Mg2SiO4 and
(Mg, Fe)2SiO4 under a wider range of PT conditions relevant to the model mantle
geotherm and subducting oceanic lithosphere. The study will continue our efforts
to delineate the pressure-temperature regimes over which different
transformation mechanisms may operate in the Earth's mantle and identify what
factors may cause changes in the transformation mechanism (P,T, degree of
overstepping etc.). In particular we will concentrate on the mechanisms of
transformations involving the polymorph of Mg2SiO4 and (Mg,Fe)2SiO4. We will
examine the role that water may play in transformations involving -phase and
examine in detail the nature of order-disorder transformations in -phase and how
they may influence the stability of -phase in the mantle. The results have
important geological implications for upper mantle dynamics, especially the
rheological behavior of subducting oceanic slabs and the mechanisms of deep
focus earthquakes. The project will involve high pressure kinetic experiments
using a multi anvil high pressure apparatus coupled with detailed
microstructural studies using optical and electron microscopy. Special emphasis
will be placed on the use of transmission electron microscope techniques,
particularly electron diffraction and high resolution electron microscopy to
elucidate the transformation mechanisms.