* 9305875
* Effect of the Nest Environment on Survival by Embryonic and Neonatal Turtles
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Gary Packard, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 09/30/1997
* USD 99,502.00

9305875 Packard Embryonic turtles survive to hatching in some nests but not in
others. Moreover, hatchlings from some of the successful nests are large and
robust whereas neonates from other successful nests are small and weakly. Why
does survival by embryos vary? Why do hatchlings differ so much in size and
vigor? Does the variation in vigor of hatchlings affect their ability to survive
once they have emerged from the nest cavity? Research outlined in this proposal
first will test the hypothesis that survival by embryonic turtles is affected by
the physical environment in their nests (as well as by maternity). The contents
of natural nests of both snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina) and painted
turtles (Chrysemys picta) will be manipulated so that effects of the environment
on hatching success can be clearly distinguished from genetic and nongenetic
effects related to maternity. The physical environment will be measured in these
same nests so that strong inferences can be made concerning the specific causes
of embryonic mortality. The program next will test the hypothesis that
substantial variation in size and vigor of hatchlings is induced by the
environment during incubation, and that this environmentally-induced variation
affects the survival by turtles during the neonatal period. The program of study
will document critical links between the environment encountered by developing
embryos, survival by embryos to hatching, phenotypic variation in hatchlings,
and survival by hatchlings during the neonatal period. The findings consequently
will have important bearing on conservation programs that entail captive
propagation and "head- starting" for several kinds of sea turtles. ***