* 9305252
* Paleoflood Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Victor Baker, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1996
* USD 220,000.00

Paleoflood hydrology is a technique that combines elements of geology and
surface water hydrology to reconstruct magnitude- frequency characteristics of
floods that occurred prior to direct measurement or systematic observation.
Slackwater deposit- paleostage indicator (SWD-PSI) paleoflood studies use
specific evidence of flooding to define paleoflood levels in stable (bedrock-
controlled) channel environments and use hydraulic modeling and geochronological
methods to reconstruct the magnitude and frequency of individual flood events.
Regional SWD-PSI studies provide data that are indispensable in relating spatial
and temporal variations in flood frequency to global-scale variations in
climatic conditions over long time period (1000s of years). We are proposing to
establish a systematic method for incorporating paleoflood data into a
hydroclimatological context to aid in understanding fundamental linkages between
global climate and regional flood frequency. This method will rely on detailed
analysis of observed hydroclimatic data sets to develop a scale- sensitive,
circulation-based conceptual framework for use in assessing hydroclimatic
variability over time scales represented by paleoflood records. In the course of
development, we plan to use this method to address the flood-climate linkage in
areas particularly sensitive to climatic variations. The methods will also be
used in a continuation of research on the relationship between the regional
paleoflood characteristics of Arizona and global climatic variations over the
past 5000 years. Our work in southern Arizona will focus on small drainage
basins(&lt;25km2) to augment previous studies in the region that have focused on
considerably larger basins subject to flooding from different hydroclimatologic
mechanisms. The results of our proposed research will offer important new
insights into the response of extreme events to climatic variation and may have
important implications for future changes in global climate.