* 9305401
* RUI:  Immunobiologic Studies of a Marsupial
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* William Stone, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1997
* USD 174,700.00

9305401 Stone The overall objective of this project is to initiate molecular
immunobiologic studies of the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, the gray, short-
tailed opossum. It has already been found that Monodelphis exhibits a typical
primary immune response but an atypical secondary response. Other recent results
suggest that the typical eutherian isotype switch from immunoglobulin M to
Immunoglobulin G is lacking in this species. Further studies will compare
Monodelphis immune responses with the mouse, a typical eutherian organism. In
collaboration with other laboratories, molecular approaches will be used to
study the major histocompatibility system and the T cell receptor. This research
will continue to involve bright, young undergraduate students. %%% The mammalian
immune system is the subject of much research in the context of human health,
and much is known about immune function in the mouse and man. In contrast, very
little is known about the analogous mechanisms of self recognition and defense
in other animals. The overall objective of this project is to characterize the
immune response of the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, the gray, short-tailed
opossum. This species is the only laboratory- adapted marsupial in America.
Because marsupials separated from eutherian mammals about 130 million years ago,
knowledge of their immune system may shed light on the origin of the mammalian
immune system. Studies will be carried out at the cellular and biochemical
levels and molecular immunobiologic studies will be initiated. With prior NSF
support it has been found that Monodelphis exhibits a typical primary immune
response. Further studies will compare Monodelphis immune responses with the
mouse, a typical eutherian mammal. In collaboration with other laboratories
molecular approaches will be used to identify MHC genes, and study the T cell
receptor. This research will continue to involve bright, young undergraduate
students. ***