* 9305074
* Molecular and genetic analysis of sex determination         in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Helen Salz, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1997
* USD 355,000.00

9305074 Salz How the sex of Drosophila melanogaster is determined is as well
understood as is sex determination in any organism. However, even in this system
how such determination is regulated remains a mystery. We are concentrating on
the identification and characterization of genes required for the maintenance of
the ON/OFF activity state of the binary switch gene Sex-lethal (Sxl).
Maintenance of Sxl is regulated by "exon-skipping", a type of alternative RNA
splicing. Only in females does the processed transcription product yield a
functional protein. We are focusing on the analysis of snf, a sex determination
gene which is utilized to establish the female-specific splicing pattern of Slx.
We have recently found that snf has homology to the mammalian snRNP proteins U1A
and U2B", suggesting that the snf gene product is an integral component of the
machinery required for splice site choice. We will 1) continue our molecular
characterization of the snf locus 2) determine if the SNF protein is nuclear
and/or cytoplasmic as well as whether it is associated with nascent transcripts
on polytene chromosomes 3) determine whether the extant mutations are simple
loss of function mutations or have aberrant functions by localizing the
molecular lesions associated with the extant snf mutations and examine the
phenotypic consequences of multiple copies of the mutant gene 4) determine
whether snf is likely to be an essential general-splicing factor, an essential
sex-specific splicing factor or an non-essential "facilitator" of splicing, by
generating and characterizing a small deficiency of the locus 5)determine
whether the human U1A protein and/or the human U2B" protein is functionally
equivalent to snf by expressing the human genes in Drosophila and determine
whether either can complement snf mutations 6) determine whether the differences
between the RNA Recognition motifs (RRM) of U1A. U2B" and SNF are functionally
significant. These structure/function studies should b e particularly
informative in light of the extensive in vitro structure/function studies that
have been carried out on the human U1A and U2B" proteins. %%% By identifying and
characterizing both general and sex-specific genes required for maintenance of
Sxl activity, we will gain insights into the mechanism regulating sex-specific
splicing. Moreover, our analysis will have broader implications for the
understanding of the mechanisms regulating RNA splicing in general since little
is known about how splice site choices are made. ***