* 9305441
* Improving the Flow Characteristics of Airborne Aerosol      Inlets
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* W. Seebaugh, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/1997
* USD 187,710.00

9305441 Seebaugh Measurements of aerosol made from aircraft sampling platforms
are essential to study the ozone depletion and climatic effects of airborne
particles. Current aircraft aerosol inlets fail to achieve samples which are
representative of the aerosol in the ambient atmosphere. The difficulty arises
from the degree of slowing required between the free air stream and the entrance
to the sampling device or instrument. Done incorrectly, this slowing can lead to
significant inertial enrichment of the aerosol or to significant losses due to
turbulent deposition within the inlet. During the initial portion of this
project diffusers with useful area ratios will be built and turbulence will be
controlled with boundary layer suction. Aerosol deposition studies will be done
to demonstrate that the reduced turbulence in the inlet is accompanied by
increases in particle transmission through the diffuser. In the second year, an
aerodynamic pumping system to provide the needed suction will be designed. The
basis for this design will involve either contouring the leading edge of the
inlet to provide insensitivity to angle of attack or adding a shroud around the
diffuser. Wind tunnel experiments will be used to verify that the internal and
external flows behave as expected. The product will be an inlet that is ready
for testing on aircraft. ***