* 9305202
* Protein Engineering of Macromolecular Self-Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* William Atkins, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 282,875.00

9305202 Atkins The long-term goal of the proposed research is to develop
strategies and methods for the production of patterned arrays of proteins in
one-, two-, and three-dimensional lattices. Specific aims include: (1) To
determine the molecular mechanisms of metal ion-induced assembly of "protein
tubes" from bacterial gluatmine synthetase (GS) dodecamers. (2) To manipulate
the exterior "stacking" surface of GS and construct mutant proteins that
preferentially "stack" with other mutants rather than with identical dodecamers.
(3) To alter the metal ion specificity of the "stacking" reaction. (4) To
determine which subunit interfaces are disrupted and reformed during the
pressure-induced dissociation and reassociation of GS and pyruvate
dehydrogenase. %%% Development of patterned structures on a nanometer size-scale
is widely believed to hold promise for new developments in materials research
and manufacturing (nanofabrication). One approach to creating such structures
involves utilization and modification of naturally occurring processes, such as
protein self-association. By introducing modifications into the surface charge
and structure of several target proteins, the investigator intends to determine
the "rules of the game" which specify the types of two and three dimensional
aggregates which form. ***