* 9305868
* Dynamic Studies of the Adhesion, Deformation and Fusion of  Monolayers, Bilayers and Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Jacob Israelachvili, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1996
* USD 285,000.00

9305868 Israelachvili This project continues the investigation of the roles of
different interbilayer forces and bilayers fluidity on the molecular-scale
deformations of adhering and fusing bilayers using novel electron and atomic
force microscopy and surface force measurements. Past experiments identified a
particularly important role for hydrophobic forces in adhesion and fusion. In
this follow-up project, a variety of techniques are used to study the dynamics
of surfactants, lipids and domains (lateral diffusion, overturning or 'flip-
flop', and exchange) during nonequilibrium interactions such as adhesion, fusion
and membrane structural transitions. The aim is to asess how these dynamic
processes and their rates - in contrast to equilibrium properties - affect
structural changes, adhesion and fusion. The investigators will attempt to
achieve similarly high time and spatial resolution of ionic effects on membrane
interactions by using 'cages' calcium compounds to liberate divalent ions at a
specific time and place. Complementary surface force apparatus and cyro-electron
microscopy measurements will be made how calcium induces membrance structural
changes, adhesion and fusion with millisecond time resolution. Additional
structural information will be provided at the sub-molecular scale by studying
the effects of divalent ions on simple Langmuir- Blodgett membranes using the
atomic force microscope.