* 9305237
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Large-Eddy     Simulations of Cirrus
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Steven Siems, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 35,151.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Steven T. Siems to
work with Dr. Peter Jonas at UMIST in Manchester, UK. Dr. Siems and the
atmospheric research group at UMIST have proposed adapting a large-eddy
simulation model in an effort to better understand the direct impact cirrus
clouds have on the Earth's radiation budget and the coupling between cloud
dynamics and radiative exchange. A large-eddy simulation should prove to be
effective given the microphysical variability found on scales of less than 1 km.
This model is to include a representation of primary and secondary nucleation
processes. It must allow for microphysical growth processes and dynamical
structures to be present and interactive with the radioactive fluxes.
Specifically, the model hopes to address issues concerning the occurrence of
regions with high concentrations of small ice crystals. It is unclear as to
whether these occurrences are more strongly influenced by fluctuations in the
ice nucleus population or the internal dynamics of the cirrus. The model will
also be used to address under the conditions under which regions containing
liquid water can exist at temperatures below -30 degrees centigrade. The model
may also be used to investigate the structure of contrails and how they differ
from natural cirrus clouds. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel, a stipend for twelve months and a small allowance for in-
country travel and attendance of a meeting.