* 9305285
* RUI: Predicting Transport Through Heterogeneous Facies      Assemblages:  Geostatistical Anatomy of Buried-Valley       Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Robert Ritzi, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 11/30/1995
* USD 76,000.00

The inability to sufficiently characterize the spatial distribution of
hydraulic conductivity (K) is an obstacle to constructing reliable predictive
models of ground-water flow and pollutant transport, to remediating ground-water
contamination, and to effectively managing and protecting ground-water
resources. In glacially derived aquifers, it is common to have low-K facies
(e.g. till or lacustrine clay) juxtaposed with high-K facies (e.g. sand and
gravel outwash). In the buried-valley aquifers of the western and central plains
of North America, assemblages of permeable outwash facies form large and
productive regional aquifer systems. Although the exact geometry of the high-K
and low-K facies can only be determined by a prohibitive amount of subsurface
information, conditional indicator simulation provides a way to compute a number
of realizations of facies distributions that have identical spatial covariance
structure and that honor available data. Running transport simulations using a
large number of these realizations, and examining the central tendency and
variance of simulated contaminant travel times, or the simulated contaminant
pathways, can give insight into how contaminants will move through the real
system. However, conditional indicator simulations require that an adequate
indicator variogram model of the spatial covariance of the facies assemblage can
be defined from field data, when in fact the field data are often insufficient
for this purpose. The objective of the proposed research under the Research at
Undergraduate Institutions Program is to determine variogram models from field
data at a number of locations in a buried-valley aquifer system. Two
undergraduate students will be involved in field work that will create the basis
for their senior research projects. One M.S. student will be involved in the
geostatistical analysis of the data. The conceptual model of a specific facies
assemblage will be combined with the variogram model to crate a quantitative
hydrofacies model. As we begin to catalogue quantitative facies models, we will
compare them for similarities and begin to test the hypothesis that one or more
archetypal quantitative hydrofacies can be developed for general types of facies
assemblages in buried-valley aquifer systems.