* 9305321
* An Atypical Calcium Dependent Protein Kinase Homologue in   Carrot and Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Jung Choi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 06/30/1997
* USD 238,005.00

9305321 Choi A variety of environmental signals that influence plant growth,
such as light, gravity and wind cause transient calcium fluxes in plant cells.
To understand how plants respond appropriately to the different environmental
stimuli that employ calcium as a common second messenger, it is necessary to
characterize the intracellular calcium receptors, their functions, and their
distribution in various plant cells, organs, and tissues. This laboratory has
cloned a gene for a calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) that has its own
calcium receptor in the form of a C-terminal calmodulin-like domain with 4 EF-
hand motifs. CDPK appears to be the plant homologue of the calcium/calmodulin-
dependent protein kinases in animals. A CDPK related kinase (CRK), whose
C-terminal domain has diverged, with nonconservative substitutions in the EF-
hand motifs has also been cloned. Other features in the CRK sequence predict
that CRK may be myristoylated, possibly for membrane localization, and that CRK
may be phosphorylated by CDPK and/or cell-cycle kinases. Distinct homologues of
CRK and CDPK appear to be present and in both monocotyledonous and
dicotyledonous species, implying that both have conserved functions. This
research will use a variety of molecular and biochemical approaches to
characterize further the structure and function of these enzymes and to test the
hypothesis that CDPK and CRK are involved in transduction of intracellular
calcium signals. It will be determined whether CDPK and CRK are differentially
expressed in plant tissues and organs that respond to stimuli that evoke calcium
fluxes, and whether the levels and specific activities of CDPK and CRK respond
to changes in intracellular calcium levels. The significance of CRK sequence
features will be tested by determining whether they are conserved in Arabidopsis
CRK homologues and by direct biochemical characterization. This research will
examine whether CDPK and CRK are involved in intracellu lar calcium signaling,
and provide insights into how their roles may differ. %%% A variety of
environmental signals that influence plant growth, such as light, gravity, and
wind, cause transient calcium fluxes in plant cells. To understand how plants
respond appropriately to the different environmental stimuli that employ calcium
as a common second messenger, it is necessary to characterize the intracellular
calcium receptors, their functions, and their distribution in various plant
cells, organs, and tissues. This laboratory has cloned genes for two calcium-
dependent enzymes that are likely important in the signal transduction pathways
involving calcium. The goals of this project are to characterize these enzymes
further and study their function in plants. The results of this research will
increase our understanding of cellular calcium receptors and how plant cells
respond to changes in their environment. ***