* 9305769
* Conformational Disorder, Dynamics and Reactivity in         Hemeproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1993,05/31/1994
* Joel Friedman, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1994
* USD 93,750.00

Absorption of visible light by ligand bound ferrous hemeproteins such as
hemoglobin (Hb) and myoglobin (Mb) results in a near instantaneous (less than
10-13sec) rupture of the iron ligand bond. The photogenerated contact pair (heme
plus ligand) can decay either through reformation of the iron-ligand bond
(geminate recombination) or through a progressive increase in the iron ligand
separation distance. The objective of this project is to determine the role
conformational disorder plays in controlling or modulating geminate
recombination in Hb and Mb at ambient temperatures. The following experiments
are to be pursued: 1. A double pulse excitation experiment with sub picosecond
resolution designed to determine the time scale over which the protein solution
is effectively an inhomogeneous distribution of conformational substates. 2. A
time resolved (less than 1picosecond resolution) kinetic hole burning experiment
using Raman and absorption to characterize the spectra of fast and slow
recombining conformations. 3. An experiment narrow sub designed to follow in
real time the thermally driven dynamics of a population of conformational
substates. The narrow distribution is to be generated by using a weak 620nm
femtosecond excitation pulse. %%% A protein molecule can have any of a very
large number of slightly different micro conformations. At biological
temperatures, a given molecule undergoes rapid interconversion among these
different conformational substates. It is possible that reactivity of a given
protein is controlled by how frequently the protein assumes some highly reactive
conformational substate.