* 9305007
* Characterization of a MADS Box Gene Expressed During        Root Nodule Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Mary Dunn, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1998
* USD 350,000.00

9305007 Dunn Floral homeotic genes from Arabidopsis thaliana and Antirrhinum
majus have been shown to share considerable sequence similarity with
transcription factors from yeast (MCM1) and humans (SRF). all of these putative
transcription factors contain a highly conserved DNA binding domain called the
MADS box and are responsible for transducing environmental signals influencing
organ development. To address the possibility that a member of this class of
transcriptional regulators may be active in alfalfa root nodule development,
degenerate oligonucleotides were designed to conserved sequences flanking the
MADS box domain of the Arabidopsis thaliana ap3 homeotic gene. Preliminary data
suggests that alfalfa root nodules express a MADS box gene localized primarily
in the infected cells of the nodule. This factor is likely to play a role in
both receiving signals originating from the bacteria and in transmitting the
environmental cue to a cellular response. The first part of this project
characterizes the alfalfa MADS box gene and examines its expression in several
tissues. The second part of the project addresses questions about the function
of this gene. The alfalfa MADS box domain will be inserted in place of the
homologous region of the MCM1 deletion. The target genes of the alfalfa MADS box
protein will be investigated by examining its specific binding to nodule
specific plant promoters. The information produced from this study will be used
to further examine the interaction of the MADS box protein with both plant
promoters as well as bacterial factors required to bring about the desired
symbiotic response. ***