* 9305473
* Acetabularia Mutants That are Developmentally               Arrested or Abberant in the Timing of Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Dina Mandoli, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1997
* USD 290,000.00

9305473 Mandoli Dr.Mandoli's long term goal is to understand how developmental
age and/or size of an organism and environmental signals co-regulate initiation
of reproductive development. A genetic dissection of the initiation of
reproduction in Acetabularia acetabulum will provide unique insights into
development at the level of the single cell. Initiation of reproduction in A.
acetabulum, requires de novo protein synthesis, and is regulated at the
translational level by a) developmental age/size of the cell, b) blue light and
c) a putative cytosolic, nuclear encoded inhibitor. There are three specific
aims in this proposal: 1) To breed an isogeneic cell line. Isogeneic cells will
provide a homogeneous background for mutants. The cell line also will be
screened for increased fecundity and DNA content using four parameters which
correlate with these phenotypes; 2) To screen for two types of developmental
mutants; those which are developmentally arrested at specific points during
vegetative growth (da mutants) and those which initiate reproduction or 'cap'
prematurely (early mutants) which may be defective in, or null for, an
inhibitor. Mitotically active haploid nuclei will be mutagenized with EMS prior
to gametogenesis at a dose known to induce 50% kill of the subsequent
generation. Treatment of mitotically active haploid nuclei will propagate
populations of mutant gametes inside gametangia. Selfs and backcrosses of
gametes will recover recessives; 3) To characterize these mutants using nuclear
and cytoplasmic complementation in trans (cell grafting and nuclear
transplantation) and classical genetic techniques. Dr. Mandoli can rescue da
mutants in three ways. First, implanting a wild type nucleus will 'piggy-back'
the mutant nucleus through reproduction. Second, grafting a wild type cytoplasm
may complement the mutant in trans. Third, repetition of development post
amputation will determine if regrowth and normal development are the same.
Classical genetics of early and rescued da mutants will determine dominance,
numbers of alleles and complementation groups. ***