* 9305022
* A Novel Kdo-Rich Polysaccharide Required for R. meliloti-   Alfalfa Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Russell Carlson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1997
* USD 320,000.00

Rhizobium-legume symbiosis offers a model system for the examination of plant
microbe interaction and plant developmental regulation. Many bacterial
polysaccharides have been shown to be important factors in successful nodulation
of the host plant, particularly LPS and EPS. This project is aimed at furthering
an understanding of the infection and nodulation process. R. meliloti Rm1021
EPS- mutants are unable to infect the normal host plant; however strain AK631
(EPS-) produces a non-LPS, 3-deoxy-D-manno-2- octulosonic acid (Kdo) containing
polysaccharide that appears to substitute for the EPS in the nodulation of
alfalfa. The Kdo-rich polysaccharide is novel to rhizobia and is analogous to a
class of K-antigens from E. coli. A form of this polysaccharide has been found
in all R. meliloti strains examined to date. Preliminary data indicate that the
lpsZ gene and the fix-23 gene region are involved in the synthesis and
modification of this polysaccharide; mutation of these genes result in strains
that are unable to nodulate the host plant and are defective in the production
of this polysaccharide. In addition, the incorporation of the lpsZ gene into R.
meliloti Rm1021 EPS- mutants results in the modification of the Kdo
polysaccharide and the restoration of the Fix+ phenotype. The objectives of this
project are: 1) the structural characterization of the wild type polysaccharide
from R. meliloti AK631; 2) the characterization of the polysaccharides from
fix-23 and lpsZ mutants of R. meliloti AK 631; 3) the purification of bacterial
surface components for use in biological activity studies; and 4) the
determination of the biochemical effect of lpsZ in Rm 1021. Biological nitrogen
fixation offers a cost effective and environmentally sound alternative to
chemical fertilizer, where applicable. This research constitutes a significant
contribution to the broad base of scientific knowledge required for advancements
in the areas of plant-microbe interaction, plant developmental regulation, and
biological nitrogen fixation in agriculture.