* 9305873
* Algorithms and Software to Predict the Structure and SurfaceCharacteristics of Coiled-Coil Proteins
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Vincent Fischetti, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 02/28/1998
* USD 347,566.00

This project is a collaborative effort with scientists in two disciplines,
computer science and biology. Such a collaboration is essential for the success
of the development of computational tools and their later use in biological
research. The first crucial step, which is to understanding the biological
problem at hand in mathematical terms and to translate this into a mathematical
problem with a clear objective, provides the foundation of this proposal. In
this project, the resulting mathematical problems are tackled by the computer
scientist and their solutions are implemented and then used in biological
research. These computational tools are of interest in their own right and are
likely to find application outside the biological area. The focus of this work
is a study of alpha-helical coiled coil proteins. The streptococcal M-protein
serves as a model protein. For the majority of proteins, the secondary structure
of the protein, which is critical for its proper function, cannot simply be
resolved by examining the sequence of the amino acids that define the protein.
While x-ray crystallography is the only reliable means available today by which
to solve the structure of a protein molecule, it cannot always be used. The
alpha-helical structure is commonly found in proteins because of its ability to
stabilize proteins through short regions of helix-helix packing, referred to as
a coiled-coil interaction. The main goal of this project is to develop
computational tools that enable the comparison of surface characteristics of two
M proteins, and more generally of any two coiled-coil proteins. Algorithms are
devised to identify identical amino acid clusters on the outer surface of
coiled-coil proteins. Such clusters, which are not readily identified through
linear sequence homology, could predict the formulation of cross-reactive
epitopes between microbial and mammalian molecules . This is then verified by
the synthesis of the peptide region and a variety of serological tests.
Algorithms are also designed to identify and display tandem repeat blocks in
sequences. At the DNA level, these represent mutational `hot spots.` In
bacterial proteins the function of these repeats is not fully understood, but
perhaps they have evolved as a means of mutating orders of magnitude more
frequently than spontaneous mutation events. Finally, the sequence of M proteins
from strains of the same serotype, (M6), which were isolated over the last
century are compared.