* 9305904
* Mathematical Sciences: Rigorous Results on Statistical Mechanics of Interacting Particle Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Glen Swindle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1996
* USD 59,600.00

The proposed research is divided into two categories. The first pertains to the
hydrodynamic description of self-organizing systems. Self-organizing automata or
particle systems are open driven stochastic systems which evolve to a stationary
distribution characterized by the nontrivial scaling behavior (as a function of
system size) known as self-organized criticality. We have previously established
that many of these systems near equilibrium can be described in certain limits
by nonlinear diffusion equations, with a diffusion coefficient which has a
singularity at a critical value of the local density. Scaling arguments suggest
that the validity of this hydrodynamic description for the open (nonequilibrium)
self-organizing automata depends on the size of the fluctuations in the local
density in comparison to the rate at which the system converges to the critical
density as the system size diverges. The purpose of this research is to
rigorously investigate the validity of the singular diffusion description for
the open systems, with the goal being general conditions for when fluctuations
destroy the diffusion description. In the past several years there has been a
considerable amount of activity in a number of scientific communities regarding
self-organized criticality. Recent activity has focused on relatively simple
systems, which, when simulated on the computer show broad distributions which
change in a nontrivial way with the size of the system. The purpose of this
research is to look at mathematical models which describe these systems.