* 9305432
* Annual Meeting of the Society for Developmental Biology:    June 17-19, 1993; Providence, RI and Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1994
* David McClay, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 05/31/1994
* USD 5,000.00

Funds are awarded to support the travel of speakers invited to the 52nd annual
symposium of the Society for Developmental Biology (SDB), which will be held
June 17-19, 1993 at Brown University, Providence, RI and Woods Hole, Mass. This
year's symposium is organized by David McClay, current President of the SDB. The
title of the meeting will be "Annual Meeting of the Society for Developmental
Biology" with a broad range of topics selected for the six platform sessions.
Topics will include "Gamete Morphogenesis, Fertilization and Egg Activation",
"Cell Interactions", "Pattern Formation", "Transcriptional Regulation in
Development", "Axial Organization of the Embryo," and "New Approaches Being
Applied in Model Developmental Systems". Each session will include several
different animal and plant model systems in order to show the diverse mechanisms
for solving a variety of developmental problems. In addition, several
minisymposia are being planned on plant developmental genetics. In the past five
years the meeting has been of medium-size (300-400 registrants) with a single
platform session (about 30 speakers total) and 60-80 posters presented at two
sessions. This year, the last day of the meeting will be held at Woods Hole, a
short distance from Providence, RI. The symposium on the last day will celebrate
the 100th anniversary of the Woods Hole Embryology Course, a course that has had
a strong role in the training of developmental biologists in the United States
and around the world. The meeting is attended by graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and senior researchers.