* 9305860
* Metal-Insulator Transition and Superconductivity in         Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Peter Lindenfeld, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 175,000.00

9305860 Lindenfeld This research will investigate the transition from the
metallic, superconducting state to the insulating, magnetically ordered state in
layered cuprate oxide materials, the high-Tc systems. Thin films from a few
atom-layers to several unit cells in thickness will be grown and characterized
by a number of methods. The conducting properties will be changed by varying the
composition of the materials which are prepared by laser-ablation techniques.
The evolution of spin fluctuations and magnetic order will be investigated as
the superconductivity disappears with compositional changes. In collaboration
with colleagues, the materials will be characterized by x-ray and neutron
diffraction and electrical transport measurements. %%% This project deals with
the growth and characterization of high-Tc films. A major interest is how the
superconducting properties change or disappear as films of the materials are
grown atom by atom. The authors will use structural and electrical techniques to
characterize the thin film materials and investigate the interplay between
magnetic and superconducting properties of the materials. The results have
importance for fundamental aspects of superconductivity as well as technological
relevance in the context of preparing new superconducting layered structures.
***