* 9306797
* Mathematical Sciences: Existence and                        Blow-up of Solutions of Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Hans Lindblad, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Work to be done on this project concerns the time evolution of solutions to
partial differential equations, especially nonlinear wave equations. The basic
question which arises in these studies is the possibility of breakdown or blow-
up of solutions. For some equations one has global existence of solutions
whereas for others the solution will fail to exist after some finite time. One
focus of the work is in the study of low regularity solutions, that is,
solutions with low regularity data. The motivation is from equations in physics
in which energy is conserved. If local existence can be established, the
conserved energy will guarantee existence in the energy norm indefinitely.
Present results require that a large number of derivatives be small, leaving no
sense of what can go wrong. In addition to studying the period of existence of
solutions, work will also be done in trying to describe the behavior of
solutions at the onset of blow-up, perhaps one of the most challenging problems
facing researchers in this area today. Many important equations in physics can
be written as systems of nonlinear wave equations. These include classical field
theory in a fixed gauge, continuum mechanics and the classical equations of
Einstein, Yang Mills and equations of nonlinear elasticity. The mathematical
study of how the solutions to these systems progress with time centers on some
of the most important questions under investigation in mathematical analysis.