* 9306847
* CAA: Role of Extracellular Matrix Proteins in Craniofacial  Development in Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Kathleen Smith, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 12/31/1994
* USD 55,000.00

The pattern of expression of two extracellular matrix proteins, tenascin and
thrombospondin, is being examined during craniofacial development in mammals.
These proteins are thought to be significant in musculosketetal development, in
the process of ossification, in the establishment of connective tissue
patterning, as well as in a number of other developmental events. Two model
systems -- mice and the mini-opossum, Monodelphis domestica -- will be used to
test these hypotheses. Specific studies include: the use of PCR cloning
techniques to contruct a marsupial cDNA probe to tenascin; the use of these
probes to map the spatial and temporal expression of tenascin in cranial
skeletal tissues in the developing marsupial neonate; the comparison of the
pattern of expression in Monodelphis with that in mice; the collection of pilot
data for a future study involving the experimental manipulation of matrix gene
expression in vivo by application of exogenous growth factors; and the mapping
of expression of thrombospondin in time and space in mic embryos. This project
is significant for a number of reasons. First, it will allow an examination of
the processes involved in normal craniofacial development and may help
illuminate the significance of two molecules thought to be of general
significance in development. Second, it will make use of a new model for
mammalian development, Monodelphis domestica, in which most development occurs
after birth. Additionally, these studies will allow exploration of the molecular
basis of heterochronies observed in marsupial and placental mammal development.
Finally, in line with the goals of the Career Advancement Award, this project
will provide the opportunity to extend previous research into entirely new
directions.