* 9306482
* Role of Agrobacterium VirB Proteins in T-DNA Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Lois Banta, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 08/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

This is a study of the mechanism of bacterial infection of susceptible plants.
Integration of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA into the plant genome results
in characteristic pathology. Bacterial infection involves transfer of T-DNA and
some proteins from the bacterium to the plant. T-DNA and virE2 protein transfer
is mediated by proteins which are products of the bacterium virB operon. Studies
planned are aimed at: (1) characterizing the behavior of the virB proteins,
particularly the possible formation of membrane-associated aggregates. Cross-
linking approaches will be employed. The expression stoichiometries of the virB
proteins will be examined. The roles of individual virB proteins in the
transport process will be evaluated via mutations of individual virB genes. (2)
The transport mechanism itself will be examined through use of chemically
modified or mutagenically modified virE2 protein, which may interfere with the
transport mechanism. %%% Plant pathogens play an important role in the dynamics
of the planetary biomass. More specifically, these pathogens affect ornamental
as well as agriculturally important species. Therefore, beyond the intrinsic
interest in the assembly of a complex system to transfer genetic information
from the bacterium to the plant, the characterization of the infection process
may lead to development of selective intervention strategies with economic and
environmentally positive consequences. The studies planned utilize biochemical
and genetic approaches to characterize the mechanisms by which bacteria infect
susceptible plants.