* 9306473
* Mating Patterns and Inbreeding Depression in Dimorphic      Populations of Eichhornia paniculata (Pontederiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Joshua Kohn, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 140,000.00

9306473 Kohn Natural populations of the emergent-aquatic annual Eichhornia
paniculata often contain two readily identifiable genetic morphs whose rates of
self fertilization average 0.8 and 0.2, respectively. We will take advantage of
these populations to evaluate several recent theoretical predications of
critical importance for understanding the evolutionary dynamics of inbreeding
depression and mating system change. We will measure morph-specific levels of
self fertilization and male outcrossing success to obtain complete information
on morph-specific gamete transmission in these natural populations. This will
provide some of the first information on how a floral morphology that increases
the selfing rate affects other aspects of gamete transmission. We will evaluate
morph-specific inbreeding depression to see if genes that control the mating
system are in disequilibrium with fitness alleles responsible for inbreeding
depression. Such associations are expected under many recent theoretical models
and can alter expectations based on population mean levels of inbreeding
depression. However, associations between mating and fitness alleles have not as
yet been demonstrated in any natural population of hermaphroditic plants. We
will resample morph frequencies in populations first examined over 10 years ago
to gain information on the stability of morph ratios over time. Previous
measures of transmission in these populations provided an expectation of rapid
decline in the frequency of the morph with the lower selfing rate. If morph
frequencies have not changed, our measures of transmission and viability should
shed light on factors maintaining mating system polymorphism. If the morph with
the lower selfing rate is in decline, we will gain an unusually well-documented
example of evolution by natural selection over a human time scale. The results
will provide useful insights into factors promoting stability or instability of
mixed mating systems and t he dynamics of inbreeding depression in natural
populations.***