* 9306679
* Dynamic Spatial Patterns During Succession:  Resolving      Patterns and Mechanisms Using Grid-based Spatial Automata
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Edward Rykiel, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 300,318.00

This proposal will use grid-based statistical data to develop a model that
explores the integration of local plant interactions, community development, and
ecosystem processes. Analyses will involve data from a gridded plot on Mt. St.
Helens during recovery from the eruption, 1983-1993. Growth, survival, and
reproduction of individual plants of various species will be used to construct a
computer simulation model on a cellular grid that represents local plant
interactions. Manipulation of significant influencing factors will indicate the
degree to which these factors affect community development and ecosystem
processes, such as nitrogen fixation. These simulations will be compared to
observations of plants in the field during this award period as a means of model
evaluation. %%% Understanding the relative contributions of various
environmental factors to local plant population dynamics and interactions,
community development and ecosystem processes during recovery from disturbances
is major goal of ecological study. The linkage between population, community and
ecosystem processes has become a particularly important topic as the functional
importance of biodiversity, population interactions, and community development
to ecosystem function and recovery from disturbance has been recognized. This
research will link field observations and simulation modeling to develop an
ecological framework for integrating these processes and levels of organization.