* 9306225
* Dissertation Research:  Navajo Beliefs and Behaviors        Regarding Early Childhood Food Intake
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Cheryl Ritenbaugh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 10/31/1994
* USD 9,600.00

This project examines the beliefs and behavior of Navajo mothers regarding
control of early childhood food intake and its relationship to childhood
obesity. Subjects will include all mothers of children twelve to twenty-four
months of age, and the appropriate children, residing in Pinon, Arizona, a
small, rural community on the navajo Reservation. Also included for the study
will be other caretakers of the children, trading post managers and staff, and
health care workers in the community. Ethnographic methods, including semi-
structured interview and participant observation, and cognitive anthropological
methods, including free listing and pile sorting, will be utilized to elicit
information regarding food beliefs. Structured observation will be used to
determine the dietary intake of a subsample of the children. Anthropometric
measurements at various skinfolds sites will be obtained to determine which of
the children are obese. Mothers' food believes will be categorized and related
to the children's obesity status. Results will augment the anthropological
literature regarding cultural determinants of food behavior, and will be
potentially useful to nutrition educators working with the Navajo to prevent
childhood obesity and thereby the early onset of Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabests
Mellitus.