* 9306239
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Qualitative Analysis of       Ecological Models with Delays and Diffusions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 42,000.00

9306239 Kuang The investigator studies the global qualitative behavior of
solutions of some ecological models with delays or diffusions. The principal
themes of this work are the fundamental problems of finding various criteria for
the uniform persistence of these considered systems, the global stability of
steady states, the existence of periodic solutions and spatial patterns, and the
existence of chaotic behaviors. These topics indeed cover most aspects of the
so-called global qualitative analysis of nonlinear systems. In particular, the
investigator studies some mathematical models of populations dispersing among
patches in heterogeneous environments, where various kind of interactions are
considered. In addition to performing the traditional local stability or
bifurcation analysis, he considers global stability, bifurcation, and chaos
aspects of the nonlinear systems. Time delays and space variations constitute
integral components of most ecological, biological, physiological, chemical,
physical, economic and atmospheric processes. Almost all these real-life
processes are nonlinear in nature. They are normally too complicated to simulate
in a lab, or too difficult to understand from experimental work alone. In order
to better manage or control such processes, it is necessary to study them
mathematically. Most of the previous approaches to these applied mathematical
problems have been local (pretending the system behaves in a small region as if
it were linear rather than nonlinear) and thus do not paint the whole picture of
the real systems. This project tries to gain a full view of the real picture by
focusing on the nonlinear effects of the dynamics of the considered systems.
This work offers a better understanding of the dynamic interplay of the effects
of time delays and diffusions. In particular, the final results can be useful to
ecologists, engineers, and system scientists. ***