* 9306123
* Reproductive Cycling in Fundulus Heteroclitus
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Kelly Selman, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1996
* USD 210,000.00

9306123 Wallace Fundulus heteroclitus females ovulate and spawn in their natural
habitat with a semilunar periodicity coincident with spring tides for up to
eight months of the year; they also spawn with a semilunar periodicity under
constant, controlled laboratory conditions at any time during the year. Highly
elevated levels of circulating estradiol-17 Beta (E2)are associated with each
spawning episode. A biological clock for reproductive activity, and involving
cyclic E2-release by the ovary, thus appears to exist in this abundant and
experimentally convenient teleost. In order to appreciate the operant factors in
the reproductive cycling of F. heteroclitus, various aspects of reproductive
activity will be monitored by Dr. Wallace over several spawning episodes. These
include vitellogenin and gonadotropin levels in the bloodstream and biogenic
amine levels in the hypothalamus. If vitellogenin and gonadotropin levels are
found to fluctuate, corresponding mRNA levels will be measured in the liver and
pituitary, respectively. The manner by which gonadotropins regulate aromatase
activity in prematurational follicles (the source of elevated E2 levels) will
also be addressed together with the competence of follicles to respond to
relevant hormones at various times during the cycle. The effect of E2 on cyclic
spawning will be experimentally investigated by administering E2 at various
times during the spawning cycle. Other drugs will also be provided in order to
explore cause and effect relationships in the hypothalamic- pituitary-gonadal
axis. Finally, a series of observations will be made on egg hatching patterns
and locomotor activity. Semilunar patterns in such processes, if convincingly
demonstrated, would indicate that F. heteroclitus has a genetically determined,
biological clock that regulates its overall physiology. ***