* 9306499
* A Mechanistic and Spatial Analysis of Plant Competition in  Two Contrasting Grassland Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1998
* Linda Wallace, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 03/31/1998
* USD 87,875.00

9306499 Wallace The aim of this proposal is to provide new data on
individualistic competitive interactions among dominant grass species that do
versus do not have compensatory responses to being grazed by large ungulates. An
exixting model of plant growth and competition will be modifed to increase the
handling of spatial and temporal variablity for individualistic competitive
interactions. The data will be used to parameterize the model as well as
increase our mechanistic understanding of competitive interactions and plant
compensatory response to removal of aboveground biomass under competitive
circumstances. The question is an important one for the structuring of
grasslands. And few studies focus on actually documenting and then incorporating
differential plant response to herbivory into mechanistic, predictive models.
The proposed work builds on the expertise of productive PIs and the
collaboration is likely to continue to be a productive one. The experimental
approach proposed is carefully thoughtout and intensive. I like the intensive
physiological compenent, the data from which should complement and verify work
being done on other labs. For the experiment, I had one question which I did not
find addressed: What are the proposed extent, timing and persistence of the
clipping treatments proposed? Also, a quibble perhaps, it seems to me that the
experiment measures response of clipped vs unclipped plants to (potential)
resource limitation rather than directly measuring competition as claimed. For
the model, the one question I had was whether the rule, to distribute resources
in proportion to demand ba sed on root biomass, was really an appropriate rule
(even though I know that it is often the rule used)? It seems to me to build in
a couple pf assumptions that are probably not warranted, especially in this
study: that rate of uptake is proportional to root biomass and that it is equal
among compensating and noncompensating species. Overall, a very strong proposal
(though perhaps a somewhat disproportionaltely large investment, even on an
annual basis, especially since the offcampus overhead rate was allowed. ! F v v
7 Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 5 Courier New " h E+ e 8 K abstract for
Linda Wallace Deborah Johnson Deborah Johnson