* 9306418
* Transition from Host to Phage Metabolism After T4 Infection
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Burton Guttman, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 187,000.00

9306418 Kutter The bacteriophage T4 laboratory at The Evergreen State College
(Olympia, WA) is continuing studies on the transition from host to phage
metabolism (host takeover). The laboratory has focussed for many years on the
function of the phage T4 alc gene, which shifts transcription from cytosine-
containing bacterial DNA to T4 DNA containing 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. They have
now cloned alc gene, which was possible only in an expression vector designed
for very lethal genes. Experiments with purified Alc confirm that it interacts
with the host RNA polymerase (RNAP) and stops transcript elongation, and it can
cause release at specific, complex sites. They propose further studies on the
action of Alc. The Alc protein has an interesting basic domain whose role will
be studied by means of mutant analysis, partial proteolytic digestion, and
antibodies directed against specific domains. The laboratory has also been
completing the T4 genomic map and sequence integration, and they have been
studying the process of host takeover more globally, including sequencing a
12-kbp region of the t4 genome that includes many new genes that are probably
involved. They will clone and study the effects of some of these new genes, as
well as the previously identified genes controlling nuclear disruption and
internal proteins, and a region of the genome they have characterized that
controls stimulation of, and changes in lipid metabolism. They plan to
particularly focus on identifying T4 genes that stop host translation, using the
genomic sequence data they have assembled; they will study new T4-encoded
ribosome- binding proteins and identify other translation effects upon induction
of cloned new genes. They also will also look for T4 factors that modify host
factors, inactivate host messenger RNA , or release nascent host protein from
the ribosomes. %%% These studies are of general interest in modeling a wide
range of mechanisms viruses may use in subverting host cells to virus
multiplication and in analyzing lethal genes. A number of undergraduate students
will also have the opportunity to take part in a stimulating research problem.
***