* 9306490
* Peptides That Influence Aspects of Mosquito Diuresis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Timothy Hayes, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1995
* USD 30,000.00

9306490 Hayes This project represents basic research into how small hormonal and
neurotransmitter molecules called peptides are used as messengers between cells
and tissues. Dr. Hayes is attempting to discover how information is written on
the structure of these small molecules and read by the target tissues. What are
the rules of the peptide molecular language? This type of basic information has
potential for future application indirectly to the development of new
pharmaceuticals and to applications in agriculture. Utilizing mosquitoes as
subjects, he can economically obtain millions of insect subjects for his
experiments. Also, by using mosquito subjects, he can direct the results of the
research toward the development of a new generation of potential, specific
insecticides that have potential for not having harmful effects on humans,
beneficial insect, and the environment. Specifically, the project is designed to
isolate and determine the structure of peptides that effect a physiological
process critical to mosquito survival, water and salt elimination. The
structures of these naturally occurring peptides will allow synthetic versions
of the native peptides to be prepared for the generation of antibodies and for
receptor investigations. The antibodies will be used to locate sites of storage
and release of the peptides within the mosquito. This should help determine if
each peptide is a neurohormone, a neurotransmitter or an extraneuronal peptide.
Synthetic analogs of the native peptides will be designed to probe the
receptor(s) tissue location, molecular structure, and binding site surface. The
interaction between receptors and peptides are a critical and perhaps the most
important single form of intercellular communication that integrates a
collection of cells into an organism. ***