* 9306879
* Bioluminescence: Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical       Control in Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Therese Wilson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 204,000.00

The objective of this research is to understand the molecular and biochemical
mechanisms of bioluminescence in bacteria and dinoflagellates, including the
genes coding for the proteins involved and their evolutionary origins. In
dinoflagellates, the luciferin, a tetrapyrrole probably derived from
chlorophyll, is oxidized enzymatically to produce light. The mechanism of this
reaction, the enzymatic intermediates, and the identity of the emitter, will be
studied using proteins produced by recombinant techniques from cloned genes and
synthetic substrate(s). The structures, sequences and organization of these
genes will be determined, and their evolutionary origins will be investigated.
In bacteria, luciferase is a flavoprotein monooxygenase which catalyzes the
oxidation of aliphatic aldehydes to the corresponding acids. Luciferase-bound
intermediates along with accessory "emitter" proteins will be characterized
using photophysical and enzymological techniques to investigate the nature of
the primary excited state and how it is formed. Possible alternative functions
of luciferase, such as protection against cellular damage by oxygen radicals,
will also be studied using bacteria which grow in 100% oxygen and were isolated
from a human wound. %%% Although the emission of visible light by living
organisms is a rare, curiosity of nature, it is also a unique tool for exploring
unusual biological energetic processes. The objective of the research is to
understand the molecular and biochemical mechanisms of bioluminescence, and to
examine the control and evolutionary origin of the genes involved. We will
principally use simple marine unicellular organisms in this study; bacteria and
dinoflagellates. The bacteria emit blue-green light. These cells often live in
association with higher organisms in the gut tract or in specialized light
emitting organs. Dinoflagellates have a very different bioluminescence system
which seems to have evolved independently, and makes use of a substance related
to chlorophyll. The dinoflagellates are responsible for the blooms (called red
tides) in the ocean, where they produce potent neurotoxins which accumulate in
the shellfish that ingest them, thus making the shellfish poisonous for man. The
phosphorescence of the ocean seen at night is also due to dinoflagellate
bioluminescence. Our studies are learn about the biochemistry for this peculiar
light emission reaction.