* 9306296
* A Workshop to Explore the Feasibility, Protocols and Costs  of an "All-Taxa Biodiversity Inventory;" University of      Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; April 16-18, 1993
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Daniel Janzen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 100,053.00

This workshop will consider one of the ultimate issues of biodiversity research:
is an all-taxa biotic inventory at a single site feasible? If so, what are the,
strategies, protocols, resources and time required to carry it off? The 3-day
workshop at the Univ. of Pennsylvania will involve 42 scientists whose expertise
will encompass biotic sampling, survey and inventory, ecology, systematic
studies, curatorial matters and computerization/networking of the data for most
terrestrial organisms. The PI, a leader in biodiversity research and
conservation, followed up on a recent international biodiversity conference by
developing this workshop and attracting its participants. He will produce a
workshop document which could be the initial blueprint for planning such an all-
taxa survey. %%% This workshop is a first bold step toward tackling one of the
great issues in biodiversity research, management and conservation: is an
inventory of all species of organisms at one geographic site feasible? If so,
how can it be accomplished and what are the necessary resources? If successful,
the long-term effect of the workshop on the infrastructure of science will be
substantial and broad. Three immediate major benefits of the workshop will be:
bringing together of multidisciplinary workers; development of data management
techniques for taxonomic and ecological information; answers to principle
scientific questions concerning biodiversity. The potential benefits of an all-
species inventory would initially be to society in demonstrating that
sustainable use of biodiversity through discovery and use of genetic and other
resources is economically worthwhile.