* 9306600
* Symposium:  Craniofacial Adaptations of Faunivorous Mammals to be held December 27-30, 1993, in Los Angeles, California
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 5,493.00

9306600 Van Valkenbugh Support is requested for a one-day symposium entitled
Craniofacial Adaptations of Faunivorous Mammals to be held as part of the annual
meeting of the American Society of Zoologists, December 27-30, 1993 in Los
Angeles, California. Feeding adaptations and behavior are fundamental aspects of
mammalian evolution and ecology and have been well studied in both primates and
herbivorous hoofed mammals. In contrast, Faunivorous mammals (species that
consume vertebrate and invertebrate prey) have received comparatively little
attention. Yet, faunivores include a wide range of mammals, such as insectivores
(e.g. shrews), carnivores (e.g., cats), piscivores (e.g., fish-eating bats), and
omnivores (e.g., pigs). They range in size and shape from shrew with a mass of
less than two grams, to polar bears, which exceed 500 kilograms. In spite of
this diversity, faunivorous mammals are united by the necessities of capturing,
killing, and consuming prey. Anatomical specializations of the skull and teeth
for these activities are apparent at both macroscopic and microscopic levels and
include increased skeletal and dental strength, accentuated cutting blades on
the teeth, and load- bearing modifications of skull architecture. Over the past
ten years, research in cranial and dental structure has accelerated and
diversified, benefiting from the application of several new technologies such as
scanning electron microscopy and computed topography. It is now time to bring
together previously independent researchers for not the synthesis of work-to-
date and an appraisal of current and future research directions. ***