* 9306795
* Collaborative Research:  Relative Effects of Hostplant      Chemistry and Insect Predators on Herbivorous Insects and   their Hostplants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Nancy Stamp, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1997
* USD 106,910.00

9306795 Stamp The relative importance of hostplant chemistry and predation in
determining foraging patterns of insect herbivores and the degree to which these
factors interact are largely unknown. This project will include two series of
field experiments, with the expression of hostplant defensive chemistry (iridoid
glycosides and phenylpropanoid glycosides in Plantago lanceolata ) manipulated
by using cloned genotypes. the first set of experiments will assess the relative
effects of chemical variation in hostplant genotypes versus insect predators on
the foraging patterns, growth, defensive chemistry, fecundity and survivorship
of insect herbivores, plus evaluate the consequences for the hostplant genotypes
and insect predators. It uses hostplant genotypes that vary considerably in
their levels of defensive chemistry, four caterpillar species that differ in
their ability to handle iridoid glycosides and two different kinds of insect
predators (stinkbugs and wasps). A second series of experiments will focus on
the behavior, growth rate and survivorship of newly hatched specialist
caterpillars determine when they induce defensive chemistry in hostplants. %%%
Most work on plant herbivore relationship has focused either on hostplant
chemistry or on the role of natural enemies in isolation. The current project
examines the interactions of these factors. This is important because it
elucidates mechanisms that control potential pests of crop or forest plants as
well as processes that maintain biological diversity of these systems.