* 9306507
* RPG: Microbial Virulence Induction Enhancement by Plant CellWall Oligiosaccharides
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Ann L. Powell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1994
* USD 18,000.00

This is a research planning grant for women. To be able to understand functions
in pathogens and plants so that plant diseases can be controlled and cellular
mechanisms for signal recognition between organisms can be deciphered, we will
investigate enhancement of bacterial virulence functions by oligosaccharides.
This enhancement will serve as a model system supporting further pursuit of
virulence functions in fungi. Previous work has shown that plant cell walls
contain a polygalacturonase inhibitor protein (PGIP) that recognizes and
inhibits fungal polygalacturonases (PG) and that the association of PG and PGIP
results in reduced breakdown of pectin so that oligosaccharides three to twenty
units long are formed. These oligosaccharides have been shown to be inducers of
defense responses in the plant cells and in Agrobacteria similar
oligosaccharides have been suggested to be potent enhancers of virulence
induction by plant phenolics. This research assesses the inhibition of bacterial
PGs by pear and tomato PGIPs and determines the susceptibility to Agrobacteria
infection of transgenic tomato plants expressing elevated amounts of PGIP.
Furthermore, oligosaccharides optional for the enhancement of bacterialvirulence
gene expression will be identified. The results from the studies outlined in
this grant will provide the basis for the search in fungi for homologues to
bacterial genes responsible for the regulation of virulence induction and
enhancement. To be able to understand the signals that are exchanged between a
microbial pathogen and a plant cell during infection, we will analyze the effect
that sugar polymers have on the functions in a bacteria that allow it to infect
the plant cells. These sugar polymers are known to be formed when a protein in
the wall of the plant cell, PGIP, encounters an enzyme, PG, that fungi deploy in
order to reach the interior of the plant cell being infected. The sugar polymers
are known to trigger responses in plant cells that can slow the infection
process, but they also have been suggested to enhance the infection functions in
bacterial plant pathogens. Since little is known about the control of functions
that fungal plant pathogenes need in order to infect plants, we will first
describe the effects of the sugar polymers in the infection process by bacterial
pathogens and then look for similar functions in the more complex fungal
infections. We need to understand functions in both types of pathogens and in
the plants in order to exercise control over plant diseases caused by these
pathogens and in order to decipher basic mechanisms of communication between
organisms.