* 9306658
* Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Nonparametric           Methodology Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1993,06/30/1996
* David Scott, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1996
* USD 130,500.00

Nonparametric methodology is widely used in one and two dimensions, but not in
high dimensions. This research proposal focuses on the mid-range dimensions in
an attempt to foster a deeper understanding of the implications of the curse of
dimensionality. Particular emphasis will be given to multivariate regression and
density estimation problems, and closely related applications. Anecdotal
evidence suggests a gap exists between the apparent successes of nonparametric
methodology and the poor performance predicted by theory. We will examine new
points of view, especially related to adaptive estimation. Higher quality
estimation has often required use of negative kernels, but recent research and
shown that equivalent gains are possible in regions where the Hessian is
indefinite, often in the tails which dominate in higher dimensions. Other recent
work suggests that cross-validation algorithms which are considered of marginal
practical value in one dimension, improve dramatically in the multivariate case.
We have found the many bandwidth selection algorithms cluster into two cases,
and propose to characterize and investigate these classes. Dealing with medium
dimensional data gives rise to many problems in data visualization which we
propose to investigate. Multivariate visualization requires aids and guides such
as cognostics. We plan to extend our density estimation visualization
capabilities to regression surfaces as well as applications such as visual
clustering and discrimination. We propose to extend univariate ideas of mode
estimation and testing based on the mode tree and simulation to several
dimensions. Algorithmic development for multiprocessor and parallel
architectures will be briefly considered. Nonparametric methodology seems to
work well in the hands of experts, and this research is designed to not only aid
the expert but to facilitate the use of the methodology by a wider audience. The
proposer has recently completed a book on the topic of multivariate density and
regression estimation, and related applications, particularly focusing on
histograms and their logical extensions (Scott, 1992). Difficult theoretical
problems with practical consequences still abound. However, widespread
application reflects the general acceptance of nonparametric methodology. The
growth in the field of scientific visualization is fertile ground for these
exploratory procedures. This project attempts to capitalize on existing
investments in large data bases, by developing flexible techniques that attempt
to extract the maximum amount of information and structure hidden in the high
dimensional data.