* 9306978
* The Response of Freshwater Plankton Communities to Natural  Levels of Ultraviolet Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Craig Williamson, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1996
* USD 250,000.00

WPC4 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x v x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x
@ x X , , 0 FX @Courier 10cpi 2 V @ Z F ` ? x x x , v x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet
500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| x 2 2 This research will (1) characterize
natural fluxes of UV B in lakes, and (2) experimentally manipulate natural UV B
fluxes to resolve how plankton communities respond to UV B radiation. The
results of this research will 1) establish solid baseline data on the
attenuation of UV B radiation in freshwater lakes, 2) provide insights into the
sensitivity and response of plankton communities to UV B fluxes, and 3) provide
data on how future increases in UV B are likely to interact with other important
ecological variables such as nutrient limitation and predation. Natural fluxes
of ultraviolet radiation in the UV B range (280 320 nm) are known to be harmful
to a wide variety of plants and animals and are increasing globally due to
stratospheric ozone depletion. Organisms have already responded to current
levels of UV B with the production of photoprotective compounds, photorepair of
DNA, and behavioral avoidance. Although this response suggests that UV B is a
potent ecological force, little is known about the ecology of UV B at the
community or ecosystem levels, or even how far UV B penetrates freshwaters. %%%
The combination of intensive experimentation in a few lakes, and the sampling of
UV B and other limnological variables in a broad comparative study of numerous
lakes, will strengthen our understanding of the role of UV B in freshwater
ecosystems. ***