* 9306672
* Evolution of Organismal Design:  Functional Morphology of   Tetraodontiform Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/11/1999
* Peter Wainwright, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 01/11/1999
* USD 500,000.00

9306672 Wainwright This research will investigate the evolution of anatomical
and physiological design of the feeding mechanism in fishes of the order
Tetraodontiformes (puffer fishes, trigger fishes, and their relatives). The
primary goal of this work is to provide several specific tests of the general
hypothesis that features of design limit or direct subsequent evolutionary
changes. During feeding behavior, patterns of muscular contraction will be
documented by recording the electrical signals associated with muscle
contraction through fine-wire electrodes, and movements of the structural
components of the head will be assessed by comparing the ability of species to
alter muscle activation patterns and movements while feeding on prey that vary
in the challenges they present to the fish. Data collected from several species
will be used to examine the correlation between evolutionary duplication of jaw
closing muscles may enhance subsequent diversification and flexibility of
feeding behavior. Second, the effect of incorporating a major evolutionary
novelty into the head on the feeding system will be explored using the puffer
fish body-inflation mechanism as a model system. This research will contribute
to our understanding of how complex muscle-skeleton systems evolve. The work
will provide rare tests of the influence of specific features of functional
design on the subsequent evolution of those systems. In addition, this research
will broaden our base of comparative knowledge of the diverse feeding systems in
vertebrates. ***