* 9306314
* Cladistics of the Aleiodes Lineage of the Subfamily         Rogadinae (Hymenoptera:  Braconidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1997
* Scott Shaw, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 61,809.00

9306314 Shaw Parasitoid wasps of the genus Aleoides are among the most commonly
encountered rogadine Braconidae (Insecta: Hymenoptera), particularly in
temperate parts of the Holarctic region. These wasps are remarkable in that the
host caterpillar remains mummified, thus naturally preserved for study. Since a
wide variety of caterpillars are attacked, the tribe is a particularly promising
study group for analysis of patterns of host utilization by parasitoid wasps.
The purpose of this research is to complete a cladistic analysis of world
species of Aleoides , which can be used to interpret patterns of host
utilization by these wasps. The requested funds will be used to support a
graduate student who will assist the PI with specimen preparation, handling,
data gathering, data entry, and scanning electron microscopy. Additional funds
are requested for scanning electron microscope (SEM) studies and supplies. This
research will result in a phylogenetic classification, which will provide the
framework for an examination of patterns of host utilization. It additionally
will render the Rogadini more accessible to continued research in parasitoid
ecology, behavior, physiology and biological control. %%% This project will
examine the relationships of species in a large genus of wasps that are
parasitic as immatures, feeding on a variety of caterpillars many of which are
pests of forests and crops. The study should result in a sound, modern
classification of these beneficial wasps. Such a classification will be of use
for further studies in the behavior, ecology, and host utilization of these
wasps and should aid applied efforts to use the se wasps as biological control
agents of various pests, thereby diminishing use of noxious chemicals for insect
control. ***