* 9306981
* Ecological Effects of Global Change:  Tree-Insect           Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Richard Lindroth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John M. Briggs
* 12/31/1998
* USD 299,431.00

9306981 Lindroth Increasing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 and attendant
climate change are expected to have significant impacts on forest ecosystems.
You understanding of how these changes will affect ecological interactions,
especially those between trees and tree-feeding insects, is at best rudimentary.
Elevated CO2 can markedly alter the foliar chemistry of deciduous trees,
including reductions in nitrogen and increases in carbohydrates and carbon-based
secondary metabolites. These changes alter the performance of leaf-feeding
Lepidoptera. CO2 interacts with other environmental factories (nutrient
availability, defoliation) and possibly with plant genotype affect leaf
chemistry and insect performance. This research investigates the direct and
interactive effects of elevated CO2, resource availability and plant genotype on
tree-herbivore-parasitoid interacations. The experimental system includes
quaking aspen, red oak and sugar maple (which exhibit a range of inherent growth
rates and shade tolorances), two leaf-feeding insects (gypsy moth and forest
tent caterpillar) and a gypsy moth larval parasitioid (Cotesia melanoscelus).
Carbon-nutrient balance theory provides a framework for development of three
major goal associate hypotheses. These goals are to determine effects of
elevated CO2 and 1) drought stress, 2) light availability, and 3) aspen genotype
on tree chemical composition, and consequences for performance of insect
herbivores and the parasitoid C. melanoscelus. %%% Numerous researchers and
research agencies have identified studies on interactions of plants and
herbivores as pivotal in understanding the ecological consequences of global
change. This research will help address that need. Special features of this
research include an emphasis on interactive effects of CO2 and environmental
system, and use of tree and insect species that are ecologically and
economically important components of North American deciduous forests.