* 9306607
* Chromatin Diminution, Development, and Genome               Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Grace Wyngaard, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 54,258.00

Large-scale genomic rearrangements including the loss of significant amounts of
DNA are known to occur during the development of the organism in several groups
of animals and some plants, but the mechanisms for these changes and the
functions served are not known. Dr. Wyngaard in a career advancement award will
be learning new DNA-based technologies to explore the pattern and process of
chromatin diminution and genomic rearrangement in a group of freshwater copepods
(planktonic crustaceans) where these phenomena are well known. Probes for
particular classes of DNA will be used to test whether DNA excisions involve
specialized groups of genes and whether the sequence of losses has functional
effects in the development of the organism. %%% Chromosome rearrangements and
loss of significant amounts of DNA, the genetic material, characterize groups of
ciliated protozoa, crustacean copepods, and nematodes during the development of
individual organisms. Dr. Wyngaard in a career advancement award is applying
powerful new molecular methods to the study of these phenomena, in particular to
determine whether classes of genes are excised during development and whether
the sequence of losses has functional effects in growth and maturation. The work
will advance understanding of molecular genetics and evolution in animals.