* 9306900
* Structure and Chemistry of Gas Phase Atomic Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Martin Jarrold, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/1997
* USD 457,100.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. M. Jarrold of Northwestern University will study the structure and
chemistry of gas phase atomic clusters. Geometric structures, structural
isomers, and structural transitions will be determined with an improved ion-
chromatography technique. Additionally, information will be obtained on
previously inaccessible features such as cluster annealing and the temperature
at which clusters isomerize and undergo a phase transition. Thermal desorption
measurements on clusters will be used to unravel the chemistry that occurs on
the nano-surfaces of atomic clusters, and to determine accurate dissociation
energies and ligand binding energies. Specific cluster systems to be studied
will include large fullerene-type carbon clusters composed of more than 100
carbon atoms and semiconductor clusters. %%% Clusters of atoms (and molecules)
constitute a form of aggregated matter that bridges the traditional conceptual
boundary between the condensed (solid or liquid) and gaseous states of
aggregation. Because the physical and chemical properties of clusters differ
from those of the condensed or gaseous phases of the concerned material, the
study of cluster properties is of fundamental interest. In addition to the
exploration of cluster properties for their intrinsic interest, there is strong
coupling to the technological applications of clusters. Fullerenes, or
buckyballs, are clusters in which the constituent atoms arrange themselves to
form three dimensional geodesic structures. The appellation fullerene (or
buckyball) is given to this type of cluster in recognition of Buckminster Fuller
who is known for his designs of geodesic domes. Fullerenes are now recognized to
constitute a new, third form of carbon in addition to the well known forms
graphite and diamond. Their physical and chemical properties are intensively
investigated to increase our knowledge about them and to exploit it for
technological applications.