* 9306971
* RPG: Transgenic Mice as Metabolic Models for Studying       Growth Hormone Action
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Mary McGrane, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9306971 McGrane This research planning grant project uses transgenic mice to
investigate the molecular mechanism of growth hormone (GH) action at the nuclear
level. The mice are transgenic for a chimeric phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK)/bovine GH gene. These mice exhibit symptoms of altered glucose
metabolism, manifest primarily as insulin resistance. We are seeking to explain
this observation by characterizing the key genes involved in carbohydrate
metabolism which are regulated by GH. During the research planning phase of this
investigation we will measure the GH-regulated expression of "early" response
genes, c-fos and c-jun. It is postulated that the altered expression of these
transcription factors will affect a second stage of expression, involving genes
important in carbohydrate metabolism. In order to measure the "early" response
in transgenic mice with chronically elevated blood GH, we will perform partial
hepatectomies and measure c-fos and c- jun expression in the regenerating liver.
Information from these in vivo studies will be confirmed by experiments
involving GH- treatment of primary hepatocytes from transgenic mice. It is
anticipated that these feasibility studies will allow us to measure GH-induced
early molecular responses in the whole animal. This will provide basic
information of the mechanism of GH action, which at the present time remains
undefined. We are using a unique animal model to study the way growth hormone
(GH) affects glucose metabolism in the whole animal. In order to do this, we
have introduced a foreign GH gene into mice. These mice have significantly
elevated levels of GH in the blood and we can measure the effect of this
overproduction. In this project, we are looking at GH regluation of gene
expression. The genes which we are focusing uon are those which code for
proteins important in the processing of glucose in the liver. For example, GH
may have biological effects in the nucleus of lever cell s and "turn on" or
"turn off" the transcription of given genes. This may alter metabolic pathways
which are involved in utilizing glucose for energy or storage in the liver. At
the present time, the mechanism of GH action is poorly understood. These studies
should provide basic information on the mechanism of GH action so that we can
begin to understand the way this hormone works. ***