* 9306676
* Regulation of Streptomyces antibiotics by mia and abs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Wendy Champness, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1995
* USD 50,000.00

This career advancement award provides partial support for Dr. Champness during
a sabbatical leave at the John Innes Institute in Norwich, United Kingdom.
Streptomycetes are well-known for their capacity to synthesize a vast repertoire
of secondary metabolites (antibiotics). Besides their commercial importance, the
Streptomyces are interesting for their complex developmental cycle. In the
course of this life cycle, antibiotic synthesis is developmentally regulated.
The objective of the research in this proposal is to define aspects of the
global genetic regulation of Streptomyces coelicolor antibiotic synthesis. The
research planned is based on a set of genes, recently discovered in Dr.
Champness laboratory, which regulate the expression of antibiotic genes. The
major goal is investigation of the mechanism by which these genes globally
regulate antibiotic synthesis. %%% This molecular analysis promises to
contribute not only to our understanding of microbial developmental gene
regulation, but also to biotechnology. Understanding of S. coelicolor regulation
is highly likely to explain much of antibiotic regulation in other
Streptomycetes and Actinomycetes, and thus increase the potential for rational
manipulation of production of commercially important metabolites including the
many new metabolites that are continuously being discovered.