* 9306354
* Experimental and Theoretical Analysis of the Regulation of Redscale by the Parasitoid Aphytis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Roger Nisbet, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The investigators propose to continue an experimental and theoretical study of
the interaction between redscale, an insect pest of citrus, and Aphytis, an
insect parasite that has been introduced and keeps redscale under economically
satisfactory control in many areas in the world. The population abundance of
redscale is not only kept far below the levels at which it is a pest, the
populations are also remarkably stable. The central hypothesis of the proposed
research is that the parasite achieves these ends through the flexible responses
exhibited by Aphytis individuals as they encounter scale insects. These
individual responses, in turn, lead to changes in the scale and parasite
populations, and hence in the future death rate imposed by the parasite. This
study is aimed at: analyzing the factors that determine these decisions,
determining their consequences for population dynamics by incorporating the
description into mathematical models, and testing by field experiment whether
the models in fact have correctly described the underlying processes. %%% This
research should produce rarely-obtained insight into the processes by which
field populations are regulated, and especially into the role of individual
parasite behavior in achieving this end. It will add to a general theory of
parasite-host and predator-prey dynamics for systems in which the dynamics are
more or less continuous throughout the year and there are overlapping
generations. Most particularly, it represents one of the few attempts to test
detailed hypotheses about the mechanisms underlying population dynamics of a
particular system in the field. The research should also provide insight that
will be useful in solving insect pest problems in the future.