* 9306704
* Control of Segmental Identity by Drosophila Homeoproteins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Juan Botas, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

9306704 Botas One of the least understood problems in Drosophila developmental
genetics is the specification of segmental identity by homeotic selector genes.
What are the functions of target genes of homeoproteins? What are the specific
control elements through which homeoproteins exert their identity functions?
What are the molecular bases for the phenomena of phenotypic suppression? By
addressing these questions, this work will provide insight into how homeotic
selector genes control morphogenesis. decapentaplegic (dpp) is under homeotic
control. dpp expression in parasegment 7 of the embryonic visceral mesoderm (vm)
requires normal function of Ultrabithorax (Ubx); in addition, ectopic expression
of Ubx leads to ectopic expression of dpp. Ubx protein (UBX) binds to the dpp
site in polytene chromosomes. A 600 base pare dpp enhancer (vm-en), identified
by immunoprecipitation with purified UBX, confers regulation by Ubx in the vm.
Two adjacent UBX binding sites in vm- en have been defined by DNAse I
footprinting. Sequences in vm-en required for enhancer function will be defined
by deletion analysis. Site directed mutagenesis will be carried out to
determine: 1) the function of UBX binding sites in vivo and 2) whether UBX
regulates dpp directly. Lack of function mutations in either Ubx or dpp disrupt
midgut morphogenesis by causing the lack of the second midgut constriction. A
vm-en dpp transgene able to rescue this mutant dpp phenotype has been
constructed. This transgene will be used to investigate directly the role of
specific vm-en sequences, including the UBX binding sites, in midgut
morphogenesis. abdominal-A (abd-A) completely represses dpp in parasegment 8 of
the vm. This repression is also conferred by vm-en but is not a consequence of
abd-A repressing Ubx. Hence, the vm-en is an ideal tool to investigate a general
phenomena of epistasis among homeotic proteins known as phenotypic suppression.
A 450- base pair dpp embryonic ectoderm enhancer (ee-en) has also been
identified by immunoprecipitation with UBX and the possible function of dpp in
PNS development and the roles of ee-en and its homeodomain binding sites will be
studied. The investigation of the control of segment-specific morphogenesis by
Drosophila homeoproteins is likely to be of general interest because of the
evolutionary conservation of homeotic/Hox genes from Drosophila to humans. The
control of segment specific functions of dpp by homeotic genes is particularly
relevant because many proteins of the TGF-beta family have been implicated in a
variety of essential developmental functions in vertebrates. ***