* 9306533
* Phylogenetic Relationships of the Ranunculidae and Basal    Hamamelidae:  Implications for the Early Evolution of       Non-magnoliid Dicotyledons
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Sara Hoot, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 124,645.00

9306533 Hoot The earliest lineages of flowering plants are known only as
fragmentary fossils from Cretaceous strata, against which we can compare today's
living descendants in order to reconstruct the likely course of evolution of
angiosperms. With living plants, systematists analyze and compare morphological
features of flowers, fruits, leaves, stems, and roots in order to build
hypotheses about the likely direction of change, character by character, and
then search for consistency in patterns of change across these and other sources
of evidence (pollen, chromosome composition, secondary plant compounds). Modern
methods of DNA analysis bring new data to bear on the problem, and Dr. Sara Hoot
at the Field Museum of Natural History is analyzing three plant genes in groups
of flowering plants hypothesized to be early angiosperms. Two of these are
chloroplast genes and one is nuclear, thereby providing an internal control on
patterns of phylogenetic divergence between the two plant cell genomes;
sequences for the chloroplast atp B gene will be a novel and potentially
powerful source of data. %%% New DNA sequence data will be obtained from
numerous species of Ranunculidae and basal Hamamelidae, angiosperms thought to
be among the earliest dicot lineages of the flowering plants. Patterns of
phylogenetic divergence will be analyzed from the molecular data and compared
with current views based on morphological features of extant and fossil plants.
Areas of agreement between the two sources of evidence will allow study of the
evolution of floral form in early angiosperms; areas of disagreement will
highlight weaknesses in our understanding of rates of gene evolution or of
homology of anatomical characters.