* 9306597
* Gibberellin Biosynthesis in Maize-Chemistry, Biochemistry   and Genetics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Bernard Phinney, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 08/31/1997
* USD 285,000.00

WPC 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x =V x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ Canon LBP-8III (Additional)
CALB8IAD.PRS x @ 0J zX @ #| x 2 % B X g F ` Courier 10cpi Courier Footnote 16cpi
. ? x x x , =V x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ + H H H , S , H 6 X @ ; @ t 7 } 3 J4 s @ u $ u $
< t 7 } 3 O4 K ^_ZY X P C~ } X C~ YX P C~ X PSQRVW 8 >W u a c e g i i = : W _^ZY
X 9306597 ` ` Phinney Through the pioneering use of single gene mutants, the PI
has defined most of the steps in the pathway for gibberellins ? biosynthesis in
maize vegetative shoots. We have shown that GA 1 is the major gibberellin
controlling stem elongation in maize and that geranylgeranylpyrophosphate (GGPP)
is metabolized to ? x copalylpyrophosphate (CPP0, ent kaurene, GA 12 , and G 1
via the early 13 hydroxylation branch pathway. This proposal describes metabolic
experiments that will establish five remaining steps in this branch pathway and
locate the steps blocked by our d2 , d3 , and anl mutants. In addition,
metabolic studies with five members of a ? ` second branch pathway from GA 12
(the early non 3,13 hydroxylation pathway) will assess the importance of this
pathway in the control of GA dependent growth in maize. The results from the
proposed metabolic studies will provide a detailed description of the
gibberellin biosynthetic pathways for maize shoots and will provide a model for
studies with other plants. A search for additional GA (dwarf) mutants will be
continued: these mutants are being generated by transposon tagging using the
maize transposable element Ac. The location of the genetic blocks for the new
mutants will be determined form bioassays, qualitative analysis of endogenous
givverellins, and metabolic studies. An exciting and novel aspect of this
proposal comes from the availability of transposon tagged dwarf mutants. The
approach provides a convenient method for cloning specific genes for GA
biosynthesis. These clones will be used in conjunction with conventional methods
to isolate the enzymes that control specific steps in the biosynthetic pathway.
%%% The objective of the research is to understand shoot elongation controlled
by the class of plant hormones, the gibberellins (GAs). The strategy is to (i)
identify the genes and the gene products for these steps in the pathway, and
(iii) analyze the enzymes controlling these steps, and thereby provide
information for the future manipulation of plant growth. ***