* 9306735
* Mitochondrial mRNA Processing in Trypanosoma Brucei
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Donna Koslowsky, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

RNA processing is known to control key steps in the growth and differentiation
of organisms. In mammals and yeasts, regulation of alternative mRNA 3' end
processing can generate structurally transcripts that produce different
polypeptide isoforms. Polyadenylation appears to be a determinant of mRNA
stability and specific changes in poly(A) tail length have been correlated with
translational efficiency. In T.brucei mitochondria, transcript levels,
polyadenylation and RNA editing are all differentially regulated, indicating the
important role RNA processing plays in the biogenesis of this organelle.
However, very little is known about the mechanisms which control these processes
or how they interact in the ultimate regulation of gene expression. With the
development of a system to investigate precursor and cleavage, the dissection of
these mechanisms and the understanding of how RNA processing can regulate
mitochondrial biogenesis can be greatly expanded. %%% Kinetoplasted protozoa
have provided amazingly fertile ground for the study of novel molecular
phenomena such as trans-splicing, bent DNA and de novo circular gene
amplifications. Probably the most surprising discovery, however, is the
phenomena of RNA editing which occurs in the mitochondria of these organisms. If
as has been suggested, RNA editing reflects an old mechanism and is a direct
descendent of RNA replication, understanding how this system interacts with
other RNA processing machineries in its regulation may give us a much broader
understanding of basic genetic regulatory processes.