* 9306368
* LTREB:  Long-term Dynamics of Moose Populations, Community  Structure, and Ecosystem Properties on Isle Royale
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1998
* John Pastor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this project is to determine the long-term dynamics of how
moose affect plant species distribution, ecosystems, and landscapes at several
different spatial and temporal scales. This will allow integration individual
behavior with population and ecosystem ecology. The previous work has
demonstrated that selective browsing by moose on hardwoods increases dominance
of spruce, which in turn depresses soil nitrogen availability because of poor
litter quality. It has also been found that these effects are distributed non-
randomly across the landscape, and derive from the effects of browsing on plant
competition, seed rain and seed bank dynamics. Through an explicitly spatial
simulation model of a foraging moose it has been shown that: 1) browsing by
individual moose imposes structure on initially random landscapes; 2) that
structure as well as the energetic status of the moose depends greatly on the
foraging strategy used (e.g. Markovian foraging vs. foraging according to the
marginal value theorem): and 3) the foraging strategy affects the energetic
status of the moose. Three years of study have suggested that episodic, cyclic,
and transitional processes determine the sequence of how ecosystems change in
response to browsing and how foraging decisions are subsequently altered. These
processes occur at very different time scales along a continuum from short-term
to long-term. Such processes, ranging from short to long-term, include
revisitation of browsed plants by moose, cyclic patterns of seed rain depending
on mast years, recruitment and mortality of plants determining the sequence of
invasion of browsed patches by unbrowsed plants, and changes in soil N
availability resulting from manuring and changes in litterfall. The sequences of
short-term events partially determine long-term trajectories. Conversely, long-
term trends may be in opposite directions from that of some local short-term
events. It is crucial that short-term results be placed in the context of long-
term trends. %%% Research of this nature is fundamental to the better
understanding of complex ecological systems. Such knowledge, as it is gained, is
almost immediately applicable to the management of living resources; more for
sustainable hunting, timber resources, and water quality as well.