* 9306684
* Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Investigations of             Low-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1999
* Charles Lieber, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1999
* USD 736,983.00

9306684 Lieber The relationship between local atomic structure, microstructure,
electronic states and physical properties in complex low- dimensional solids
will be investigated with an emphasis on high- temperature copper oxide
superconductors and transition metal chalcogenide conductors. Detailed physical
measurements of the structure, electronic states and transport properties will
be made using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and other techniques.
Measurements will be made as a function of systematic variations in composition
and processing to develop an understanding of fundamental material properties
and how these properties can be rationally changed. Investigations of the copper
oxide superconductors will focus on two general areas. First, the structural and
electronic effects of metal-substitution and oxygen doping in BiSrCaCuO single
crystals will be characterized at the atomic to nanometer scale using STM and
scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and on a macroscopic scale using
diffraction and transport measurements. These studies will provide data needed
to eleucidate the relationship between atomic structure, microstructure,
electronic states, and the observable parameters such as Tc and the critical
current density. Secondly, the low- energy excitations in the superconducting
state of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 single crystals will be characterized using high-
resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and STS. HREELS and STS
will be used to characterize the magnitude of the energy gap as a function of
temperature and sample Tc in oxygen doped BiSrCaCuO single crystals. These
HREELS and STS investigations will provide new data essential for probing the
mechanism of superconductivity. In addition, STM and STS also will be used to
characterize the local atomic structure and electronic states in metal
dichalcogenide materials. Results from these studies will address systematically
the problem of pining and disorder in two- dimensional mate rials. Overall,
these investigations will provide general insights into the relationship between
atomic level properties and macroscopic phenomena, and will develop further STM
and STS for probing complex materials problems. ***