* 9306988
* Development of Parent-Offspring Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Anne Clark, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 106,936.00

9306988 Clark In many species of birds and some mammals, parents raise families
of young that differ in age, size and sex. When providing food, parents face the
problem of how to distribute it among these young. The young of many birds must
signal their hunger by begging behavior. A number of very general theories
predict how parents should allocate care and how much effort offspring should
make to get it. However, there are few studies of exactly how parents might
discriminate between individual young to provide for their particular needs and,
further, how younger or smaller siblings compete successfully for care. This
study will address these questions with field experiments and observations of
red-winged blackbirds, a species that has not only age differences within broods
but also sex differences in growth rate. The behavioral differences among
siblings due to age and sex will be documented in controlled tests of those
motor and visual abilities that would allow them to beg effectively from their
parents. These tests will allow Dr. Clark to identify critical periods when the
differences in competitive abilities between older and younger siblings are
greatest. Field experiments will be used to test parents' ability to recognize
and give appropriate care to young of different developmental stages. Both
developmental testing and experiments will be used to assess whether or not
younger siblings can accelerate the development of some abilities such as
vision, a flexibility that might help them compete with their older siblings.
This study will contribute to our understanding of parent-offspring interactions
in several ways. It will be the first to investigate exactly how a helpless
nestling bird's size, age, and sex compared to its siblings affect its
interactions with its parents. It will thus help to provide a needed empirical
base for theoretical explanations of parent and offspring behavior in
vertebrates. Secondly, this study may extend our animal mo dels for family-level
interactions, a current research focus in human psychology. The central question
addressed in this area is how the presence and identity of siblings alters the
family environment and changes the interactions between a parent and each
developing offspring. Altricial bird broods, unlike same-age litters of
altricial mammals, make excellent analogs of the age-staggered human family,
albeit on a much shorter time scale. Finally, the study of visual development
utilizes an unusual camera technique used for studying myopia in human infants.
As a first study of visual accommodation in passerine (perching) birds, the data
on nestling blackbirds will add to our understanding of the development of
visual accommodation and its function in vertebrates, including humans.