* 9306842
* Consequences of Larval Interactions to Mayfly Survival,     Fecundity and Population Growth
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Barbara Peckarsky, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1997
* USD 275,162.00

9306842 Peckarsky The objectives of the proposed research are to (1) determine
how much of the death rate of the stream-dwelling larval mayfly, Baetis
bicaudatus, is due to stonefly and trout predation, and to parasitism by
nematode worms, (2) measure the consequences of reduced feeding by mayflies
while avoiding competitors, predatory stoneflies and trout in terms of female
egg production and size-related male mating success, and (3) using methods to
estimate mayfly population growth, determine the relative impacts of predators,
parasites and competitors on the mayflys' ability to sustain populations over
the long term. Meathods proposed to meet those objectives include: (a)
experiments conducted in small (25cm) and large (1.5m) enclosures to measure the
effects of stonefly and trout predation on mayfly death rate, (b) behavioral
experiments to determine the risk of trout predation to mayflies that have
entered the water column to escape stonefly predation, (c) dissections of mayfly
larvae and adults to estimate stages and sexes of infection, sterilization and
death cause by nematode worms, and (d) experiments conducted in small and large
enclosures to measure the effects of predator on mayfly growth rates, sizes of
adults and egg production, (e) field experiments will determine whether larger
male mayflies have greater mating success, and (f) sizes and egg production and
mayflies that completed their larval stage in sites or streams with different
densities of predators competitors. These data will illustrate whether any
effects of predator avoidance observed at a smaller scale (in enclosures) can be
detected a t larger scales in natural streams. Data from these experiments will
be used to compare mayfly population growth in the face of stonefly and trout
predators, parasites and competitors. Filed estimates of mayfly population
growth will be obtained as a "reality check" on experimentally derived
population growth rates. The key contribution of this research is a unique
investigation of connections between factors affecting larval morality and
behavior and adult reproductive success. No previous studies have compared the
consequences of a suite of selection pressures such as predation, parasitism and
competition on one stage of a natural population, and interpreted these impacts
on population growth in context of the complete life cycle. $ ! ! !8 ! F ( Times
New Roman Symbol & Arial * " h k k 7 Crystal Blackshear Crystal Blackshear