* 9306947
* Macroscopic Quantum Phenomena in Magnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Anupam Garg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 95,000.00

The quantum mechanical tunneling of macroscopic degrees of freedom will be
studied in magnetic systems, such as the total moment in ferromagnetic and the
Neel vector in antiferromagnetic particles of size approx. 100 Angstroms. If
such exists, it would significantly enlarge the known range of applicability of
the superposition principle. Special emphasis will be placed upon studying
dissipation due to environmental degrees of freedom with a view to guiding and
understanding experiments. Examples of dissipative agents are nuclear spins,
eddy currents and spin waves. Certain quantum phenomena resulting from the
topological phase in the spin path integral will also be studied. Magnetic
domain wall motion will also be studied from a tunneling perspective. A
combination of path integral and perturbative methods will be employed involving
both numerical and analytical work. %%% This proposal involves the theoretical
study of quantum mechanics applied to systems with a large number of degrees of
freedom. The question is whether systems whose state is determined by a
superposition of macroscopically distinct states (eg. a magnetic moment and its
orientation) can behave in a similar way to those with few degrees of freedom -
that is exhibit tunneling across classically forbidden barriers or exhibit
resonance. Good candidates for these phenomena are small magnetic particles,
but, to date, experiments aiming at proof of existence have been controversial.
This work aims to guide and critique experiment and to study those mechanisms
(energy loss) which could mask the effect. The work has value because of its
possible relevance to magnetic recording media where such effects would be
undesirable.