* 9306818
* Genetic and Environmental Influences on Behavioral          Flexibilty in an Insect
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1997
* Scott Carroll, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 230,500.00

9306818 Dingle Because most behavioral variation among individuals probably
results from interactions between genes and environments, it is advantageous to
study the behavior of different genotypes across a range of environmental
conditions. Using this perspective, Drs. Dingle and Carroll will compare social,
quantitative genetic, and populational influences on the tactical decisions of
soapberry bugs from two different environments. Working with an insect species
permits raising many generations in a short period of time, and so increases the
chances of obtaining reliable results. Drs. Dingle and Carroll will
experimentally manipulate the environments that these animals experience to
reveal how genes and environment interact to create behavioral differences
between populations and among individuals. The approach taken here exemplifies a
new model paradigm for the study of behavioral evolution. Studies of animal
behavior have previously examined ecological and social causes of individual
differences, but hardly any have attempted to analyze how genes and the
environment (nature and nurture) influence behavior together. Human psychology
is an exception to this generalization: By combining pedigree information with
environmental analyses, the study of human behavior has advanced on levels
little explored for other animals. Because so many individuals can be raised so
quickly, and because they have been found to have as much behavioral variation
as do other kinds of animals, insects are excellent model organisms for this
kind of study.