* 9306913
* Phylogenetic Relationships Among the Cucurbitaceae and      Allied Families
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Loren Rieseberg, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1997
* USD 160,000.00

9306913 Swensen The Cucurbitaceae and Begoniaceae are two plant families whose
members exhibit very distinctive morphological features, yet their phylogenetic
relationships to each other and to related groups remain unclear. The cucurbit
family is widely appreciated for its diversity of fruit structures (compare
pumpkin, luffa, cucumber, chayote) whereas the begonias show a diversity of
floral structures and leaf forms. Research by Drs. Swensen and Rieseberg is
designed to use DNA gene sequences from the chloroplast and nuclear genomes for
comparing members of these two families and several putative relatives. The new
molecular data will be compared with traditional morphological characters used
in the taxonomy of these plants, in order to determine areas of congruence and
areas of disagreement. Where congruent, the data will allow recognition of
reliable morphological features for taxon identification and for study of
evolutionary change in characters. Disagreements will highlight problems of
homology and possible differences in rates of molecular evolution. %%% Two
related families, Datiscaceae and Coriariaceae, will also be studied. These
include plants with symbiotic associations with nitrogen fixing actinorhizal
bacteria. The research will investigate the evolution of this association and
will provide hypotheses as to why it occurs in some groups and not in others.
This information should prove useful in the induction of nitrogen fixing
symbioses in agriculturally important plants.