* 9306912
* Maternal Manipulation of Sibling Aggression as a Possible   Mechanism of Sex-Ratio Adjustment
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Laurence Frank, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 08/31/1996
* USD 150,000.00

9306912 Glickman Siblicide, the killing of one sibling by another, has been well
studied in a number of bird species, but has only recently been described in a
mammal. Integrating data from a long-term field study with observations made in
a research colony, Dr. Laurence Frank has found that newborn spotted hyenas
fight violently at birth, have an array of adaptations for winning the fight,
and that one usually dies in the first weeks of life when both sibs are the same
sex. This aggression is associated with massive prenatal exposure to androgens,
which are presumably responsible for the unique syndrome of genital
masculinization, enhanced aggressiveness, and dominance over males that
characterizes the female spotted hyena. Reproductive records from a long-term
field study show that female hyenas appear to adjust the sex ratio of their
offspring according to their own social rank and current demographic conditions.
Through intensive study of wild female hyenas and their offspring in the
critical first month of life, Dr. Frank will test the hypothesis that female
spotted hyenas are able to influence the outcome of neonatal aggression to
concentrate parental investment in a singleton of the favored sex. Behavioral
observations will commence at birth, and will include detailed observations of
maternal behavior at the natal den and regular inspection of the den hole with a
fiber-optic video camera to monitor number and condition of the young. To assess
costs of offspring of both sexes, Dr. Frank will regularly assess dominance
relations within the litter and weight gain by cubs. In addition, he will
continue to maintain genealogical, demographic, and dominance records that date
back to 1979. This research addresses basic questions in three fields of
behavioral biology: sibling aggression and parent-offspring conflict, sex-ratio
adjustment, and hormonal influences on aggression. Siblicide poses an array of
questions that challenge our understanding of kin sele ction and the costs of
reproduction. Under what circumstances is it evolutionarily advantageous for a
young animal to kill its nearest relative? Does this behavior also benefit the
parents' fitness, or does the surviving sibling benefit at the cost of both its
dead sib and its parents? Should the primary hypothesis be proven, it will
demonstrate that maternal behavior is capable of influencing the sex ratio of
offspring after birth, and will lead to important questions about the cognitive
processes involved, since the demonstrated pattern of adjustment apparently
responds to changing ecological and social variables. This work is coordinated
with a major study of hyena endocrinology and development in Berkeley, one goal
of which is to identify the role of prenatal androgens in shaping neonatal
aggression. Because humans produce the same hormones that appear to influence
physical and behavioral development of the spotted hyena, insights into their
role in hyena aggression may help focus questions about their role in human
behavior.