* 9306608
* Molecular Analysis of Tobacco  Phloem-Specific Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Dominique Robertson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9306608 Robertson Phloem-specific protein (p-protein) is a major protein in
sieve tube elements, yet the function of this protein is not known. Functions
commonly ascribed to p-protein are that it plugs sieve pore plates following
wounding and/or that it maintains sterility in phloem by binding microorganisms.
However, the synthesis and turnover of p-protein are very high, characteristics
not normally associated with proteins that are primarily structural in nature.
In the electroosmotic flow theory of phloem translocation, p- protein has been
hypothesized to have an active role in the transport of photosynthetic
assimilates. Antisense technology to phenocopy null mutations for p-protein
isoforms can help to clarify the role of p-protein in translocation. As the
first step towards this goal, the PI proposes to isolate p-protein genes from
tobacco, Arabidopsis and pumpkin. %%% A long term goal is to monitor changes in
translocation flow and in the plant's response to wounding in plants transformed
with antisense p-protein mRNA. These experiments will increase our understanding
of the mechanism of phloem translocation and will help elucidate the function
and importance of p-protein in normal plant growth. The knowledge gained from
such studies will increase our basic understanding of phloem tissues and may
have important consequences for agriculture. ***