* 9306692
* Control Processes in a Terrestrial Food Web:  Trophic       Interactions of a Generalist Predator
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* David Wise, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1997
* USD 204,250.00

The proposed research will investigate top-down and bottom-up control processes
in a poorly understood but critical terrestrial food web: the detritus-based web
of the forest floor. The wolf spider Schizocosa oreata, an abundant generalist
predator, occupies an intermediate position in food webs of the leaf-litter
community of deciduous forests throughout eastern North America. This project
investigates control processes in this food web using laboratory experiments and
a series of short-term and long term manipulative field experiments designed to
reveal how S. oreata interacts with trophic levels above and below it. %%%
Understanding how food webs function is critical to prudent management and
conservation of ecological communities. Current food-web theory focuses on how
resource limitation and predator- prey interactions affect species on different
trophic levels. Densities of species at intermediate trophic levels may be
sensitive to cascading effects of top predators, or top-down control, and also
may respond to changes in resource levels at the bottom of the food web, or
bottom control. The results will be broadly applicable because spiders are major
predators in all terrestrial habitats, and because processes within the forest-
floor food web are critical to energy flow and nutrient cycling in forest
ecosystems.