* 9306571
* RPG: Physiological and Behavioral Responses of Birds to     Global Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Eileen Zerba, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Jereatha Coleman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 20,538.00

This research planning grant for women focuses on the examination of the direct
effects of climate change on the physiology and behavior of birds. The specific
aims are to delineate the limits, functional ranges, and interrelationships of
thermogenic and locomotor capacities of the house finch in relation to various
climatic conditions. The principal objectives of this research are: 1)
determination of the effects of wind and ambient temperature on energy
metabolism, thermoregulation and locomotion of the house finch, and 2)
comparisons of the energy expenditure for thermoregulation of sedentary and
active birds under various temperature and wind conditions. House finches
undergo dramatic seasonal changes in thermogenic endurance. Thus, the
relationship between regulatory thermogenesis and exercise-generated heat during
winter and summer seasons affords an interesting comparison. This design and the
testing of the hypotheses will define the limits and functional ranges of
metabolic, thermoregulatory and locomotor capacities of the house finch under
more ecologically significant temperature and convective conditions than
previous laboratory investigations. This information is critical for 1)
determining how close these birds are operating to the limits of their
functional capacities in nature, 2) providing a mechanistic link between shifts
in activity patterns in response to changes in thermal environments, and 3)
predicting the survival potential of these birds in different thermal
environments. The understanding of the links between physical environments and
individuals is of great theoretical significance. Such individual-based models
can be used to predict responses at the population and community level of
organization. This is particularly relevant for assessing predictions concerning
global climate change, which anticipate major shifts in abundance and
distribution of animal populations. Thus, individual-based models as used in
this study can make significant contributions as initial steps toward an
understanding of the driving forces of larger-scale changes in population
dynamics.