* 9306657
* Host-plant Age, Phenology, and Vigor as Determinants of     Herbivore Performance
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Albert Fivizzani, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 12/31/1996
* USD 124,710.00

Plant-feeding insects are generally not uniformly distributed among host plants
or within individual hosts. Instead, certain hosts, and sites within hosts, are
preferentially attacked by insects. The timing of feeding within a growing
season is also frequently circumscribed. Determining the extent to which theses
feeding preferences are correlated with insect survival and fecundity is crucial
to understanding what factors trigger and terminate periodic outbreaks of
insects. The proposed research will examine interactions between a leaf-mining
moth and its quaking aspen host trees in northern Minnesota, where the moth
frequently reaches outbreak densities. Experiments will test whether miners
preferentially feed at particular sites within leaves, or on leaves on
particularly large and/or rapidly growing shoots and branches, as some current
theory suggests; if the distribution of feeding over the growing season is
correlated with herbivore performance; and whether aspen trees develop
resistance to herbivory as they mature. %%% Outbreaks of herbivorous insects
occur both in natural &amp; human dominated ecological systems.This research
addresses pivotal questions concerning how natural temporal and spatial
variation in foliage quality influences herbivore performance &amp; potential
for population outbreaks. It details the extent to which high herbivore density
results in the use of inferior resources, an important component of the
population dynamics of plant-feeding insects. In addition, the results will have
important implications for management of stands of quaking aspen, a commercially
valuable tree species.