* 9306483
* RPG:Role of the Fas Antigen and Bcl-2 in Ovarian Follicular Apoptosis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Susan Quirk, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 18,000.00

This is a research planning grant for women. Follicles in the ovary undergo a
continuous process of growth and regression; only a small minority actually
proceed to ovulation. Substantial evidence suggests that atresia occurs by the
process of apoptosis, or programmed cell death. However, the genes controlling
apoptosis are not known. The operating hypothesis of this research is that
ovarian follicular apoptosis occurs in response to definable signals: either
lack of a survival factor or induction by a cytotoxic stimulus. Genes coding for
two proteins, the fas antigen and BCL-2, have been demonstrated to be intimately
involved in apoptosis in other systems, inducing and suppressing the process,
respectively. Limited data available indicate that the fas antigen is expressed
in the mouse ovary and bcl-2 is expressed in the chicken ovary. The proposed
preliminary research will examine the role of these genes in ovarian follicular
apoptosis by studying their expression in vivo in healthy and atretic follicles
of rats. Subsequent research will examine the regulation of expression of the
fas antigen and bcl-2 in rat follicular cells in vitro by various mediators of
follicular development. Finally, a potential cause and effect relationship
between fallicular atresia and expression of these genes will be examined by
inhibiting the activity or expression of the gene products using antibodies and
antisense oligonucleotides to mRNA. Mammalian females are born with a full
complement of germ cells, the oocytes, present in the ovary. Oocytes become
surrounded by a structure called the follicle which is comprised of granulosa
and theca cells. Throughout life ovarian follicles are stimulated to develop, a
process involving growth and differentiation of all cell types within the
follicle. Only a few of the follicles that enter the growing pool actually
progress to ovulation. The vast majority begin to degenerate, or undergo atresia
at different points in the developmental process. Recent evidence indicates that
ovarian follicular atresia occurs by programmed cell death, an active process
whereby a cell mediates its own death by following a genetically determined
developmental program. Factors regulating cell death in the ovary have not been
identified. This propossal will test whether genes encoding two proteins, the
fas antigen and BCL-2, which are involved in inducing and suppressing programmed
cell death in other systems (the immune system, nervous system and in various
tumor cells) also regulate cell death in the ovary. An understanding of
follicular degeneration is essential to allow development of improved methods of
fertility control, treatment of infertility and enhancement of fertility. There
is intense interest in programmed cell death because of its involvement in a
wide variety of normal developmental processes as well as its relevance to the
development of cancers. The ovary provides an excellent model for the study of
programmed cell death.