* 9306547
* CAA: DNA-Protein Interactions Regulating Transcription of   the Id Protein Gene During Myogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Sandra Sharp, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

This research is supported by an NSF Career Advancement Award to Women. The work
addresses a single aspect of one of the most compelling questions challenging
molecular biologists today, that is, how the differentiation processes by which
animals develop specialized organs from a single fertilized egg are regulated.
One such process is that of muscle formation or myogenesis. During myogenesis,
myogenic cells turn on expression of numerous genes whose projects are specific
to and necessary for function of muscle. The turning on of muscle specific genes
is accompanied by down-regulation of expression of a family of genes which code
for proteins whose function appears to be to inhibit differentiation, the Id or
Inhibitor of differentiation proteins. Id proteins are not unique to muscle
cells and one hypothesis is that Id inhibits the differentiation of cells
already commited to a specific developmental pathway until such time in
embryogenesis as terminal differentiation is appropriate. In culture, when
myoblasts or pre- muscle cells are treated with the drug doxorubicin, and are
then placed in medium in which they would normally differentiate into myotubes
or muscle cells, they do not differentiate. Instead, the cells produce
abnormally high levels of Id mRNA and protein, and the genes which should be
turned on during differentiation remain off. Genes are turned on and off by
interactions between specialized regulatory proteins and specific DNA sequences
in their promoter or control regions. These experiments are designed to
determine and compare the sites of specific protein-DNA interactions in the
promoter region of the Id gene in cells which are expressing Id at different
levels, myoblasts, myotubes, and muscle cells affected by exposure to
doxorubicin. "In vivo footprinting" will be used to determine where the
regulatory proteins are bound. The nucleotide sequence of the promoter region
will be determined, and the occupied sites will be compared to those already
known to bind various tissue specific and ubiquitous regulatory proteins. In
order for any biological developmental process to occur successfully, it must be
carefully regulated. Molecular biologists have been successful at identifying a
number of different regulatory proteins which control development. One such
protein is called Id, and one of its functions appears to be to keep pre- muscle
cells from becoming muscle tissue until exactly the right time in development.
The results of this research will increase our appreciation for the intricacies
of development, and in so doing may provide insight into some developmental
disorders or diseases which occur when molecular controls fail.