* 9306806
* Dissertation Research:  Community and Regional Organization in First Intermediate Period Egypt:  An Archaeological      Investigation at Abydos, Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor, Mr. Matthew Adams, a graduate
student at the University of Pennsylvania, will collect data for his doctoral
dissertation. He will analyze material from ongoing archaeological excavations
at the site of Abydos which is located in the Nile Valley of Upper Egypt. During
previous work at the site Dr. O'Connor discovered a group of houses which were
destroyed by fire and not reoccupied. The result of rapid burning was
extraordinary preservation. For example, the team has uncovered ceramic vessels
with contents such as grain and figs intact. Ovens were discovered with bread
moulds and the bread within still in place. The site thus provides a unique
opportunity to examine daily life. In addition, large quantities of lithics,
seals and ceramics were also recovered. Mr. Adams will analyze these remains as
well as other materials from adjacent time periods to determine how social
organization changed over time. Abydos is important because of its
geographically marginal position. It lies at the boundary between the Upper and
Lower Kingdoms and as centralized authority waxed and waned over time, the
political, social and economic position of Abydos was directly affected. Mr.
Adams is focussing his work on the First Intermediate Period when centralized
rule was in a decline and he wishes to learn what kinds of adaptations took
place at a local level. He will examine the extent to which regional networks
continued to exist and whether or not a hierarchical political and settlement
organization was maintained in this provincial region. He will also examine
changing economic relationships within Abydos itself to see whether occupational
specialization declined. This research is important for several reasons. While
much is known about how complex societies develop, archaeologists have
relatively little understanding of the reverse process when large scale units
fall apart. The work will increase our understanding of an important but little
known site and provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also aid
in the training of a promising young scientist.