* 9306694
* Characterization of Copper-Dependent Regulation of          Plastocyanin Biosynthesis in Scenedesmus obliquus
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Jeanette Quinn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 09/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9306694 Quinn The objective of this proposal is to carry out preliminary studies
essential for a detailed investigation of the mechanism of copper dependent
plastocyanin biosynthesis in Scenedesmus. This detailed study will be undertaken
by the PI as part of her independent research program. Specifically the
objectives of the research proposal are to identify and isolate cDNA clones
containing Scenedesmus plastocyanin encoding sequences and to generate a genomic
library and screen it to identify plastocyanin encoding genomic clones. The
genomic clones will be subcloned and sequenced so that potential regulatory
regions can be compared with sequences from the copper regulated cytochrome C6
gene of Chlamydomonas. Finally, since Scenedesmus is currently not a convenient
experimental system for molecular and genetic analyses, the phytocyanin encoding
genomic clones will be introduced into the heterologous host C. reinhardtii and
the resulting transformants tested for their ability to express the Scenedesmus
plastocyanin gene in response to the level of available copper ions. The outcome
of these experiments will determine the future directions and methodologies to
be used for further characterization of the mechanism of regulation of
plastocyanin biosynthesis. The results of these experiments will offer insights
into the conservation of copper independent regulatory pathways between related
organisms. The utility of this novel approach, if sucessful, could also greatly
expand future prospects for algal molecular biology in general. %%% Algae are
capable of utilizing two different proteins in the photosynthetic process. Which
is used depends on the presen ce or absence of copper ions in the environment.
This project examines the mechanisms underlying the induction of expression of
one of these genes in response to the presence of copper ions in the
environment. ***