* 9306271
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Nonlinear Demographic Dynamics:    Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments, Data Analyses
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Jim Cushing, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 320,000.00

9306271 Cushing The investigators conduct an interdisciplinary research program
to test nonlinear population theory: they construct and analyze mathematical
models, design and implement biological experiments, develop and apply
statistical techniques for the analysis of data. For the biological experiments
an organism is used that is easy to culture, has a short generation time (i.e.
yields long time series data) and allows an accurate census of animal numbers:
flour beetles of the genus Tribolium. In the first part of the study the
objectives are model identification and parameter estimation. In the second
part, the concern is to document transitions in the qualitative behavior of the
demographic dynamics. Rates of reproduction and adult mortality are manipulated
in order to cross boundaries in parameter space from stable equilibria, to
periodic cycles, to chaos. In phase three the objectives are to test hypotheses
concerning the existence of these unusual demographic dynamics and develop
methods for identifying these phenomena in experimental data. A major
contribution of this project is an unequivocal example of experimentally
manipulated transitions between qualitatively different dynamical behaviors of a
biological population as predicted by a mathematical model. In the last ten
years or so, the recognition that simple equations can generate complex dynamics
has led to an outpouring of fascinating theoretical possibilities for the
explanation of population time series data. Understanding the observed
fluctuations in animal population numbers is a central question in population
biology; it has far-reaching applications in areas ranging from food production
and pest control, to the management of renewable resources, to the conservation
of species diversity. The hypothesis that fluctuations are the result of
nonlinear dynamic forces has proved to be elusive to test due to the
difficulties of gathering adequate ecological data, of experimentall y
manipulating ecological systems, and of evaluating complex mathematical models
with ecological data. In this research project the investigators' approach to
testing nonlinear population theory is to connect mathematical models rigorously
with experimental biological data by means of newly developed statistical
methods for nonlinear time series. The project is unique in its
interdisciplinary approach because it involves both theory and experimentation
and utilizes the talents of the biologist, statistician, and mathematician. It
is unusual in the field of population biology to have an interdisciplinary
effort in which investigators from all of these disciplines are involved in all
aspects of the project, from experimental design and implementation, through
theoretical modeling and analysis, to statistical testing and verification. The
ultimate goal is to demonstrate the usefulness and importance of nonlinear
mathematics in gaining a rigorous understanding of the dynamics of animal
populations and in particular of fluctuations in population numbers, be these
fluctations regular or "chaotic."