* 9306326
* Intrinsic Equations of Motion for Interfaces in Models      of Solidification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Andrew Bernoff, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daljit S. Ahluwalia
* 06/30/1996
* USD 60,000.00

A methodology is proposed for deriving equations of motion for interfaces in
transition between two phases, such as the solidification of a liquid into a
solid, in the asymptotic limit of small diffusion. The investigator will show
that the velocity of the interface is a function of its local geometry,
described by so-called intrinsic quantities such as the curvature. This model
allows the computation of the radius at which a growing spherical particle
becomes unstable and may allow a deeper understanding of the complex dendritic
structures seen in solidification. The problem of the solidification of a liquid
has many industrial applications, such as the growing of a quartz crystal from a
melt for use in semiconductor devices like computer chips. For these
applications it is desirable to grow smooth, regular crystals. Unfortunately,
many substances tend to grow into irregular snowflake-like dendrites. In this
study the investigator proposes a methodology for reducing the complex equations
governing solidification to a relatively simple geometric description. This
reduction should allow the prediction of the transition from regular to
dendritic solidification. It may also give some insight into the process by
which irregular dendritic structures form and grow.