* 9306246
* RPG:  Phenotypic and Genetic Differentiation Along an       Elevation Gradient in Solidago macrophylla
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Carol Kelly, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 17,298.00

The genetic divergence of populations is considered an important step towards
speciation. However, the degree to which natural plant populations have diverged
for quantitative traits is unclear because of maternally biased estimates of
differentiation. The goal of Dr. Kelly's research planning grant is to use an
elevational gradient to determine whether life history, morphological, and
fitness traits have evolved in response to climatic variability in the goldenrod
species Solidago macrophylla, a native perennial plant of northeastern North
America. Clinal variation in plant phenotype will be correlated with elevational
variation in environmental conditions that may be acting as selective forces for
the evolution of fitness-related features of plant size and reproductive
condition. Subsequent research will consist of a series of reciprocal transplant
experiments that are designed to distinguish paternal (pollen) effects from
maternal contributions (chloroplast, mitochondria, endosperm) to phenotypic
variation both within and among populations. The latter research component is a
novel and important addition to traditional reciprocal transplant studies that
have usually failed to control for local versus long-distance pollination. %%%
Research on Solidago macrophylla will be the first to estimate the level of
genetic differentiation for quantitative traits among populations while
controlling for maternal bias (effects of local sources of chloroplasts,
mitochondria and endosperm). The results of the study will augment understanding
of the degree to which quantitative life-history traits in plants have evolved
in response to natural selection. In addition, the results will clarify patterns
of genetic diversity among populations for quantitative traits, information that
is necessary for effective conservation of rare and endangered plants.