* 9306462
* Phylogenetic Relationships of Green Algae and Land Plants,  and Molecular Evolution of Green Algal Chloroplast Genomes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* James Manhart, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 210,002.00

9306462 Manhart Among the green algae, both unicellular and multicellular forms,
there proves to be a greater diversity of genomic structures and arrangements
than among all the flowering plants. Some of these genomic markers indicate
lineages that are the likely close relatives to land plants, sharing features of
gene arrangement in their chloroplasts and other fine-scale genetic structures.
Dr. Manhart at Texas A&amp;M University is studying several aspects of
chloroplast genome structure and function in green algae in order to
characterize features that mark particular phylogenetic lineages. Particular
attention is focused on organization of the rps12 gene, the presence of introns
in chloroplast transfer RNA genes, and the presence of introns in the
photosynthetic gene rbcL. In addition, DNA sequencing will be done for the 16S
ribosomal gene in order to make comparisons of mutational differences between
green algae, in order to reconstruct their genealogical connections. %%% This
research involves the use of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) gene sequences and fine
details of cpDNA organization to test hypothesized phylogenetic relationships in
green plants and to increase our understanding of the molecular evolution of
cpDNAs. Aspects of chloroplast structure and function should prove useful in
delimiting those green algae that are the likely closest relatives to land
plants.