* 9306710
* RPG: Molecular Tools for Studying Cotton Fiber Elongation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Carolyn Zeiher, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

This is a research planning grant for women. Cell elongation depends on the
irreversible extension of the cell wall and on hydraulic conductivity and turgor
of the cell. The uptake and production of osmotically active solutes for
maintenance of turgor is essential to maintain cell elongation for extended time
periods. The cellular mechanisms that coordinate the osmoregulation of the cell
and extension of the cell wall during cell elongation are poorly understood.
Cotton fibers provide an excellent experimental system for studying molecular
mechanisms regulating cellelongation. The fibers on the cotton ovule grow
synchronously allowing fiber elongation to be followed developmentally. Each
fiber is a single cell which eliminates the complications of cell division. In
cotton fibers, malate is one of the osmotically active solutes responsible for
the maintenance of turgor. As an initial step in ultimately identifying the
signal transduction mechanism(s) responsible for coordinating osmoregulation and
cell wall loosening, the regulation of PEP carboxylase, the enzyme involved in
malate synthesis during fiber elongation, is being studied. Five isoforms of the
fiber PEP carboxylase have been identified and are distinguishable by their
electrophoretic mobility on SDS polyacrylamide gels. Two of these isoforms are
preferentially expressed during maturation of fiber elongation. The immediate
aim of this project is to determine how these different PEP carboxylase isoforms
are produced. Two complimentary approaches will be taken: (1) isolation and
characterization of the PEP carboxylase gene(s) and (2) purification and
characterization of the different forms of the PEP carboxylase protein. These
studies provide the necessary background to define thephysiological function of
these different isoforms during fiber elongation and more specifically, the role
of these isoforms in the osmoregulation of the fiber cell. The cotton fiber is
commercially valuable in the manufacture of a large percentage of the world's
textiles. Improved spinning systems and increased production speeds place
increasing demands on the cotton fiber by the textile industry. Efforts to
improve the fiber quality of existing cotton germplasm in terms of uniformity,
strength and extensibility of the fiber are essential for the US to remain
competitive in world markets. Defining the underlying regulatory mechanism(s)
controlling fiber elongation utilizing modern molecular tools will be of immense
importance in future development of breeding and genetic engineering strategies
for improving the fiber's spin value.