* 9306345
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Development of Empirical Potential Functions for Protein Folding
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Harold Scheraga, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 04/30/1998
* USD 38,400.00

9306345 Scheraga This award provides funds to permit Dr. Harold A. Scheraga,
Department of Chemistry, Cornell University, to pursue with Professor Mu Shik
Jhon, Department of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), and Dr. Kyoung Tai No, Department of Chemistry, Soong-Sil
University, Korea, for 36 months, a program of cooperative research on the
development of empirical potential functions for protein folding. This
theoretical research is designed to elucidate the energies and mechanism of the
folding of a polypeptide chain into the native conformation of a protein. While
current potential functions, developed by the collaborators, are sufficiently
accurate for several applications, the collaborators will develop new and better
potential functions which will have greater applicability. This research is
important for developing a better understanding of the structure and properties
of proteins. The collaborators are highly respected researchers in the field of
the proposal. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project is supported
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This project adds an
international cooperative dimension to the PI's research under NSF Grant No.
DMB-9015815. ***