* 9306348
* Development of a Model System for Studies of Structural     Alterations Arising from Oxidative Modification of          Membrane Associated Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* K Sukalski, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 05/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

The long-range goal of this research is to define the role of the lipid bilayer
in mediating oxidative damage to membrane-associated proteins. The data
resulting from the preliminary experiments proposed here will be the basis of a
regular proposal to NSF. That proposal will be to use the model system
consisting of cytochrome b5 and cytochrome b5 reductase incorporated separately
and together into the bilayer of liposomes and to characterize, in terms of
protein structure and function, the effects of free radical generation within
the bilayer and from the acqueous media. Changes in protein structure will be
determined by peptide mapping on HPLC, amino acid analysis and, ultimately, by
protein sequencing. Oxidative damage to a cysteine or lysine residue essential
for the binding of NADH by cytochrome b5 reductase would be expected to result
in impaired enzymic activity. In addition,, the oxidation of other amino acid
residues including histidine, arginine and proline as well as cysteine or lysine
residues of either protein, not involved at the active site, could potentially
impair function because of alterations in conformation. Finally, cytochrome b5
contains heme iron which may serve as a nucleation site for oxidative damage of
amino acid residues in which vicinity of the heme or on a neighboring cytochrome
b5 reductase molecule. Once the amino acid residues susceptible to oxidative
damage are known, careful studies can be done on the effect of changing the
lipid composition of the liposomes and contrasting the effects of free radicals
generated within the bilayer to those generated in the surrounding aqueous
compartment. %%% The studies proposed here will establish conditions for
examining oxidative modifications to membrane-associated enzymes in a model
system. Oxidant species may originate exogenously from components of tobacco
smoke and air pollutants as well as exposure to radiation. They may arise
endogenously from normal metabolic reactions and through the metabolism of
certain solvents, drugs and pesticides. Highly reactive oxidant molecules can
cause tissue damage by reacting with polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell
membranes, nucleotides in DNA and cytosolic proteins. However, little is known
about the extent of oxidation of proteins associated with lipid bilayers. The
potential for impaired function is great as membrane-associated proteins are
responsible for a host of reactions necessary to maintain viability. //