* 9306687
* RPG:  Metapopulation Models at Two Spatial Scales Using     Freshwater Mussels
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Caryn Vaughn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1995
* USD 13,835.00

Metapopulation models are important tools for understanding distribution and
abundance of organisms at large spatial scales. Because these models attempt to
integrate local population dynamics with immigration and extinction events
occurring between sites, they form a bridge between the traditionally separate
domains of population ecology (local abundance) and biogeography (regional
occurrence). Freshwater mussel communities in rivers provide an exemplary system
in which to assess metapopulation models across different regional scales:
within a stream itself (small drainages) and within a network of streams (major
river drainage). Mussel communities are naturally distributed in patches because
they only occur on appropriate substrate within a river. Local populations are
prone to frequent extinction because of the shifting course of rivers which
redeposits sediment and eradicates mussel beds. Dr. Vaughn will take advantage
of historical (near-fossil) data on mussel assemblages in the Red River drainage
along with SCUBA- facilitated inventory of current mussel communities in order
to quantify colonization and extinction rates through time and over spatial
scales from local to regional. %%% Rudimentary metapopulation models have been
evaluated with datasets that emphasize current assemblages of species. Data on
temporal fluxes are needed to begin to quantify rates and patterns of
colonization and extinction over regional spatial scales. Dr. Vaughn in a
research planning grant is beginning to assemble such datasets by concentrating
on mussel communities in the Red River drainage. The work takes on added urgency
in light of the recent introduction of an alien asian clam that may prove an
aggressive competitor in the region.