* 9306875
* Fate of Cleaved Signal Peptides of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* Eve Perara, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence R. Griffing
* 05/31/1995
* USD 22,400.00

The mechanism of protein transport across specific intracellular membranes is a
central issue in cell biology. This project focuses on the hydrophobic signal
sequences which direct the transfer of secretory proteins across the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) membrane, the first step in the secretion of proteins from the
cell. The importance of signal sequences has been well-established, but their
fate, once removed from precursor proteins by the action of the ER membrane
protein signal peptidase, is unknown. The objective of the experiments to be
carried out is to investigate the proteolysis of different polypeptides
containing functional signal sequences in an effort to define a proposed signal
peptide hydrolase activity in Xenopus laevis oocytes. The intracellular fates of
both engineered and unmodified cleaved signal peptides will be observed, and the
properties of their degradation will be characterized. The results of these
investigations will be used to develop a working assay for signal peptide
hydrolases in Xenopus oocytes. Such an assay is essential to efforts to identify
and purify the proteins which specifically metabolize cleaved signal sequences.
These proteins may be important not only for clearance of signal sequences from
cells, but also in the actual mechanism of translocation across the ER membrane.
The technique which will be employed to follow the fate of cleaved signal
peptides in Xenopus oocytes may provide a powerful tool for the dissection of
discrete steps in the transfer of proteins across the ER membrane in living
cells. %%% The transfer of proteins across the ER membrane as they are
synthesized in eukaryotic cells is a critical first step in the trafficking of
proteins to a variety of destinations, including lysosomes and the extracellular
space (secretion). Advances in our understanding of this fundamental process are
important not only for general understanding of how cells function, but also for
biotechnology. This project addresses the question of the fate of the cleaved
signal sequence, that is, the piece of the newly- synthesized protein which is
required for transport across the ER membrane, but which is not part of the
"finished" protein product and is therefore enzymatically cleaved from the rest
of the protein very soon after the transfer is effected. This is an area of cell
biology which has received very little attention, despite the high level of
research activity on other aspects of the secretory process. There is a good
likelihood that unforeseen new and potentially important insights will emerge
from the work.