* 9306823
* Rates of DNA Sequence Change on Avian Chromosomes:  A Test  of the Replicative Division Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Thomas Quinn, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1996
* USD 78,000.00

9306823 Quinn The proposed research will investigate the rate of single copy DNA
divergence in the sex and autosomal chromosomes of birds. The replicative
division hypothesis suggests that the number of rounds of replicative division
in germ line cells per unit chronological time determines the rate of DNA
sequence change. Birds provide an excellent model for testing this interesting
hypothesis because in birds the heterogametic sex is reversed from that seen in
mammals. Microdissection of avian chromosome metaphase spreads and DNA
amplification and cloning techniques will be used to isolate single copy DNA
from the W, Z, and autosomal chromosomes of several waterfowl, and the
nucleotide sequence of these clones will be determined. These data will be used
to compare rates on different chromosome type in relation to the number of
replicative divisions that particular chromosome undergoes. %%% The replicative
division hypothesis and the repair mechanism hypothesis address the basic
pattern of heritable mutational change in DNA. Unfortunately, these hypotheses
cannot be tested using mammalian chromosomes. This proposal utilizes some well
designed experimental procedures, an appropriate model system (birds), and state
of the art chromosome and molecular techniques to provide a powerful test for
these two opposing hypotheses. The results have several implications. First, sex
specific markers will be obtained, and these markers can be used in breeding
programs of endangered species that do not show sexual dimorphism. Second, the
results of W chromosome rates of change can be compared to existing information
on maternally inherited mtDNA sequences, and these data may have important
implications to systematic biology. Finally, some very important molecular
techniques will be refined, and these offer great potential to other studies of
comparative chromosome mapping. ***