* 9306938
* Mathematical Sciences: On the Relationship between          conjectures about elliptic cohomology, and the cohomology   theory E-sub-n
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Matthew Ando, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/31/1996
* USD 55,500.00

9306938 Ando One of the principal tools of algebraic topology is the use of
algebraic invariants called homology theories to analyze topological spaces. In
the course of his work on conformal field theory, Edward Witten made several
surprising observations about the relationship between three important homology
theories, singular homology, K-theory, and elliptic cohomology. The general
principal is that to understand the K-theory of a space, one should understand
as much as possible about the singular homology of its free loop space, and
similarly for elliptic cohomology and K-theory. At about the same time, Mike
Hopkins and various collaborators were showing the fundamental importance to
algebraic topology of a sequence of homology theories E-sub-n. Their work
involves a very profitable interaction between algebraic topology and number
theory. It turns out that E-sub-zero is close to singular homology, E-sub-one is
close to K-theory, and E-sub-two is close to elliptic homology. Ando outlines
how certain conjectures of Witten and of Hopkins, et al., might be closely
related. He intends to investigate these relationships and make them more
precise, in the hopes that the advances in these two areas of research can
inform each other more directly and fruitfully. The theme of this project,
drawing connections between deep algebraic and number theoretic theories on the
one hand and deep geometric (topological) theories on the other, is repeated
again and again in modern topology. As the theories grow increasingly intricate,
it is only through such overall principles of organization that mathematicians
keep the structure manageable and within the grasp of human mental powers. The
instant project bears on one of the most fruitful recent developments of this
nature. ***