* 9306531
* Adaptation of Poaceae to Iron-Limiting Calcareous Soils
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* David Crowley, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1996
* USD 155,120.00

9306531 Crowley The composition of natural plant communities is typically
characterized in relation to factors such as temperature, annual rainfall, and
soil acidity. However, surprisingly little is known about specific adaptations
of plant species to specific soil factors, including limited availability of
essential mineral nutrients. In the U.S., soils west of the Mississippi River
are predominantly alkaline (high pH), and often have very low levels of plant-
available iron (Fe). Iron deficiencies are common in many agricultural crops,
including a number of important members of the grass family such as corn, wheat,
and barley. Moreover, one can speculate that limited iron availability in these
soils may be an important factor controlling the species composition of the
extensive western grasslands, which are highly significant to agricultural
production (i.e., grazing of livestock) and as natural habitats and ecosystems.
To date, no detailed research has been conducted to examine how native (and in
some cases introduced) grasses are able to thrive in soils that pose severe
iron-deficiency problems for agricultural crop species. This research by Dr.
Crowley will, for the first time, comparatively examine the specific processes
that occur at the root-soil interface of both adapted and nonadapted grass
species. In response to iron deficiency, both grasses (but not other families of
plants) and soil microorganisms secrete specialized organic compounds call
"siderophores" into the soil. These compounds have a very high affinity for
iron, thus solubilizing unavailable soil iron into forms that can be utilized by
the plant or microorganism. The root surface of grasses support an elevated
population of microorganisms relative to the bulk soil, and it is likely that
there is intense competition between the plant root and microorganisms for the
limited amount of soluble iron present. Hypotheses to be tested in our research
include (1) grass species that are pa rticularly well-adapted to Fe- limited
soils excrete larger quantities of Fe-scavenging siderophores than do nonadapted
species, and (II) adapted species are better able to capitalize on the Fe
solubilized by siderophores secreted by soil microorganisms. The data he obtains
will be integrated into a conceptual model of the interrelationships between
roots, microbes and soil as they contribute to the adaptation of certain grasses
to iron-limited soils. ***