* 9306495
* Molecular Phylogenetics of the Sternorrhyncha (Insecta:     Homoptera) and Their Bacterial Endosymbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Nancy Moran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 09/30/1996
* USD 219,818.00

9306495 Moran Aphids, whiteflies and related insects include some of the most
devastating pests of agriculture and forestry. The survival and reproduction of
all of these insects depend on distinctive bacteria called endosymbionts. These
bacteria live inside special cells of their insect hosts and they manufacture
essential nutrients that are absent from the plant sap that is the sole diet of
these insects. Endosymbionts are normally passed from mother insect to
offspring, with transmission occurring internally. Scientists studying these
insects have long speculated that properties of the insects, such as ability to
attack particular varieties of plants, might depend on the nature of the
endosymbionts. Furthermore, associations with one strain of bacteria might
sometimes be lost and replaced by associations with a different strain. In fact,
acquisition of new bacterial associates has been suspected to be the basis of
new abilities of insects to attack previously resistant plant varieties. Until
recently, these suspicions could not be tested because the endosymbiont bacteria
cannot be grown outside their insect hosts and were therefore difficult or
impossible to characterize. Modern methods of molecular biology now allow us to
explore these previously mysterious organisms. This project, a collaboration
between an entomologist and a bacteriologist, uses DNA sequences from both the
insect genes and the bacterial genes in order to answer questions regarding the
origin and persistence of the associations between these insects and their
endosymbiotic bacteria. Preliminary results have shown that the association
between aphids and their primary endosymbion ts is extremely long lived,
persisting for millions of years. An implication for agricultural pest
management is that the appearance of new strains of aphid pests is not due to
the acquisition od new bacterial associates, as previously speculated. Also,
initial work during the first year of funding with a prior NSF award showed that
a new strain of whitefly that has become a devastating pest of vegetable crops
did not originate through the gain of a new bacterial associate, as speculated
previously by agricultural entomologists. %%% Characterization of the long term
history of the endosymbiotic associations between these specialized bacteria and
their host insects will add to basic knowledge of an essential aspect of the
biology of these important insect groups which include many economically
important pest species. This research takes advantage of recent developments in
molecular biology and also in computer processing of the DNA sequences. ***