* 9306652
* Regulation of Protein Synthesis and Degradation During      Invertebrate Quiescence
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1997
* Steven Hand, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1997
* USD 320,000.00

9306652 Hand This work will investigate how certain cells and tissues are able
to survive long periods of time in dormant state, where energy metabolism and
development are shutdown. Shrimp embryos (Artemia franciscana)are the focus of
the outlined experiments, because their remarkable capacity to survive dormancy
for months and even years is well known. For any dormant state, there are two
problems that must be solved if an organisms is to tolerate bouts of quiescence.
First, there must be a coordinated suppression of both energy use and energy
production. Second, the integrity of macromolecules must be preserved during
this period when little energy is available for their replacement or repair.
Previous work with these embryos suggests that one cellular signal may be
involved in mediating both of these phenomena. The first goal of the work is to
explain how an energy consuming process like the synthesis of protein is indeed
shutdown. The relative effect of limiting the copies of message (i.e., messenger
RNA) that direct the cell to synthesize proteins, versus actually inhibiting the
machinery itself (ribosomes) that builds the proteins will be compared. Finally,
since synthesis is in some way suppressed during dormancy, then the rate of
protein degradation must also be arrested in order to avoid depletion of
macromolecules. Therefore, the second aim is to understand how degradation of
protein (a normal process in an active cell)is reduced. Explaining how proteins
are preserved during dormancy (in effect, placed into suspended animation)
should provide insights that will be useful for other biological systems where
survival depends on successful recovery from physical and chemical insults. The
mechanisms by which cells can withstand long bouts of quiescence are apt to have
important implications for numerous cases where metabolism is unavoidably
suppressed or disrupted-- organ tissue transplantation, acute blockage of blood
flow to tissues, and oxygen deprivation. ***