* 9306899
* The Dynamics of Metal Film Growth by Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Eric Garfunkel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 212,000.00

9306899 Garfunkel The purpose of this project is to understand the basic metal
overlayer growth dynamics of metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)
processes on surfaces. This research includes an examination of the mechanisms
involved in the pyrolytic deposition of transition metal films from carbonyl
M(CO)x and trifluorophosphine M(PF3)x precursors on Si, Ni, and thin film SiO2.
Specific issues that will be addressed are: i) How do organometallic precursors
interact and decompose on different substrates? ii) What microscopic structures
occur and how do they evolve during the growth of thin metal films? iii) Can one
predict which precursor would be appropriate for a desired metallization
process? The metal film growth microstructures will be studied primarily by
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and the decomposition mechanism and
thermochemistry by a combination of vibrational (HREELS), compositional (XPS and
AES), and desorption (TDS) spectroscopies. MOCVD results will be compared with
those obtained by physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods. Both the
microstructural and thermochemical results of this work should add significantly
to the understanding of the science of MOCVD and to the variety of advanced
materials applications which utilize thin metal films. ***