* 9306377
* Collaborative Research:  The Population Genetics of Plant-  Fungal Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Neal Van Alfen, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 08/31/1997
* USD 187,000.00

9220906 Dudash Inbreeding depression has been the subject of considerable
attention for over 100 years. Although many researchers have quantified how
progeny generated by self-matings perform poorly relative to progeny generated
from matings between two different individuals, few empirical studies have
focused on the differences in inbreeding depression in populations that differ
in their natural outcrossing rates. The main goal of the proposed research is to
determine the underlying genetic basis of the expression of inbreeding
depression in two closely related native species from northern California, the
self-pollinating Mimulas micranthus and the insect dependent (thus outcrossing)
M. guttatus. The objectives are three-fold. First, to quantify the degree of
inbreeding depression in terms of both male and female function in two
populations of both the selfing and outcrossing species. The effects of
inbreeding on female reproductive function are well documented, but he effects
on male function, such as pollen production are largely unknown. Second, the
genetic basis of inbreeding depression will be quantified by two greenhouse
breeding experiments. Third, among-family level variation in inbreeding
depression will be quantified in the outcrossing M. guttatus as a function of
the observed floral variation. This two-species comparison will examine the
relationship between the mating system and the genetic basis of the observed
inbreeding depression, thus providing baseline information on the genetics
driving changes in mating systems in natural plant populations. The results
generated from the research on these two related species will provide insights
into preserving both crop gene pool diversity and rare species genetic
diversity.***