* 9306747
* Seventh Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant Physiology:    to be held May 1993, University Park, PA
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1994
* Jack Schultz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 10/31/1994
* USD 6,300.00

Award provides partial support for the 7th Annual Pennsylvania State University
Plant Physiology Symposium, organized by the Pennsylvania State University
Graduate Program in Plant Physiology. The topic for 1993 is "Plant Signals in
Interactions with Other Organisms". The symposium brings together 26 papers
focusing on the mechanisms and molecules involved in recognizing other organisms
(including conspecifics), cuing defensive responses to pathogens, herbivores,
and parasitic plants, establishing relationships with microbial symbionts,
manipulating floral attractants, and attracting protective arthropods. Spatial
scales of these phenomena range from extremely local (e.g., gene regulation)
through intermediate (e.g., fungal elicitors) to long- distance (signals amoung
plant individuals). The approach is comparative and synthetic. The goals are to
produce state-of-the-art reviews of each topic, but provide treatments that
permit the evaluation of similarities and differences among various signaling
mechanisms so as to put them in suitable functional, ecological, and
evolutionary contests. Another goal is to clarify present confusion about the
functions of multiple signals, and potential interactions among multiple signals
in single systems. Plans are also presented for supporting posters and
attendance by graduate student and postdoctoral level scholars. The proceedings
will be published by the American Societh of Plant Physiology.