* 9306436
* Molecular Phylogenetics and Host Transfer Among Genera and  Species in the Leafhopper Tribe Deltocephalini
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1999
* William Black IV, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 04/30/1999
* USD 195,000.00

9306436 Black Leafhoppers are insects that extract nutrients from plants through
piercing and sucking mouthparts. Leafhoppers occur on a wide variety of trees,
shrubs, herbaceous plants and grasses and can transmit a number of important
plant diseases. It is believed that leafhopper species arose through changes in
host plant specialization. A species that feeds on several closely related plant
species may have come to specialize on one or a leafhopper that fed on one plant
species may have broadened its range. Shifts in host plant specialization are
believed to have occurred among leafhoppers in the tribe Deltocephalini. Some
genera in this tribe have a worldwide distribution and occur on trees and shrubs
or alternate between woody and herbaceous plants. Other genera are largely
associated with herbaceous plants. One group inhabits primarily grasses in
North, Central and South America. From these arose a group that are almost
entirely limited to grasses in North America and Mexico. This suggests a
progression from widely distributed species that occur on many families of woody
and herbaceous plants towards North American and Mexican species that occur
exclusively on grasses. The importance of host plant transfer in the origin of
leafhopper species is poorly understood because leafhoppers have only a few
morphological characters that can be used to separate species and determine the
genetic relationships among them. The research of this project will use DNA
sequences to estimate genetic relationships among leafhopper species. The goal
is to develop an objective phylogeny for leafhoppers that will test the
hypothesis that new species arise through host transfer and specialization. %%%
The leafhoppers are a group of insects that have economic importance because
several members transmit plant diseases to crops, trees, shrubs, etc..
Developing a better understanding of relationships among these insects will
serve to explain changes in host pl ant associations which may have potential
implications for disease control. The results of this project will also serve as
a general model for other insect groups where host plant transfer and
specialization is suspected. ***