* 9306375
* Novel Algorithms for Many-Body Classical Dynamics and       Global Optimization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* John Straub, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Lesser Blum
* 12/31/1996
* USD 210,000.00

9306375 Straub John Straub is funded by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop new algorithms for performing many-
body classical dynamics and global energy optimization. He has recast the
classical molecular dynamics problem into a Liouville operator which operates on
a time dependent phase space distribution represented by a Hartree product of
Gaussian wave packets. The result is a set of simple first order equations of
motion for the approximate time-dependence of the distribution at contant
temperature or energy. This methodology will be applied to studies of the
dynamics of atoms or molecules on surfaces, the simulation of molecular fluids
and biomolecules, and enhanced free energy perturbation calculations. In a
second but related area of study, Straub will develop a method for finding the
global energy minimum on a potential energy surface through an approximate
solution to the Schrodinger equation in imaginary time. %%% Computer simulations
have provided a number of molecular level insights into chemical processes which
occur in solution and on surfaces. The technique is very powerful, but is
limited by statistical sampling problems associated with the speed of current
supercomputers and the time available to perform such simulations. Straub is
developing a new algorithm for performing molecular simulations which should be
a major improvement in statistical sampling. If successful, this new algorithm
could provide a significant decrease in the amount of computational resources
required to obtain meaningful sampling statistics in molecular simulations. ***