* 9306637
* Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens      capensis:  Genetic Variation and Fitness Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1998
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Allen Moore
* 03/31/1998
* USD 286,000.00

9306637 Schmitt Many plants display striking stem elongation and other
morphological responses to the reduced ratio of red to far red light (R:FR)
characteristic of vegetation shade; recent physiological studies have shown that
these responses can be induced by the R:FR of light reflected onto plant stems
by neighbors. Plant physiologists have suggested that shoot elongation in
response to reduced R:FR is advantageous because it enables plants to sense and
avoid competition for light. On the other hand, shoot elongation is thought to
be disadvantageous at low density. The study proposed here will provide the
first test of these predictions in an evolutionary context. By examining the
relationship between elongation and fitness at manipulated densities in natural
populations of the common native annual Impatiens capensis (jewelweed or touch
me not), Dr. Schmitt will determine whether elongation in response to low R:FR
is favored in crowded stands, but disadvantageous at low density. Moreover, by
using R:FR to induce or inhibit elongation, the performance of experimental
plants with "appropriate" and "inappropriate" morphologies can be compared both
at low density and in dense canopies. Dr. Schmitt will also examine genetic
variation in response to R:FR within and between natural populations to
determine the potential for this trait to evolve and test for adaptive
differentiation in response to light quality among pop ulations. The integration
of quantitative genetic analysis, studies of population differentiation and
adaptation, and direct measurement of selection in different environments will
provide valuable information about the evolution of an ecologically important
functional trait. This research will integrate genetic, physiological, and
population biology approaches to the study of adaptive plasticity, and will
introduce physiological methods for using R:FR to manipulate morphology to plant
population biologists. %%% The results will contribute to understanding how
plants interact in natural communities and will provide an ecological and
evolutionary context for current research on the molecular genetics and
physiology of plant responses to light spectral quality. This work will also be
relevant to agriculture and forestry because it will provide useful information
about how response to R:FR affects performance and yield in dense stands.