* 9306848
* CAA: Development of the Olfactory Placodes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Gail Burd, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1995
* USD 40,342.00

9306848 Burd This Career Advancement Award for Women provides partial support
for a sabbatical leave. The goal of the study is to examine cell lineage of and
differential gene expression in the olfactory placodes of the frog, Xenopus
laevis. Cell lineage experiments consist of injecting dyes into cells in the
anterior neural plate, and following the migration of injected cells with a SIT
camera and time-lapsed video recordings. Likewise, the source of cells in
regenerating olfactory placodes will be determined. Two genes (distal-less and
empty spiracles) known to be expressed in mouse olfactory placodes will be
characterized in Xenopus placodes. The pattern of expression of these genes will
be determined with in situ hybridization and Northern blots. This study will
determine factors that regulate differentiation and regeneration of the
olfactory placodes. Development of a fertilized egg into a multicellular
organism is controlled by an array of genes and tissue interactions that
determine the fates of particular cell and tissue types. The goal of this study
is to examine developmental expression of genes and the formation and
regeneration of the peripheral tissue for the sense of smell, the olfactory
epithelium, in the frog. Fluorescent dyes will be injected into cells that are
thought to form or reform the olfactory placode, the precursor tissue to the
olfactory epithelium. The long-term goal of this study is to determine the
molecular and cellular factors that regulate development and regeneration in the
developing nervous system, using the peripheral olfactory system as a model. ***