* 9306755
* Investigation of Noctuoid Moth Phylogeny Using Molecules    and Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/2000
* Susan Weller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/2000
* USD 204,977.00

WPC&gt; 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi ? x x x , k x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP Laserjet (25-in-
one, Network) HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 OpX @ 2 2 @ Z cpi 3| x Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @
HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ 2 , &lt; F P &lt; #| x 9306755
Weller The proposed research will use both molecular and morphological
characters to address higher level relationships among members of one of the
largest moth superfamilies (50,000 described species), the Noctuoidea. The
Noctuoidea includes several well known groups such as the gypsy moths, tiger
moths and woolly bears, and cutworm moths. Despite possession of interesting
biological features (e.g. mimicry, sound production in tiger moths) and their
obvious economic importance as pests, several points concerning relationships of
these moths remain unresolved. The heart of the problem lies with the cutworm
moths; at this time, it is not clear whether there is one, two, or several
unrelated groups currently lumped into the family Noctuidae. This project will
combine molecular i.e. sequencing one nuclear (28B rRNA) and two protein coding
mitochondrial (ND1, COI) genes, all initially analyzed as independent data sets
with morphological data in a total evidence analysis. The evolutionary trees
produced will be used to address how the particular proteins evolved and if
current models of protein evolution are supported by this empirical study. %%%
Both anatomical features (morphology) and molecules (gene sequences) will be
used to address the higher relationships (phylogeny) of the moth superfamily
Noctuoidea. Included in this large (50,000 species) group of moths that will be
the subject of this study ar e several well known groups, many with caterpillars
notorious as major insect pests (e.g. gypsy moths, tiger moths and woolly bears,
and cutworm moths). From this study of higher level group relationships, a more
stable classification should result that, in turn, will promote future basic and
applied research with these moths. In addition, the project will examine how
protein sequences differ among the major moth groups to learn how the proteins
themselves have changed over time. This information will provide baseline data
for those interested in constructing models of protein change.