* 9306909
* Effects of Disturbance and Spatial Heterogeneity on         Nutrient Retention and Transport in a Stream-Riparian       Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1998
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 06/30/1998
* USD 800,000.00

9306909 Fisher This research will determine the effect of spatial configuration
on nutrient retention in stream-riparian ecosystems. Streams are complex,
heterogeneous systems consisting of a wetted channel, saturated sediments below
and adjacent to the wetted channel, and a strip of terrestrial vegetation (the
riparian zone) at each lateral edge. The extent and shape of each of these
varies greatly in space and time. As water flows downstream, it moves to varying
degrees among these components. Because of several favorable properties, streams
of arid lands will be used as model systems for this study. The overall goal of
this project is to determine how configuration affects the extent to which
materials transported in this water are retained and recycled within a given
reach. This goal will be met by addressing four questions around which the
research is organized. First, how does spatial pattern influence nutrient
retention? Spatial configuration and its effects will initially be considered
for a single point in time. This will be accomplished by mapping the stream
ecosystem a two scales to determine its physical configuration, describing
hydrologic connections among these elements, and the consequences of flow path
for retention of nutrients. Configuration will be manipulated experimentally to
determine the effect of different patterns on the retention process. Second, how
does disturbance affect this relationship? Several individual flash flood and
drought events will be studied in terms of their effect on configuration and
recovery of system function between events. Third, how do configuration and
function interact over large spatial and temporal scales? This analysis will
involve scaling up reach-scale processes to include geomorphic variation
generated by valley floor width. Temporal scaling will be accomplished by
considering the effect of variable flood and drought regimes; their frequency ,
intensity, and distribution in time. Fourth, how general are results derived
from North American desert streams for this ecosystem type worldwide? This
question will be answered with a comparative study of the pattern-process
relationship among streams of similar deserts in Australia and Spain. %%% This
research is significant in that it will contribute to basic scientific
understanding of how pattern and process interact in complex ecosystems. It is
an advance over black box, well-mixed reactor models that have been commonly
used in ecosystem ecology. Research results will be useful to applied ecology as
well. Streams are open systems which link terrestrial uplands with downstream
reservoirs, groundwater supplies, or estuaries. Retention and transformation of
stream load in transit affects the quality of water delivered to recipient
systems. Riparian and other wetland ecosystems are increasingly used for this
"nutrient filtration" capacity. Results of this research will aid in
understanding this process in natural streams and optimizing it in managed and
human-designed systems. ***