* 9306974
* Phylogenetic Systematics of Lysipomia:  Speciation and      Biogeographical Studies in Andean Paramo
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Tina Ayers, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 12/31/1995
* USD 22,796.00

Phylogenetic studies of genera restricted to the Andean paramo and puna provide
a unique opportunity to explore evolutionary processes in tropical, high
elevation environments. Dr. Ayers is studying the Andean plant genus Lysipomia
of the Campanulaceae family, currently thought to comprise about 30 species of
"cushion" plants. Two species are widespread and have many named, geographically
restricted subspecies and varieties. The remaining species show little or no
infraspecific variation and have extremely narrow ranges, with many endemic to a
single ridge top or volcanic cone. These endemics occur throughout the Andes,
but the greatest species diversity is found in Ecuador and Peru on both sides of
a major geologic division of the northern Andes known as the Piura Divide or the
Huancabamba Depression. Phylogenetic studies employing modern molecular and
traditional morphological characters will test whether this geologic barrier and
recent climatic changes associated with it have played an important role in the
evolutionary history of Lysipomia. %%% Mechanisms or processes of evolutionary
change can be studied only against the background of known patterns of change,
in the origin and extinction of species. Dr. Ayers in a research planning grant
begins a molecular (DNA-based) and morphological study of the patterns of
diversification in a group of high-elevation "cushion" plants, in relation to
their geographical distribution in the northern Andes. Field work to make plant
collections combined with laboratory study of chloroplast DNA mutations and
herbarium study of morphological features will provide insight into patterns of
species divergence and the role of geographical barriers and dispersal routes.