* 9306639
* Biological Disturbance and the Organization of Neotropical  Stream Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Alexander Flecker, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9306639 Flecker Neotropical streams contain diverse and abundant assemblages of
fishes, some of which process large volumes of sediments. The proposed research
will examine the impacts of fishes as sources of biological disturbance in
neotropical stream communities. Preliminary studies indicate that biological
disturbance of sediments by fishes has strong consequences that propagate widely
through riverine food webs. Three hypotheses about the role of biological
disturbance will be addressed: 1) biological disturbance generates resource
patchiness by modifying sediment distributions, 2) biological disturbance
maintains species diversity by generating a dynamic mosaic of resource states,
and 3) detritivorous fishes are keystone species whose presence strongly
modifies food web interactions. These objectives will be examined through a
series of observational and experimental field studies conducted in the Andean
piedmont of Venezuela. A detailed analysis of spatial heterogeneity of sediment
accrual patterns will be undertaken from a patch dynamics perspective. Patch
characteristics over different spatial and temporal scales will be quantified
using methods employed for the analysis of landscapes. These data will be linked
with detailed observations and experimental exclusions of fishes at different
spatial scales. The influence of biological disturbance in maintaining species
diversity will be manipulated and changes in species diversity patterns will be
assessed. The role of detritivirous fishes as keystone species in Andean streams
will be examined by selectively excluding detritivores. %%% Findings from this
study will contribute to our limited understanding of factors organizing
neotropical stream communities. This research will integrate sediment animal
relationships into a stream community context. Results will indicate whether
human impacts on detrital feeding fishes form overexploitation and impoundments
may be manifested throughout stream food webs. ***