* 9306645
* Dissertationn Research:  Fish Exploitation of the Indus     Valley Civilization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 5,038.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Mr. William Belcher will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will both conduct an ethnographic study
in Pakistan and apply the results to the analysis and interpretation of fish
remains recovered from Indus Valley archaeological sites. The Harappan
civilization developed and flourished in the Indus Valley from ca 2,600 to 1,900
B.C. It represents one of the great achievements of the late prehistoric world.
Developments there rank the region with ancient Egypt and the Near East as well
as New World states such as the Inca and Aztec empires. However much less is
known about the Harappans than their counterparts. Archaeological data shows
that this civilization had a strong riverine component and that fish constituted
a major part of the diet. However such faunal remains are difficult to interpret
and Mr. Belcher hopes to develop approaches which will aid in this goal. To this
end, he will study modern fishing practices in the same region. He will
interview fisherman and watch them at work to determine when in the yearly
cycle, how, and in what environments particular species are caught. He will also
observe how they are butchered, preserved, transported and consumed. After they
are discarded such faunal remains may undergo a number of destructive practices
such as damage by domestic animals and Mr. Belcher will examine these as well.
Finally he will apply the interpretative techniques he develops to a series of
Harappan archaeological remains. Mr. Belcher's primary interest lies not in fish
per se, but rather in the social and economic organization of the Harappan
state. By examining this one class of data, he hopes to reconstruct the economic
system through which they moved. Trade routes will be reconstructed and the
degree of economic centralization determined. It may also be possible to examine
such issues as status difference between and within sites. This research is
important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how one of
the great early civilizations of the Old World emerged. It will help to develop
techniques of faunal analysis which will be useful in many archaeological
contexts. Finally it will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.