* 9306519
* Regulation of Signal Transduction in the Colony Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor by Serine/Threonine Phosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Angel Lee, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

The colony stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R), encoded by the proto-
oncogene c-fms, is a tyrosine kinase receptor which modulates macrophage growth
and metabolism. This investigator is interested in the mechanisms that regulate
receptor function. This project focuses on the regulation of this growth factor
receptor by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of serines and threonines. The
goal of the planning period to be supported by this grant is to set up an
experimental system for the identification of sites of serine phosphorylation in
the C-terminus of this receptor. The first objective is to construct a
C-terminal truncation mutant by site- directed mutagenesis, express the mutant
receptor in myeloid 32D cells and then confirm the presence or absence of
C-terminal phosphorylation by 2D thin layer tryptic phosphopeptide mapping of
immunoprecipitated CSF-1R. A complementary strategy will be to synthesize the
C-terminal domain as a bacterial fusion protein and to utilize the fragment in
an in vitro kinase assay that contains preparations of either candidate
serine/threonine kinases or unfractionated cellular extracts. Following, serine
to alanine mutants that cover the entire C-terminus will be constructed to
pinpoint the actual sites of phosphorylation. The phenotypes of these serine
mutants will be studied in terms of effects on receptor tyrosine kinase
activity, down-regulation and desensitization, interaction with intracellular
substrates and growth potential. Work will also be initiated to identify the
responsible serine/threonine kinase. The second objective of the planning period
is to begin studies that explore reciprocal mechanisms involving
serine/threonine phosphorylation which may regulate the interactions between
CSF-1R and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor in 3T3 fibroblasts and
between CSF-1R and the interleukin-3 receptor in 32D cells. %%% The
phosphorylation of the amino acids serine and threonine is likely to represent
an important regulatory mechanism for certain classes of growth factor
receptors. This award will provide start- up support for a beginning
investigator undertaking research in this important area.