* 9306369
* Seed Water Content and Its Effect on Rodent Foraging Success
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Stephen Vander Wall, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 02/28/1997
* USD 70,000.00

9306369 Vander Wall This project examines the interactions between plants,
animals, and the physical environment by fluctuations in seed water content and
how they influence rodent foraging success. Most seeds are hygroscopic, readily
imbibing water whenever the soil becomes moistened. If conditions are unsuitable
for germination, the seeds gradually lose moisture as the soil dries out.
Consequently, seeds vary in water content over time as the weather changes.
Rodents readily find moistened seeds using their olfactory sense but often
appear to have difficulty finding seeds when the seed s and the substrate are
dry. Despite the well known characteristics of hygroscopic seeds and the
demonstrated inability of some rodents to find dry seeds, the detail of how
deed/soil moisture influences an animal's ability to find seeds appears to be
almost totally unknown. Field & laboratory work focuses on the foraging success
of three species of rodents searching for two types of seeds at various
controlled or monitored moisture levels. The response curves of rodent foraging
success at various levels of seed water content will be determined under
controlled conditions. The water content of seeds and soil will be monitored in
the field over several weeks and related to rodent foraging success. %%% Plant
animal interactions play important roles in population & community ecology, but
the role if the physical environment in mediating these int eractions has
received little attention. By focusing on caching behavior of rodents, this
project contributes to understanding dynamic's of soil seed banks, plant
populations & rodent foraging. ***