* 9306801
* SGER: Sensory Transduction of Blue Light in Corn coleoptiles
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Eduardo Zeiger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal requests a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to develop
preliminary data for a critical test of the hypothesis that carotenoids function
as blue light photoreceptors in the phototropic response of corn coleoptiles.
Current thinking in the field ascribes the role of blue light photoreceptor to
flavins or flavoproteins. Recent work in this laboratory, however, has provided
tantalizing evidence for a role of the carotenoid, zeaxanthin in blue light
photoreception. The research proposed here addresses the question of whether
this molecule serves as the photoreceptor for coleoptile phototropism, a well
characterized blue light response. Pilot studies with corn coleoptiles have
shown that they operate the xanthophyll cycle and have zeanthin concentrations
that track their light environment. Proposed experiments are designed to
correlate the extent of the phototropic response with prevailing zeaxanthin
concentrations in the coleoptile, and to establish whether coleoptile
chloroplasts show a blue light response. Other experiments with corn mutants
having an altered pigment composition will seek to correlate changes in
phototropic sensitivity with their pigment content. Characterization of the blue
light sensing mechanism in the coleoptile system would significantly enhance our
understanding of blue light sensory transduction in plants. %%% One of the most
fundamental responses of a plant to its environment is that the growing tip of a
young plant shoot turns and grows toward light. Blue light is most effective in
eliciting this response, but the mechanism by which plant tips sense blue light
is not yet understood. As the first step in the response blue light must be
absorbed by a specific chemical compound, but the chemical photoreceptor has not
yet been identified with certainty. Establishing the nature of the blue light
photoreceptor would be an important contribution to understanding of this
fundamental plant response. Circumstantial evidence has led most investigators
in the field to believe that the photoreceptor is probably a type of organic
molecule known as a "flavin". Dr. Zeiger, however, has obtained some results
suggesting that a different class of organic molecule, a "carotenoid" may be the
real blue light receptor. If a carotenoid is, indeed, the blue light
photoreceptor this would be a very important advance, but the evidence at
present is too incomplete to justify launching a full scale research program on
the subject. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will permit Dr. Zeiger to
develop sufficient preliminary data to determine whether a full scale project
should be undertaken to study the function of carotenoids as blue light
photoreceptors.