* 9306919
* RPG: Temporal Stressors and Immunocompetence
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Debora Baldwin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9306919 Baldwin Stress is a subject of interest shrouded in ambiguity. Confusion
reigns concerning the concept of stress in general and the effect of such a
phenomenon on the neuroimmunological system in particular. The ambiguity may be
attributed, in part, to the limited number of parametric studies which actually
test stress models. Furthermore, there is evidence to indicate that the specific
characteristics of the stressful event (e.g., type of stressor, duration of
stressor, predictability of the stressor) can produce immunosuppression or
immunoenhancement. The overall aim of this Research Planning Grant is to examine
one aspect of the stressful event, stressor type (physical vs psychological), on
a panel of immunological and neuroendocrine parameteres. The physical stressor
being examined in this study is voluntary running, and the psychological
stressor will be immobilization. The experiments address the following
questions: 1) What are the similarities and differences between physical and
psychological stress events on immunocompetence? What are the plausible
biochemical pathways through which stress-induced immunomodulation occurs? 2)
What is the relationship between onset of changes in neuroendocrine markers
(catecholamine, corticosteroid, glucose) and immunity? Will the effect differ
with respect to stressor type and gender? Both physical and psychological stress
have been shown to produce immune effects. Stressful events may differ with
regard to specific physiological outcomes, while sharing the same underlying
physiological mechanism. The overall expected results are as follows: 1)
psychological stress alone (immobilization) will produce the greatest compromise
of immune functioning compared to the physical stress of voluntary running, and
2) immunosuppression will be associated with a heightened neuroendocrine
response to stress. ***