* 9306223
* Genetic Control of TCA Cycle During Seed Germination
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* David Oliver, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1997
* USD 318,892.00

Mature oil seeds (cucumber, pumpkin, peanut, Brassica, etc) contain few
mitochondria and have low levels of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes.
Following imbibition the TCA cycle enzymes are synthesized de novo. The
biogenesis of the TCA cycle enzymes, however, is not uniform. The non-
decarboxylative portion of the pathway (the reactions between succinate and
oxaloacetate) is synthesized first. A few days later, the enzymes of the
decarboxylative part of the cycle, the reactions between pyruvate (or citrate)
and succinate, are formed. This switch results from changing metabolism in the
cotyledons of these seeds. Early in germination the cotyledons are converting
stored lipid to carbohydrate. While the non-decarboxylative portion of the TCA
cycle is essential for this process the decarboxylative portion is not present
thus preventing carbon loss through the decarboxylation reactions. Later as
these tissues become photosynthetic, a full TCA cycle is needed and the enzymes
of the decarboxylative portion are synthesized. In this proposal Dr. Oliver will
examine the mechanism by which this differential expression of mitochondrial
proteins is accomplished using fumarase, an enzyme specific for the non-
decarboxylative part, and the NAD+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase, an enzyme
found only in the decarboxylative portion of the TCA cycle. The proteins have
been purified, antibody tools are being produced, and N-terminal sequence
information is being obtained. The antibody and/or oligonucleotide probes will
be used to isolate the cDNA (and then genomic) clones for these two proteins.
The level of control of gene expression(transcriptional, translational, etc)
will be determined by measuring mRNA levels and with run on transcription
assays. Promoter-GUS contructs will be transformed into Brassica napus and these
transgenic plants will be used to study, 1. the time course and tissue
specificity of expression of both genes, 2. environmental and physiological
factors that control the expression of these two genes, and 3. repression of TCA
cycle proteins during seed maturation. Promoter analysis will be initiated.
These studies may be augmented by the use of transient expression assays and
rapid cycling Brassica or Arabidopsis.