* 9306729
* Relating Zooid and Colony Growth in Modular Organisms       Arborescent Cheilostome Bryozoans
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Scott Lidgard, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 169,999.00

9306729 Lidgard Unlike solitary animals such as dogs or cats, bryozoans are
animal colonies. Each colony is made up of tens or even thousands of modules
called zooids. The zooids within a colony often differ from one another in form,
but share a similar kind of growth by budding from pre-existing zooids. This
colonial organization thus introduces variation and complexity not found in the
growth of solitary animals. Different arrangements of zooids and different
budding processes allow bryozoan colonies to grow into a remarkable variety of
forms, including vines, sheets, mounds and miniature "trees". Bryozoans are
among the most diverse groups of bottom dwelling animals in marine and
freshwater habitats. Yet skeletal anatomy related to budding and colony
formation is unknown for many encrusting and most erect bryozoans because no
broadly based study has been attempted. The purpose of this research is to
analyze zooid and colony growth among tree-like cheilostome bryozoans and to
fill critical gaps in neglected areas of cheilostome morphology. These
comparative studies will allow (a) evaluation and extension of previous growth
models based on studies of encrusting colonies to include newly recognized
patterns in erect colonies, (b) assessment of the taxonomic distribution of
characters related to zooid and colony growth, and (c) documentation of
relationships among zooid form and budding patterns and colony form. Light
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy will be used to compare growth
patterns in both living and fossil groups. %%% Bryozoans are interesting and
poorly understood colonial animals. What appears to be a single "tree-like" form
may actually consist of thousands of individuals. This project will study
patterns of colony growth both in living and fossil forms of these animals.
Insights will be provides for a major group of animals whose higher level
relationships are poorly resolved and whose fossil record contains muc h of the
known diversity. ***