* 9307301
* Barium in Bone as a Paleodietary Indicator
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* James Burton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 93,000.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Price and his colleagues
will examine the usefulness of barium as a paleodietary indicator. Considerable
research done focussing on strontium has shown that it is discriminated against
relative to calcium in biological systems. Therefore relatively less strontium
is present in herbivores which eat plants than in the plants themselves.
Likewise bones of carnivores contain less strontium than do bones of their
herbivore prey. Preliminary analyses conducted by Dr. Price and colleagues
indicate that the same holds true for barium and that in this latter case the
differences between trophic level are even more pronounced. Relatively little is
known however about how barium moves through ecological systems and preliminary
data again indicate that the patterning is complex. Marine, arid and non-arid
terrestrial systems all seem to act differently. In this first stage of a
planned long term project the team proposes to gain a better understanding of
the barium cycle in a series of environments. They will collect samples and
analyze a broad range of species. Included within this will be anthropologically
relevant skeletal remains. Because food is essential to human existence and
subsistence and social systems of necessity are built around this need,
archaeologists pay a great deal of attention to the reconstruction of
prehistoric diet. This has proven extremely difficult because various classes of
food are differentially preserved in archaeological sites. Plants for example
which formed an essential part of prehistoric diet are rarely preserved.
Chemical analysis of bone has proven extremely useful since different diets may
leave telltale chemical fingerprints in skeletal remains. The proposed work by
Dr. Price and colleagues will help to develop a new technique which may yield
insight not only into diet but paleoclimate as well. This work is important
because the technique, when developed will provide a useful way to address a
number of archaeological questions in many parts of the world.