* 9307051
* Molecular Analysis of an Allatotropin in Manduca Sexta
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Frank Horodyski, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 236,766.00

9307051 Horodyski Metamorphosis in insects is regulated by juvenile hormone
(JH), a compound produced in the corpora allata (CA), a neurohaemal organ
attached to the brain by the nerve fibers. Metamorphosis is prevented if the JH
levels in the blood are high during a molt. Besides controlling metamorphosis,
JH also regulates completely separate physiological processes in the adult
female insect, sexual maturation and egg development. In order to control these
functions, the levels of JH fluctuate in a characteristic manner during
development. JH levels are regulated both by the control of its synthesis by the
CA and the control of its degradation by catabolic enzymes present in the blood.
Dr. Horodyski wants to further understand the regulation of JH synthesis by the
CA. It has previously been shown that JH synthesis is positively and negatively
regulated by neuropeptides synthesized in the insect brain. One of these
peptides, allatotropin (Mas-AT), has been purified, sequenced and shown to
stimulate JH synthesis in CA of adult insects of the order Lepidotera
(butterflies and moths). He has isolated the gene for Mas-AT, and has begun to
characterize the structure of this neuropeptide and the control of its synthesis
using molecular biological techniques. These methods are much more sensitive
than traditional biochemical approaches when studying peptides that are present
in such small amounts. He has shown that this is synthesized as as part of
larger precursor which contains other peptides. The functions of these peptides
are not yet known. The Mas-AT gene is expressed in the brain and in the nerve
cord, and the mRNA is present during larval life and during adult development.
Its presence suggests another role besides the control of JH synthesis, since
Mas-AT was inactive in stimulating JH synthesis in larval CA. He will identify
the cells in the times in which the gene is expressed. He will initiate studies
to characterize the receptor protein which med iates the cellular response to
Mas-AT, and to define the target cells for the action of this peptide. ***