* 9307582
* Stereochemistry of Nanomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Jay Siegel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1996
* USD 340,000.00

Research in three related areas will be pursued. In the first part,
heterotriangulenes will be used as building blocks for nanostructures. These
molecules with molecular weights of over 1000 Daltons will be investigated with
regard to inclusion compound formation, and polarizability and electron-transfer
involving the pi-aromatic systems. In the second part, topologically
stereoisomeric entwined networks will be synthesized, whose structures are based
on graph theory. In the third part, the synthesis of bowl-shaped polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons will accomplished. The dynamics of the bowl-to-bowl
inversion will be studied by dynamic NMR spectroscopy. Derivatives of these
compounds will be coupled to form macrocyclophanes related to fullerene
fragments. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of
Professor Jay S. Siegel at the University of California, San Diego. Large
molecules will be synthesized which contain internal cavities. Inclusion of
other molecules into these cavities will be studied as well as the
intramolecular interactions which will be detected spectroscopically. Bowl-
shaped large molecules will be prepared and the bowl-to-bowl inversion barrier
will be determined by spectroscopic methods. These bowl-shaped molecules will
also be coupled to produce fragments related to fullerene, a recently discovered
allotrope of carbon. Finally, molecules will be synthesized where chains of
atoms become entwined. The particular entwined pattern is based on graph theory,
a mathematical discipline.