* 9307759
* Signals in a Rapid Differentiation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Chandler Fulton, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1995
* USD 104,500.00

9307759 Fulton The ultimate goal of this laboratory is to elucidate the
orchestration of causal pathways during cell differentiation. The paradigm
employed for this purpose is the 100-minute change of Naegleria gruberi from
amoebae to flagellates--from one eukaryotic motility form to another--a
differentiation that is exceptionally accessible for analysis except for lack of
molecular genetics. The quest continues via three ongoing studies, each of
interest separately but all converging toward the goal. 1) Surprisingly this
quick change has two "checkpoints," at 10 min and at 20 min, at which the
strength of some signal(s) is evaluated and decisions are made whether to
progress toward differentiation or to "hold." Experiments are planned to define
these checkpoints. 2) Certain conserved proteins are synthesized during
differentiation in processes that involve signals regulating gene expression,
mRNA stability, and localization of these proteins in flagella and associated
organelles. These proteins include four calcium-binding proteins: a flagellar
and a cell-body calmodulin, calcineurin B and centrin (a.k.a. caltractin), which
becomes associated primarily with the basal bodies when these organelles form de
novo during differentiation. Studies are continuing to define these calcium-
binding proteins by examining gene expression, sequence, and protein
localization. 3) The essential tool of DNA-mediated transformation of Naegleria
is being developed using an homologous selectable marker, the OMP decarboxylase
gene. The description of checkpoints and the study of conserved localized
proteins is expected to yield results of immediate interest while the molecular
genetic system is achieved. Once gene introduction is possible in Naegleria, the
information from the first two aims will make it feasible to determine causal
pathways for signals from initiation of differentiation to assembly of
components into basal bodies and flagellae. %%% This research takes advantage of
a unicellular organism, Naegleria gruberi, to study the principles involved in
cellular differentiation. In response to chemical, mechanical, or physical
changes in its environment, this organism, within one hundred minutes, can
change from an ameba to an actively swimming, streamlined form with two
flagellae. These two forms move by two very different mechanisms which involve
very different sets of cellular machinery . This quick change represents an
excellent model to study the biochemical signal pathways and changes in gene
expression involved in a well-defined developmental process. The results should
shed light on the mechanisms of cellular differentiation common to all living
things, and will also expand our knowledge of the diversity of mechanisms by
which a variety of organisms respond to environmental signals. ***