* 9307570
* Research in General Relativity and Quantum                  Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Rafael Sorkin, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 12/31/1996
* USD 92,099.00

WPCP 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @ BOND - HP Laserjet II
HPLASERJ.PRS x @ , t 0# BmX @ 2 &lt; &gt; N ( #| x 3 ' 3 ' Standard 3 ' 3 '
Standard = rJet Series II Y ( WPCN 2 B V P Z Courier 10cpi 2 x x x , x @ 8 ; X @
BOND - HP Laserjet II HPLASERJ.PRS x @ , t 0# BmX @ 2 &lt; L #| x 9307570 Sorkin
This project will pursue research in "quantum gravity", which is the important
problem of finding a theory in which the behavior of the gravitational field is
characterized by a quantum randomness instead of by the deterministic evolution
of the classical Einstein theory. One knows such randomness is necessary for
consistency, since the known unpredictability of matter (for example, the
quantum jumps which occur within atoms) must necessarily give rise to a
corresponding unpredictability in the gravitational fields produced by the
matter. When a theory of quantum gravity is found one may expect to understand
what happens to objects which fall into black holes, and to understand what made
the cosmological "big bang" take the form that it did. The approach Prof. Sorkin
will follow is based on the hypothesis that spacetime has an "atomic" structure,
being what technically is called a causal set. At the current stage of
development of this theory a central question in understanding how the spacetime
"atoms" interact with each other, is that of l earning which sort of interaction
can avoid producing the impression of action at a distance (which would conflict
with established physical laws). Prof. Sorkin will study this question using
computer simulations of fields like the electromagnetic field propagating on a
causal set. Progress in this effort will be a significant step toward a full
formulation of causal set dynamics using Feynman's sum over histories method. It
might also provide a novel method which one could apply to computer simulations
of other problems of physical importance, such as predicting the masses of e
lementary particles like the proton. ***