* 9307245
* Developmental Variability and Heterochronic Variation in    Poeciliid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Richard Strauss, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

9307245 Strauss Heterochrony, the alteration of timing within ontogeny
(development) resulting in accelerated or retarded developmental rates of
structures with respect to ancestral conditions, provides an important
developmental mechanism for creating morphological diversity among species. This
research involves a detailed examination of patterns of morphological and
developmental variability in several divergent lineages of poeciliid fishes, a
group of livebearing freshwater fishes occurring throughout Middle America.
Various aspects of development will be examined including allometric growth
gradients (size/shape relationships), absolute and relative growth rates under
standardized conditions, and the relative timings of ossification and other
discrete ontogenetic events. The overall patterns seen for different species
will be interpreted within a phylogenetic framework. %%% The significance of
this research is that it will contribute to a more detailed knowledge of the
development of poeciliid fishes, and these results can be related to other fish
groups. The research also provides valuable information on patterns of
morphological change associated with the size and shape of characteristics as
well as the timing of development. Finally, this research will utilize this
interesting group of fish to develop analytical procedures that can be used to
examine growth and development in other organisms. ***