* 9307607
* Paleofire and Climate History in Siberia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Thomas Swetnam, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1994
* USD 15,000.00

Local patterns of community changes are often embedded within larger regional
scale processes. Interpretation of changes at the local scale are thus a
function of regional level changes. Climatic fluctuation and land use practices
are two regional level processes that affect local dynamics of forest community
structure and biodiversity. This project will use dendro-ecological methods to
reconstruct a multi-century, regional scale forest fire and climate history of
southern taiga forests on the central Siberian Plateau. Fire scar and ring-width
chronologies will be developed from a network of sites. The reconstructed fire
and climate records will be used to assess temporal and spatial changes and
trends in fire activity in association with centuries long fluctuations in
climate and land use practices. Parallel studies of paleofire and climate
histories in similar forests in the southwestern US and Sierra Nevada of
California will provide comparative data for assessing differences and
similarities of regional scale fire climatologies of semi-arid regions in North
America and Siberia. %%% This long-term historical perspective will provide
baseline data for models of future changes in forest communities driven by
global change and human land-use practices. In addition, reconstruction of fire
occurrence will be useful for assessing the importance of conifer forests as a
source of atmospheric trace gases and particulates. Finally, the proposed
research will strengthen collaborative scientiific relationships between US and
Russian scientists.