* 9307914
* Mathematical Sciences: Scientific Computing And Problems In Nature
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9307914 Whitaker The investigator develops accurate methods for modeling the
interface between fluids of different viscosities, based on volume fractions.
The methods are developed with the goal of handling harder problems such as
fluid flow around an obstacle. Also, statistical equilibrium theories of
coherent structures in turbulence are explored using numerical methods. The
approach used here is based on maximizing an entropy subject to the conserved
quantities of the flow. This formulation is based on the Euler's equations. The
investigator has also recently developed a model of DNA which will be compared
to actual DNA in nature. This model will be used to answer some conjectures
about DNA. The investigator develops accurate methods for solving equations
describing the evolution of an interface between two different fluids. This type
of interface occurs, for example, in secondary oil recovery where water is used
to expel remaining oil. The stability of the interface between the water and oil
is important for efficient recovery of the oil. In addition, some simplified
models of fluid flow are developed and solved to investigate some fundamental
properties of turbulence. The fluid could be air around an airplane wing. This
research focuses on predicting coherent structures. The investigator has also
recently developed a model of DNA which will be compared to data from actual DNA
in nature. This model will be used to address some conjectures about DNA which
are of fundamental importance. ***