* 9307890
* Surfactant Interfacial Transport from Growing Drops
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Clayton Radke, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 02/28/1997
* USD 170,000.00

9307890 Radke The PI has pioneered a novel growing-drop technique for studying
rates of adsorption at fluid/fluid interfaces. The proposed growing-drop method
relates the instantaneous pressure and size of a radically expanding liquid drop
to the dynamic interfacial tension arising from sorption of surface-active
solutes. Preliminary measurements with surfactant-free surfaces obtain accurate
tension values over a wide range of tensions and times and for both liquid/gas
and liquid/liquid interfaces. Initial modeling establishes that transport of a
prototype nonionic surfactant, 1-decanol, to a radically growing aqueous/air
surfaces is diffusion limited. This powerful growing-up technique is applied to
study interfacial sorption rates and mechanisms. Ionic surfactants, micellar
solutions, and surfactant mixtures will be studied, and theories describing
their transport will be developed and tested experimentally. Adsorption rates of
synthetic and natural macromolecules will be measured. Studies of nonionic
ethylene oxide surfactants ranging from two to thousands of ethylene oxide
groups will be undertaken with the goal of defining the limit at which molecular
reorientation at the interface causes a change from diffusion to kinetic
controlled adsorption. Likewise, adsorption kinetics of proteins will be
investigated in an attempt to determine the conditions and time scale over which
proteins retain their native configurations at interfaces.. Finally, the
growing-drop apparatus will be modified to incorporate oscillating drops, this
opening new vistas for understanding desorption kinetics. Transport of surface-
active substances to and across liquid/gas and liquid/liquid interfaces is a
determining factor in foam and emulsion stability, in bubble and droplet motion
during two- phase separation processes, and in multiphase and dispersed phase
flow in porous media. In enzyme catalyzed bioreactors, rates of enzyme
adsorption at interfaces are a significant factor limiting maximum reactor
residence times. In biopharmaceutical packaging of proteins competitive rates of
adsorption between proteins and surfactants can determine the chemical stability
of the protein during shipping. At a fundamental level, kinetic rates of
adsorption reflect molecular configuration and orientation at interfaces.
Dynamic interfacial tension is a convenient probe for revealing surfactant
adsorption/desorption kinetics at deformable interfaces. Upon disturbing the
interface, the interfacial tension is monitored as a function of time to expose
surfactant accumulation.