* 9307324
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Optimization of         the Effective Properties of Inhomogeneous Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Kenneth Golden, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1997
* USD 135,000.00

This research will analyze the effective properties of a broad range of
inhomogeneous materials that arise in many technologically and scientifically
important applications. One of the main thrusts of this work will be to obtain
rigorous bounds on effective properties, such as conductivity and elasticity.
The investigators will consider general composite materials, particularly those
composed of three or more components, which are particularly important in
applications, and for which there are many challenging mathematical questions
that remain open. Also to be studied is the behavior of media whose components
have highly contrasting properties and where percolation effects play the
dominant role in the analysis. Examples where such an analysis is necessary
include semiconductors, cermets, porous media, sea ice, and the fracture of
metals. %%% There has been a dramatic increase in the use of composite and
inhomogeneous materials for technological and scientific applications over the
last two decades. One of the key questions underlying the efficient design and
use of such materials is how the arrangement of the various components
determines the effective properties, such as strength or conductivity, of the
composite. The overall goal of the proposed research is to develop mathematical
techniques which provide a quantitative understanding of this connection between
mixture geometry and effective properties.