* 9307282
* Carbohydrate Receptors and Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Eric Anslyn, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1997
* USD 234,000.00

Two related topics will be studied: (1) Carbohydrate molecular recognition in
lipophilic and hydrophilic solvents and (2) Multifunctional catalysis in
phosphatediester hydrolysis. In the first topic, molecules will be investigated
where two intramolecular hydrogen bonds are both retained and broken in
complexation to a receptor with two hydrogen bonds. Multiple energetic analyses
will be used to probe the strength of intra- and inter-molecular hydrogen bonds.
Bis-boronic acid molecular hosts that are complementary to pyranoses will be
prepared that incorporate a redox metal ion that will change coordination on
complexing glucose. The difference in redox potential of the metal ion, with
different coordination spheres, will be the basis of an electrochemical sensor
for glucose in aqueous medium. In the second topic, bifunctional catalysis by
two guanidinium groups in stabilization of the transition state of
phosphatediester hydrolysis will be studied. Trifunctional catalysis with a
general base and tetrafunctional catalysis with an added metal ion will be
studied in the guanidinium system. A method for predicting enzyme rate
enhancements based on binding constants and transition state analogs will be
applied to the proposed multi-functional catalysis. %%% This grant from the
Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of Professor Eric V. Anslyn at the
University of Texas, Austin. Two topics will be pursed: (1) Complexation of
carbohydrates and (2) Multifunctional catalysis of phosphatediesters, which are
important in biological systems. In the first project, molecules that complex
carbohydrates such as glucose in both water and organic solvents will be
prepared. The structures of these complexes and their stabilities will be
determined. A metal ion, such as an iron, will be incorporated into the
receptor, which will be probed electrochemically to determine if glucose is
complexed. This will lead to a practical application for the detection of
glucose in aqueous solutions. In the second topic, a molecule will be prepared
that uses two organic groups as catalytic centers for phosphatediester
hydrolysis. This system will be expanded stepwise to include a basic functional
group, and a metal ion. It is anticipated that this synthetic system will mimic
an enzyme.