* 9307750
* Metallasilsesquioxanes as Models for Silica-Supported       Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Frank Feher, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 02/28/1997
* USD 374,000.00

9307750 Feher This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program supports research on silica-supported catalysts by Dr. Frank
J. Feher of the Chemistry Department, University of California at Irvine. Three
projects involving metallasilsesquioxanes will be pursued. The reactivity of
molybdenum, tungsten, and rhenium-containing silsesquioxanes as olefin
metathesis catalysts will be investigated, with particular emphasis on
determining the effect of varying the M-O-Si bond angle. The chemistry of
platinum group metals in highly siliceous environments will be compared to their
behavior in more traditional ligand environments. New surface-modified silicas
and silica-supported catalysts will be prepared to test the results of model
studies in solution with the chemistry of heterogeneous catalysts. %%% Because
silica (sand) is an amorphous insoluble material, it is difficult to study.
Incompletely-condensed clusters of silicon and oxygen, called silsesquioxanes,
are used here to mimic the hydroxylated surfaces of silica. In catalytic
applications, in which silica is used as a support material for metals,
reactions at the surface are important in the catalytic activity. An advantage
of the silsesquioxanes is that they can be dissolved in many common organic
solvents, thus allowing detailed studies using many of the powerful analytical
techniques used to study molecules in solution. In this project, reactions which
model surface reactions of silica and silica-supported catalysts will be carried
out and the insights obtained will be tested on new heterogeneous catalysts. ***