* 9307466
* Dissertation Research:  "Mother, Student, Worker, Me:       Multiple Selves/Multiple Responsibilities of Chicanas       Renegotiating the Terms of Womanhood"
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,10/31/1995
* Karen Brodkin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 10/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

Sacks/Rodriguez 9307466 This project examines conflicts faced by low income
Chicanas who work outside the home and attend school as they attempt to juggle
work, school, and family. While considerable research on this topic has been
accomplished on African-American and white women little has been done on Chicana
women. The researchers predict that such women find themselves required, but
unable, to fill multiple role expectations as students, workers, family women,
and community women. It is further hypothesized that they attempt to reconcile
those contradictions by reconfiguring their ideal priorities for Chicana women
and their views of the roles of Chicana women should play. The researchers will
compare Chicanas with radically different lifestyles and their experiences with
constructing, interpreting, and reconstituting womanhood. This project will
illustrate the behavioral and conceptual processes by which Chicana confront the
often conflicting demands of the dominant society and the Chicano family, and
the cultural alternatives they develop in response. This research will take
place in Denver, Colorado in working class, Chicano barrios of North Denver,
Auraria, and the West Side: neighborhoods of steadfast Chicano families who now
face unprecedented economic change. *** s( t( ext. 357 7564 U$U U U U U U U U U
UCV WT _W`i` `5a a a b b"b b b b b b bRc c{c c c;d d dte e e e e engtg~gihyh~h h
h h h hEj jXm mvn n p q3rUr~r r r r s sGsVsasts s s s s?s s s t tMttt t$uKuRuWu
u vWx=z { # 6 F U \ o Z 8 i !!"x" #1%X)37 7 7 7)8 8 8?9P9 : @ @ A F K K KoL2M M
M>N O O PKP"Q{Q Q Q Q QcS S S S T TzUsW f ? L Times New Roman Symbol & Arial &
Lucida Sans Bookman Old Style " h r sacks rodriguez abstract abstract%award
thesis abstract sacks rodriguez Raymond Hames Raymond Hames