* 9307836
* Electroenzymatic Synthesis using Oxidoreductase Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Dale Drueckhammer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/1997
* USD 190,000.00

9307836 Drueckhammer The focus of this research is the development of
preparative electroenzymatic synthetic methodology. The reactions of flavin
containing oxidases and dehydrogenases will be driven electrochemically in the
reverse direction for the asymmetric synthesis of amino acids and hydroxy acids.
Diffusable mediators (viologen derivatives) will be used to transfer electrons
from the cathode to the enzyme. Medium to high molecular weight electron
transfer mediators will be prepared for use in a size-exclusion membrane
enclosed electroenzymatic reactor. Applications of the technique for the
synthesis of D-amino acids, L-alpha-hydroxy acids and D-aldose sugars will be
probed. %%% With this award, the Chemistry Division and the Division of Chemical
and Thermal Systems are jointly supporting the work of Dr. Dale G. Drueckhammer
of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University. The focus of the work,
submitted under the EPRI/NSF Initiative in Electrochemical Synthesis, is on
developing technology that combines the power of enzyme catalysis with the
utility of electrochemistry to achieve preparative scale electroenzymatic
synthesis. The success of the project could presage a new area of biocatalysis
for use in the enzymatic synthesis of organic and biological compounds. ***