* 9307513
* The Cuzco Ceque System Research Project
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Brian Bauer, Institute for New World Archaeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1996
* USD 34,695.00

9307513 Bauer With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Brian Bauer
will continue his examination of the Incan system of "ceques" which were
described by the earliest Spanish missionaries. What these documents indicate is
a system of 41 or 42 hypothetical lines (ceques) which radiated out from the
capitol of Cuzco in highland Peru. Religious shrines were situated at various
points along these lines. In past work Dr. Bauer has located some of these
shrines on the ground but many remain unknown. To complete this task, he and
Peruvian colleagues will first study archival documents which are located in
repositories in both Peru and Spain. They will then conduct field survey to
locate the places actually described. On this basis it will be possible to
reconstruct the ceque system and how it functioned and then to situate it in
real space. Although this research may appear to concern an esoteric ritual
system, it in fact provides direct insight into how states function. Lacking
both writing and wheeled vehicles, the Inca rulers created an empire which
extended beyond the boundaries of present day Peru and which integrated large
numbers of people who spoke diverse languages and lived in very different
environments. A question which interests archaeologists is how such a complex
system was maintained. Information available indicates that the ceque system
played a central role in this. Ceque lines marked major boundaries between kin
groups and the maintenance of individual shrines was also based on kin and
social ties. Thus the ceque system may provide insight and a way to approach
more basic questions of social organization. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will also increase our understanding of how complex societies develop and are
maintained. ***