* 9307012
* RUI:  Three-Trophic Level Interactions in an Aquatic        Macrophyte Hybrid Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Jamin Eisenbach, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1996
* USD 180,729.00

This research will investigate a three trophic level interaction in a hybrid
zone of cattails. The three levels of interactions include: the cattails and the
hybrid, herbivores that eat the seeds of the cattails, and parasites that infect
the seed-eating herbivores. To study how herbivory varies among the three types
of cattails, field experiments will examine the herbivore loads sustained by
these cattails over a broad geographic range. The role that hybridization and
introgression play in influencing rates of herbivory and parasitoidism will be
addressed with a transplant study using potted plants of various crosses.
Herbivore exclusion and addition experiments will examine 1) whether the pattern
of reduced herbivory on the hybrid cattails can be attributed to plant
properties or parasites, 2) the degree of dependence that one species of seed
eating herbivore has on the presence of another. %%% ALthough hybridization of
plants has been responsible for 30-70% of the genetic variation in and among
plant species, little is known about the three-way interactions that occur in
zones of hybridization. By focussing on the patterns of herbivory and the
herbivore-natural enemy interactions, the dynamic nature of plant hybrid zones
will be elucidated. This research will make an important contribution to
understanding the role of hybridization and control of natural enemies in plant
populations.