* 9307328
* Study of Gap Anisotropy in High Tc Superconductors by       Tunneling Method
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Kwok-Wai Ng, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 01/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

9307328 Ng This project will investigate high-Tc materials using low temperature
scanning tunneling microscopy. A ultra-high-vacuum system has been built to
allow a study of tunneling as a function of angle with respect to the
superconductor surface. In this way the anisotropy in the tunneling current will
be sought. This can be related to anisotropy in the density of electronic states
of the high-Tc materials, and provides input to and tests of current theories of
high-Tc materials. The measurements will determine how the anisotropy is
influenced by temperature variation, scattering processes, and the coupling
strength between CuO2 layers. %%% This project studies the arrangement of
electrons in the high-Tc superconducting materials. The high-Tc materials are
characterized by planes composed of copper and oxygen atoms. Within these CuO2
planes, the arrangement of electron charge is anisotropic, but direct
measurements to determine the anisotropy are very difficult. This project will
use tunneling microscopy to detect electrons having the surface at various
angles. The resulting anisotropy will be used to test current theories and will
provide important fundamental information about the high-Tc materials. The
information is also relevant to potential technology in that superconducting
devices may depend on the anisotropic properties of the high-Tc materials. ***