* 9307644
* Mathematical Sciences: Hydrodynamics and                    Magnetohydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Bruce Turkington, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daljit S. Ahluwalia
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

The proposed research is directed toward some models of turbulence in fluids and
magnetofluids. Deterministic and statistical equilibrium theories of coherent
structures in turbulence will be explored using both analytical and numerical
methods. These theories, which complement the cascade-oriented concept of a
driven and dissipative system, provide models for the long-time, large-scale
behavior of flows and fields governed by conservative evolution equations. Their
equilibrium solutions are characterized by variational principles, such as a
maximum entropy principle with constraints dictated by the conservation laws for
the governing dynamics. Theoretical tools and computational algorithms will be
developed to solve the constrained optimization problems that arise from these
general principles. A variety of fundamental, prototype problems derived from
specific physical applications will be treated with these methods; they include,
for instance, the organized vortex structures in a shear layer, and the most
probable state of a magnetically-confined plasma. Most of the tractable problems
of this kind are essentially two-dimensional; however, some aspects of the
analogous three-dimensional problems will be also tackled using extensions of
the same methods. The principal aim of this research is to develop a basic
understanding of the physics of turbulence. The turbulent medium can be an
ordinary fluid, such as water flowing in a pipe or air streaming past a wing;
or, it can be a magnetized plasma, such as ionized gas in a thermonuclear fusion
reactor. Simplified mathematical models of these complex physical problems are
formulated in order to investigate some fundamental properties of the phenomena
they exhibit. Particular attention is focussed on the coherent or organized
structures that emerge and persist in the presence of turbulent disorder. These
structures are studied quantitatively by deriving and then solving equations
that captu re the coarse-grained behavior of the system while partially ignoring
its fine-grained fluctuations. In this way, useful predictions can be made of
physical systems having a very large number of degrees of freedom, which
otherwise would be beyond the grasp of current methods of mathematical analysis
or computer simulation. An interdisciplinary approach will be adopted in which
abstract analytical tools, modern computing techniques, and solid physical
reasoning are employed in a unified manner.