* 9307917
* A Multi-Layered Approach to the Development of Concurrent   Object-Oriented Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Doris Carver, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9307917 Carver Concurrent software systems will be specified using an object-
oriented formal specification language. The long-term objective of the research
is to define a hierarchy of formal specification languages that address, in
increasing specificity, the requirements of concurrent systems. This family of
languages is based on the concept of a base language that serves as the parent
class and subclasses that represent increasingly specify features of concurrent
systems. The preliminary approach is to first develop a hierarchical description
of the classes and their relationships and then to formally define the base
class, both syntactically and semantically. Using inheritance, subclasses will
then be defined for categories of programming languages that support specific
language features. This approach to the specification of concurrent object-
oriented systems promotes the use of abstraction and assists the specifier with
the transformation of a problem to a language-specific form. The hierarchy of
specifications also has potential for specification reuse. The planning
activities include comprehensive study of research in areas that are fundamental
to the proposed research, including formal specification languages, concurrent
object- oriented languages, and algebraic specifications. The planning
activities also include the development of a mini-language to provide a
mechanism for experimentation and for expansion of the proposed research. ***