* 9307927
* Mathematical Sciences: Non-commutative Differential Geometryof Deformations of Commutative Rings: Operations Index      Theorems and Characteristic Classes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Boris Tsygan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 80,550.00

This award is concerned with the study of the noncommutative differential
geometry of deformations of commutative rings. The principal investigator has
proved the algebraic index theorem for any deformation of the ring of functions
on a symplectic manifold. The main technical tool was the theory of operations
in cyclic homology. He plans to develop this construction further, which would
yield the algebraic index theorem for families and foliations, the algebraic
analogue of the Connes-Moscovici index theorem for an equivariant quantization
of a ring of functions, and index and character formula representations of
quantizations of commutative rings. These methods are also expected to yield
various generalizations of the Riemann-Roch-Grothendieck theorem. This is
reasearch in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the oldest parts of modern
mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past
quarter-century. In its origins, it treated figures that could be defined in the
plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the field makes
use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and
conversely is finding application in those fields as well as in theoretical
computer science and robotics.