* 9307477
* Scramble Competition: An Examination of Day Range Length    Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Lynne Isbell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/1996
* USD 133,799.00

A major goal of studies in primate behavior has been to understand the causes
of competitive relationships among females. Historically, attempts to explain
variation in competitive relationships have focused on what has been called
"contest competition," which can lead to dominance hierarchies, a major
organizing theme in describing female relationships. However, field studies have
now shown that greater variation in female relationships exists than is
accommodated or recognized by models of contest competition alone. Also,
predictions of day range size from competition models have proved inadequate to
date. This project will focus on the complementary relationship of contest
competition and "scramble" competition, which has not been so widely examined in
the past. It has been widely accepted that intragroup competition increases as
group size increases. One result of this increased competition is that in many
primate species larger groups travel farther per day than smaller groups.
However, not all species respond to increases in group size by traveling longer
daily distances. In fact, primates can be separated clearly by whether they do
or do not increase their day ranges with increasing group size. This division
also separates clearly along the strength of the dominance hierarchy within
groups (a form of contest competition). Isbell argues that in those species that
increase day range length with increasing group size, dominance hierarchies
among females within groups are strong and easily detected. In contrast, in
those species that do not increase day range length with increasing group size,
dominance hierarchies are weak or difficult to detect. This study promises to
clarify some fundamental issues regarding behavioral expressions of competition
in social groups of primates.