* 9307610
* Laser Spectroscopy of Ferroelectrics and Dynamics of Phononsin Glasses and Crystalline Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* William Dennis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 65,000.00

This proposal is to extend a collaborative research effort between the Russian
research group at the Ioffe Institute in St. Petersburg and the U.S. laser
spectroscopy group at the University of Georgia. The current cooperation in
phonon dynamics in single crystal fibers will be broadened to include the
dynamics of phonons in glasses and into the application of high resolution laser
spectroscopy to the study of ferroelectrics. The proposed research will match
the expertise of the Russian investigators in phonon dynamics and spectroscopy
of ferroelectrics with the state-of-the-art facilities and expertise in laser
spectroscopy at the University of Georgia. These facilities include a system for
the preparation of single crystalline fibers using the techniques of laser-
heated pedestal growth, a line tunable pulsed far infrared laser for
monochromatic phonon generation and a single frequency tunable dye laser for
coherent transient and spectral hole-burning spectroscopy. The anticipated
results for this research effort will provide information on the domain
structure and the possibility for optical holeburning memories in the
ferroelectric chromium doped lithium germanate glasses using photon-gated
photoionization holeburning, information on the spatial, spectral and temporal
phonon dynamics of glasses, and a better understanding of phonon-surface
interactions and phonon transport in crystals using the special geometry of
single crystalline fibers. %%% This study treats three basic problems in
materials science. The first project will be to examine the dynamics of high
frequency phonons in disordered materials such as glasses. This problem relates
to the understanding of heat transport, the structure, and the dynamics of
glassy systems. The second project will be to study the domain structure of
ferroelectric materials using state- of-the-art high resolution laser
spectroscopy. The results of this exercise should provide new information on the
fundamental properties of ferroelectric materials. Finally, ferroelectric
materials containing known impurities will be investigated as possible new
candidates for high density optical computer memories using persistent optical
holeburning. This research will be conducted as a collaborative effort between
the U.S. laser spectroscopy group at the University of Georgia and the Russian
research group at the Ioffe Institute in St. Petersburg. It will utilize the
expertise and facilities at the University of Georgia in high resolution laser
spectroscopy, far infrared lasers and materials preparation capabilities using
laser heated pedestal growth coupled with the expertise at the Ioffe Institute
in the properties and preparation of ferroelectrics and their experience with
phonon studies in glasses.