* 9307753
* Research Initiation Award:  Thermal Boundary Resistance in  Thin-Film High-Temperature Superconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Patrick Phelan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* DEBORAH KAMINSKI
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS 9307753 Phelan The thermal boundary resistance (Rbd) occurring
at the interface between high-critical-temperature (high-Tc) superconducting
thin films and their substrates plays a major role in determining the operating
temperature, and hence the feasibility, of high-Tc superconducting devices. The
research objectives are to develop a fundamental understanding of the
relationship between the film/substrate interface microstructure and Rbd, and to
formulate a model relating Rbd to easily measurable properties like Tc, critical
current, and normal-state resistivity. Experiments are performed, using a
closed-cycle cryogenic apparatus, on films etched in a novel two-strip meander
pattern that enables both normal and superconducting-state measurements to be
conducted. Two experimental procedures are proposed. In one, a continuous-wave,
visible laser beam serves as a heat source, thus allowing for superconducting-
state measurements. In the other, the oxygen content of the high-Tc film is
varied so that the film Tc can be controlled, resulting in a normal-state film
at temperatures much lower than usual. This allows the two strips to serve as
heaters and/or thermometers after a calibration of their electrical resistances
versus temperature. The experimental results permit a comparison between Rbd for
superconducting-state and normal-state films, and provide valuable information
for the thermal design of high-Tc thin-film devices.