* 9307259
* Uniform Monolayer Pealing by Cyclic Etching of Gallium      Arsenide (100) and Silicon (100) Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Andrew Kummel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1997
* USD 297,050.00

9307259 Kummel This research addresses precise etching of GaAs(100) and Si(100)
by an exact integral number of monolayers using saturation dosing of Cl2
followed by laser induced desorption. Molecular chlorine is required because it
only absorbs to a coverage of one monolayer on these two surfaces. The critical
qualities for the laser induced thermal desorption are (a) uniformity across the
sample; (b) complete removal of all etching products; (c) restoration of the
surface to a clean well-ordered state. These characteristics will be sought
through the use of sequences of nanosecond laser pulses or single microsecond
laser pulses rather than the conventional nanosecond single pulse technique. The
monolayer peeling technique is critical to the development of quantum well
devices because, if successful, it would allow etching to the exact interface
between two thin semiconductor layers such as GaAs and AlGaAs. %%% The goal of
this study is to devise a method of etching GaAs(100) and Si(100) at room
temperature without surface damage and with an ultra-precise atomic level
control over etch depth. This proposed technique of monolayer peeling is cyclic
etching with chlorine and laser induced thermal desorption. The monolayer
peeling technique is critical to the development of advanced electronic and
photonic devices and integrated circuits using structures such as compound
semiconductor quantum wells, because it would provide the basis for a critical
fabrication process, etching to the exact interface between two ultra-thin
semiconductor layers such as GaAs and AlGaAs.