* 9307549
* Investigation of the Peroxidase-Oxidase Oscillator:         Theory and Experiment
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Raima Larter, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 12/31/1996
* USD 312,500.00

9307549 Larter Raima Larter and Alexander Scheeline are supported by a grant
from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study the detailed
chemical kinetics of the peroxidase-oxidase chemical oscillator. Free-radical
behavior, photochemical effects, the role of co-factors, degradation of
peroxidase during reaction, reactivity of NAD dimer produced as a reaction
intermediate, and the consequences of acid-catalyzed anomerization of NADH will
be studied. Two goals to be addressed are: 1) to sufficiently characterize the
chemical dynamics so that realistic models for the reaction can be devised; and
2) to better understand the chemistry of the constiuent species. Measurement
tools to be employed include oxidimetry, potentiometry, cyclic voltammetry,
spectrophotometry, and electron paramagnetic resonance. %%% It has been
suggested that chemical oscillations may provide the underlying rhythm for all
types of biological oscillaitons which have been observed to occur at all levels
of the metabolic process. Many of these oscillations have been explained in
chemical terms. The peroxidase-oxidase reaction which is being studied by Larter
and Scheeline is a very useful model reaction of the biochemical processes which
might underlie rhythmic phenomena in living systems. One of the objectives of
their research is to resolve the question whether it is the natural enzyme
kinetics or the unnatural features of the in laboratory experiments which lead
to the observed nonlinear dynamic behavior which are the source of the
oscillations in this system. ***