* 9307614
* The First ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference,     Bombay, India, January 5-7, 1994, Group Travel Award in U.S.and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Andres Soom, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1994
* USD 15,650.00

9307614 Soom Description: This project supports the participation of a U.S.
delegation in the first Heat and Mass Transfer Conference organized jointly be
the Indian Society of Heat and Mass Transfer (ISHMT) and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineering (ASME). The conference will be held at the Bhabha Atomic
Research Center (BARC) in Bombay between January 5 and 7, 1994. The American
scientists are expected to participate in panel discussions on research and
graduate education in the U.S. and India, and on university-industry cooperative
research in the two countries. They will also conduct a symposium on modern
developments in boiling and condensation, and will present state-of -the- art
review lectures on topics of emerging technologies. They will give courses on
experimental methods in heat transfer, heat transfer in manufacturing and
material processing, and thermal resistance in electronic systems. The U.S.
scientists plan to selectively visit Indian research institutes including BARC
and four of the Indian Institutes of Technology. Scope: This project will help
develop close ties between researchers in the U.S. and India for exchange of
technical information and for conducting cooperative research projects of mutual
interest. This meeting in India is similar to others organized by the ASME with
counterpart organizations in China, South Korea, Japan and Europe. India has a
very strong community of researchers in this particular field of heat and mass
transfer, and it is likely that the U.S. participants will benefit from
attending this conference. ***