* 9307581
* Torque Investigations in High-Tc Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,09/30/1997
* David Farrell, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 250,000.00

This project involves collaboration between an experimentalist at Case Western
University and a theorist at Iowa State University. The research involves the
use of high sensitivity equilibrium torque measurements of high-Tc materials.
The theoretical goal of the project is to determine how the behavior of the
torque in such materials is influenced by thermal fluctuations. The experimental
thrust is focused on three areas: the flux-lattice melting transition in
yttrium-barium-copper-oxide materials, the magnetic field dependence of this
transition, and the determination of the symmetry of the superconducting ground
state in this material. These results should lead to a deeper understanding of
the behavior of high-Tc materials in a magnetic field. %%% High temperature
superconductors are being widely studied, in part because of their potential for
carrying large electrical currents without the energy losses found in ordinary
conductors such as copper and aluminum. However, the very large currents in the
superconductors generate very large magnetic fields which react back on the
superconductors and eventually destroy the superconducting state. Thus the
behavior of superconductors in magnetic fields is a fundamental issue in high-Tc
materials research. This project involves both a theorist and experimentalist in
an effective collaboration which is focused on studying the forces experience by
a superconductor in a magnetic field. This magnetic torque measurement apparatus
is unique in the US and is providing important fundamental information that is
also useful in technological applications.