* 9307067
* The Screening of Mutagenized abi3 Seeds of Arabidopsis      thaliana for New Giberellin Sensitivity Mutants, and their  Characterization
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Valerie Sponsel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1995
* USD 35,700.00

9307067 Sponsel The proposed research involves a new screening procedure for
mutagenised Arabidopsis thaliana seeds to select plant stature mutants which
differ in their ability synthesize or respond to the bibberellin (GA) group of
plant hormones. Since GAs are normally required to counteract abscisic acid
(ABA)-induced seed dormancy in Arabidopsis the original mutagenesis will be
conducted using seeds which are homozygous recessive at the AB13 locus. The ab13
allele causes insensitivity to ABA and hence prevents seed dormancy. It is
expected that mutations which perturb the biosynthesis or response to GA, and
which would normally prevent seed germination, will not impair germination in
ab13 seeds. Therefore this screening protocol should allow the isolation of new
GA mutants, especially new GA-response mutants. During the twelve months of this
award it is proposed to begin the genetic analysis of these mutants in
association with Dr. M. Estelle. The biochemical analysis will also be
initiated. It will involved the identification and qualification of GAs in the
new mutants using combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The
characterization of new GA-insensitive mutants in which the reception of the GA
signal, or the tranduction of that signal into a growth response is impaired
will assist in the identification of genes which are involved in these events.