* 9307658
* Diversity Maintenance in Variable Environments:  Multiple   Mechanisms at Multiple Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1997
* Peter Chesson, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1997
* USD 325,000.00

9307658 Huntly This research combines theory and experiments to define and
measure the mechanisms by which fluctuating environmental factors (e.g.,
temporal variation in weather patterns, spatial variation in soil water or
nitrogen content) influence coexistence, using desert annual plants of the
Chihuahuan Desert as a test case. The PI's will focus on an integrated
examination of effects of environmental variability at several temporal scales,
both within and between years, and on simultaneous measurements of the effects
of several different mechanisms of coexistence, two being dependent on variable
environmental conditions and one being classical niche differences. The PI's
combine development of models of germination and growth of desert annual plants
with field and laboratory experiments designed to measure responses of plants to
within- and among-year patterns of temperature and resource availability, and to
detect non-linear competitive interactions. %%% A sound understanding of the
role of environmental variability in the dynamics and diversity of communities
is needed, as is a framework for understanding the contributions of multiple
factors to species coexistence. This research will provide a better
understanding of species coexistence in variable environments mediated by
multiple interactions, and increase our understanding of the ecology and
coexistence of desert annual plants. ***