* 9307816
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies of Exactly Solvable Models   in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Jacques H Perk, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia R. Brown
* 06/30/1996
* USD 104,000.00

9307816 Perk This is a research project for the continuation of the study of
many of the unsolved problems in the chiral Potts model, generalized chiral
Potts models, and multi-component chiral Potts models. These mathematical models
describe phase transitions in experimentally realizable systems such as
adsorption of molecules on thin films, multi-layered systems, membranes, etc. In
spite of many successes so far in calculating various physical quantities of the
chiral Potts model, these results have not yet been fully explored and made use
of. It is intended in this project to translate the exact results into language
more transparent to physicists, so that experts in Monte Carlo calculations,
high- and low-temperature expansions, and various other methods, can use them.
The exact results can be then used to properly gauge the errors of the
approximate methods and solve long-standing controversies. Attempts to obtain
new solvable models in three dimensions will be made in collaboration with our
Russian colleague Yu.G. Stroganov. Progress in this work may bring forth
interaction between many other research areas in mathematics and physics such as
quantum groups and knot theory, monopoles and string theory, phase transitions
in condensed matter, and biomembranes in biophysics. ! ! A ( Times New Roman
Symbol &amp; Arial " h ; % ; % / terri l. hicks terri l. hicks