* 9307947
* The Development of Strategies for the Design and            Preparation of New Molecular Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Frank Fowler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 11/30/1996
* USD 338,000.00

9307947 Lauher This award is made in the Advanced Materials and Processing
Program in support of the collaborative research of Professors Lauher and Fowler
at SUNY-Stonybrook. Support is provided by the Chemistry Division. The objective
of the research is the development of general strategies for the synthesis of
designed layered organic solid-state materials. The approach is based on the
identification of two independent sets of functionalities that will
independently lead to the self-assembly of molecules into a layered
supramolecular network. Conceptually, the first functionality assembles the
molecules into one-dimensional networks and the second unites the one-
dimensional networks into two-dimensional layered solids. Representative
functionality candidates are the dicarboxylic acids and N,N'-disubstituted
ureas. New persistent hydrogen bonding motifs will be sought. The relationship
between molecular symmetry and crystallographic symmetry and the use of
chirality will be explored. %%% New materials with novel mechanical, electrical
and optical properties will be required by developing science and technology.
Using the tools of molecular functionality, symmetry and chirality for control
of supramolecular structure, this research will provide critical information
that will form the basis for the design and preparation of new materials. ***