* 9307337
* Why so Little Planktonic Nitrogen Fixation in Estuaries--   Limitation by Trace Metals and Grazing?
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Robert Howarth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* John R. Gold
* 10/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

9307337 Howarth In the temperate zone, primary production is limited by Nitrogen
in many if not most estuaries and by Phosphorus in most lakes. One major reason
for these difference is a difference in Nitrogen fixation by planktonic
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). In lakes, temporary shortages of Nitrogen
relative to Phosphorus result in blooms of cyanobacteria which fix Nitrogen and
help alleviate the shortage. This does not occur in most estuaries, where
planktonic cyanobacteria capable of Nitrogen fixation are rare and rates of
Nitrogen fixation low. The work proposed here addresses this difference with a
series of mesocosm experiments using water from Narragansett Bay. The central
hypothesis of the proposal is that low availability's of Iron and/or Molibdium
in estuaries lead to slow growth rates of planktonic, Nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacteria. This leaves the cyanobacteria vulnerable to consumption by
generalized grazing animals, leading to low population numbers and rates of
Nitrogen fixation. The hypothesis does not state that herbivores in estuaries
specifically feed on cyanobacteria. Rather, it is hypothesized that estuarine
ecosystems may contain high numbers of generalized grazers which are capable of
feeding on fine cyanobacterial filaments and are likely to do so incidentally to
their feeding on other particles when such filaments are present. Zooplankton,
ctenophores, and a variety of bivalves (mussels, oysters, clams) are examples of
such filter feeding animals common in estuaries which may fed on cyanobacterial
filaments. With sufficiently high growth rates, cyanobacteria might bloom and
fix Nitrogen even with high rates of grazing, as can happen in freshwater. Iron
and/or Molibdium availability's are viewed as central to the growth rate of
cyanobacteria based on previous research; the requirement for both in Nitrogen
fixation is high. %%% Mesocosm experiments form the core of the proposed
research. Estuarine water and plankton assemblages will be subje ct to different
additions of Iron, Molibdium, and Phosphorus, and levels of grazing will be
controlled by adding predators on herbivorous zooplankton. Silversides (Menidia
beryllina) will likely be the predator used. Interactions of metal additions
with the fish additions in replicated experiments are of particular interest.
Response variables to be measured include rates of Nitrogen fixation,
abundance's of cyanobacteria and heterocysts, composition of the zooplankton
community, assimilation, of Molimdium, Sultan, and Iron, and concentrations of
nutrients, Molibdium, and Iron. A recently published method using oxine to
complex labile forms of Iron will be used to estimate Iron availability to
phytoplankton. The proposed research should lead to a better understanding of
the factors which exclude Nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria from the plankton of
most temperate estuaries and coastal seas, helping to cause Nitrogen limitation
of net primary production in these systems. The research should also lead to a
better understanding of the controls on Nitrogen fixation by plankton in lakes,
and therefore on the maintenance of Phosphorus limitation even in lakes
receiving nutrient loading with low Nitrogen:Phosphorus. Thus, the research
relates to the practical issue of management strategies to control
eutrophication in both estuaries and lakes.