* 9307596
* Mathematical Sciences: Index Reduction Formulas for Central Simple Alge>ras.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Adrian Wadsworth, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 06/30/1996
* USD 60,000.00

This work is concerned with the study of index reduction formulas for central
simple algebras on passage to the function field of a projective variety. The
type of variety under consideration is a twisted form of G/P where G is a split
reductive algebraic group and P is a parabolic subgroup of G. The index
reduction formula will follow from a knowledge of the Grothendieck group of the
variety of interest, which has been computed in general only when G is
connected. The principal investigator will investigate the Grothendieck group of
the twisted forms of G/P when G is not connected, where it is clear from
examples that some new phenomena not seen in the connected case will arise. The
principal investigator will also study central simple algebras with involution,
and the associated generalized even Clifford algebras. This research is in the
general area of ring theory. A ring is an algebraic object having both an
addition and a multiplication defined on it. Although the additive operation
satisfies the commutative law, the multiplicative operation is not required to
do so. An example of a ring for which multiplication is not commutative is the
collection of nxn matrices over the integers. The study of noncommutative rings
has become an important part of algebra because of its increasing significance
to other branches of mathematics and physics.