* 9307771
* RUI:  The Analysis of Three-dimensional Spatial Information of Tree and Forest Canopy Structure:  A Planning Grant
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Geoffrey Parker, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Beach
* 12/31/1996
* USD 198,873.00

Forest canopy communities are important in maintaining the diversity,
resiliency, and functioning of the ecosystems they inhabit. With the increasing
interest and amounts of data on forest canopies that are resulting from new
access techniques, ecologists require the development of tools to manage and
analyze their data and a means for comparing data from disparate studies.
Ecologists will need to deal with: 1) new types of data, 2) a great deal more
data, and 3) the necessity of sharing data among researchers who have separate
research questions. The project will bring together forest canopy researchers
("domain scientist"), quantitative scientists, and computer scientists to work
towards establishing methods to collect, store, display, analyze, and interpret
three-dimensional spatial data relating to tree crowns and tree canopies. This
award will support the following planning activities to: 1) compile an array of
research questions and needs that involve canopy structure from domain
scientists; 2) examine potentially applicable information models and software
tools that are in used in allied fields; and 3) develop conceptual models and
recommendations for the types of format of information and analyses necessary to
answer research questions posed by forest canopy researchers. Anticipated
products include: a specifications list of questions and needsof domain
scientists; and annotated compilation of potential tools from allied fields; an
information model that will be tested with data collected from a forested study
site were we can gain access to the canopy with a large construction crane; and
an explicit set of steps to implement the model and generate the methods to
collect and analyze three- dimensional spatial data. This award is being jointly
supported by the Ecological Studies and the Database Activities in the
Biological Sciences programs.