* 9307202
* Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Selection in an Early Successional Field: Patterns and Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Donald Stratton, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/1997
* USD 177,500.00

9307202 Stratton Environmental heterogeneity is often invoked in theories of
microevolution but little is known of the spatial or temporal scale of variation
in selection. The evolutionary outcome of natural selection depends critically
on whether variation in fitness is fine grained or course grained. For example,
dispersal of offspring in microsites with similar fitness effects will promote
local adaptation, while heterogeneity within the dispersal radius favors the
evolution of generalists. Variation in selection is defined by reversals in the
relative fitness of genotypes (genotype x environmental interactions for
fitness). My previous work has shown that soil nutrients and vegetation patterns
vary on scale of meters and affect the absolute fitness of Drigeron, but changes
in rank fitness among genotypes occur on a scale of centimeters. Selective
heterogeneity may thus qualitatively different from easily observed ecological
heterogeneity. %%% Spacial autocorrelation analysis will be used to measure
spatial and temporal variation in the relative fitness of 12 genotypes of
Erigeron annuus over two years. I will compare the magnitude of pure spatial and
temporal variation in selection with second order changes in the location of
fitness peake among years. Simultaneous measurements of soil nutrients, light,
water, and background vegetation will identify factors correlate with the
relative fitness in the field; greenhouse experiments will then be used to
confirm the casual relationships. Furthermore, I will test whether variation in
selection is caused by frequency dependent, genotype genotype interactions at
several spatial scales. This research will be among the first studi es of
temporal variation in selection in natural plant populations, and the first to
test the stability of spatial patterns of selection through time.