* 9307091
* Phylogenetic Relationships of Dennstaedtioid Ferns Based on DNA Sequence Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Paul Wolf, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 01/31/1998
* USD 189,615.00

9307091 Wolf Determining evolutionary relationships among organisms is a major
goal of systematists; phylogenies provide the necessary historical framework for
studies of evolutionary processes, biogeographic dispersal and migration, and
coevolution with symbionts and other ecological associates. Recently, DNA
sequencing has provided valuable new data for phylogenetic analysis of plants,
especially the flowering plants. Historically, ferns have been the subject of
major taxonomic confusion, particularly at upper taxonomic ranks (families and
orders), and a wide variety of classifications and hypothetical phylogenies
exists for this group of ca. 10,000 species. This confusion results in part from
a lack of morphological features that are both variable in their expression or
form species to species but coherent enough to be homologous, that is, similar
and comparable across numerous different species and genera. DNA sequence data
are ideal characters for both reasons: variable among taxa but comparable across
all of them, at least for functionally important genes. Dr. Paul Wolf of Utah
State University is sequencing DNA from the chloroplast photosynthetic gene for
numerous fern species allied in the "dennstaedtioid" group, in order to
reconstruct their phylogeny under the working assumption that mutational
differences track the divergence of species through time. %%% An independent
molecular set of data will provide a valuable tool for assessing the origins of
various fern groups as well as for examining patterns of morphological and
chromosomal variation. The dennstaedtioid ferns constitute a major component of
the leptosporangiate or "higher" ferns, and the data from this study will
ultimately be combined with results from other laboratories working on DNA
sequencing in ferns to provide a phylogenetic framework for all major fern
lineages.