* 9307870
* Mathematical Sciences: Symplectic and Contact Geometry in   the Interaction with Topology and Complex Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Yakov Eliashberg, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1996
* USD 157,197.00

This project envisions the continuing development of symplectic geometry and
topology in its interaction with other fields of mathematics. The main progress
under prior support was achieved in 3-dimensional contact geometry, construction
of new invariants of high-dimensional closed and open contact manifolds, in the
description of invariant properties of boundaries of symplectic manifolds, and
in the application of symplectic methods to the theory of 2-knots in real
4-space. In the present continuation, several new areas of research are
suggested. In particular, there is the study of newly discovered connections
between symplectic geometry, pseudoisotopy theory and algebraic K-theory,
applications of Lagrangian intersection theory to Morse theory for
plurisubharmonic functions on complex manifolds, and the development and
application of contact homology theory. Other projected directions of research
are: 3-dimensional contact topology and further development of symplectic
methods in 4-dimensional topology. It seems that in modern mathematics
interdisciplinary research plays a very special and important role. Many recent
discoveries were made in areas which do not fit into any traditional
classification. For instance, a breakthrough in 4-dimensional topology by
Donaldson came from gauge theory, a topic in quantum physics, and many other
recent topological discoveries were motivated by physics. Symplectic topology at
present is a beautiful blend of different mathematical sciences: topology,
Hamiltonian dynamics, complex analysis, differential geometry, etc. It attracts
more and more ideas from different fields and repays them with unexpected new
applications, which makes research in this direction especially promising.