* 9307134
* Molecular Characterization of the AXR2 Gene of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Mark Estelle, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 357,574.00

9307134 Estelle The plant hormone auxin or indole acetic acid (IAA) plays a
central role in plant growth and development. To understand the molecular
mechanism of auxin action Dr. Estelle and his colleagues are studying a group of
genes in Arabidopsis thaliana called the auxin- resistance genes. Mutations in
these genes cause auxin resistance and an array of developmental defects which
appear to be related to a reduction in auxin sensitivity. In addition, mutations
in each of the auxin-resistance genes alter sensitivity to at least one
additional plant hormone. It is hypothesized that this cross resistance is a
reflection of the integrated nature of plant hormone action. In this award, Dr.
Estelle describes experiments which investigate the function of the auxin-
resistance gene AXR2. Two dominant mutations in this gene have been identified.
The prior studies suggest that the AXR2 gene functions early in auxin response.
In addition, histological studies on axr2 mutant plants suggest that the AXR2
gene has an important role in auxin-regulated cell elongation. Three specific
aims are defined. First, the investigators will analyze two rapid auxin
responses which are thought to be important in auxin-induced cell elongation.
Second, they will isolate and characterize new alleles of the AXR2 gene. They
use these mutants to gain new insight into the function of the wild-type gene.
Third, they will isolate the AXR2 gene by positional cloning and characterize
both wild-type and mutant alleles at the molecular level. In recent years,
molecular and biochemical studies have resulted in the identification and
partial characterization of several proteins which may function in auxin action.
However, it has been difficult to determine the physiological role of these
proteins. A genetic approach promises to make a unique contribution to our
understanding of this complex problem. It is expected that the genetic and
molecular characterization of auxin-resi stance genes like AXR2 will provide
important new information on the mechanism of hormone action. ***