* 9307242
* Mathematical Sciences: Uniqueness of Multiple Trigonometric Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Marshall Ash, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 30,000.00

Ash 9307242 This mathematical research focuses on problems of multiple
trigonometric series. The single-variable theory of such series could be said to
be reasonably well understood, although there remain a number of exceedingly
difficult problems still unresolved. Multiple trigonometric series have
intrinsic problems which do not allow for simple generalizations from the one-
variable case. One of the primary issues of convergence results from the variety
of natural ways one can try to sum a multiple series. Even the most basic
question of whether a multiple series which sums to the zero function must have
zero coefficients (Cantor's theorem in one variable). If unrestricted
rectangular convergence is allowed then the answer is affirmative in all
dimensions. This was only proved two years ago. For spherical and square
convergence, the answer is still unknown, except for spherical in dimension two.
Work will be done to extend the recent results obtained for rectangular
convergence to the remaining cases. Related work will be carried out on the
almost everywhere convergence of multiple Fourier series. For functions in the
Lebesgue spaces with power less than two, spherical partial sums may diverge on
sets of positive measure. Nothing is known about convergence for functions with
finite quadratic norm (Hilbert space). To study this class, work will first
concentrate on radial functions to see if counterexamples already exist within
this group. The influence of trigonometric series on the development of modern
mathematical analysis is impossible to record in this short space. The basic
U.S. graduate courses are replete with byproducts of the research efforts that
have gone into our attempts to understand these building blocks of mathematical
synthesis used universally by all scientists. Yet the underlying summability
properties of the series remains, to a large extent, an enigma. This project
seeks to build on a remarkable breakthrough which occurred when four researchers
settled one of the most famous unsolved problems of multiple Fourier series two
years ago. ***