* 9307379
* U.S.-Czech Joint Fund Research on Modelling                 and Numerical Computations in Geodynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1993,05/14/1996
* Ctirad Matyska, Charles University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/14/1996
* USD 0.00

The primary objective of this US-Czech Joint Fund research project between Dr.
Ctirad Matyska, Charles University, and Dr. David A. Yuen, University of
Minnesota, is to investigate outstanding questions in solid earth geophysics
from theoretical and numerical approaches. They will study the problem of the
interaction between mantle convection and movements of the Earth's rotational
axis. Of special focus will be the quantitative evaluation of large-scale mean-
flow in the Earth's mantle. Additionally they will conduct a detailed inversion
study of the transport properties inside the Earth from satellite observations
of the gravity field and internal density fields inferred from seismology. This
will be done using the latest experimental constraints on the relationship
between seismic velocity variations and density changes. Based on their results
, the researchers hope to develop numerical algorithms suitable for solving
three-dimensional mantle convection problems on supercomputers and for rapid
interpolation of large datasets needed for graphics and visualization. This
research in geophysics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Czech Republic to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Funds for the project are awarded through the US-Czech
Joint Fund, Prague, in accordance with established guidelines.