* 9307548
* Research in Networked Multimedia Information Services
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1994,02/28/1998
* Shaoul Ezekiel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Decker
* 02/28/1998
* USD 1,914,126.00

1 From: dstaudt at NOTE 5/17/94 5:28PM (1566 bytes: 28 ln) To: gclavon at nsf15
Subject: Ezekiel ------------------------------- Message Contents
------------------------------- ---------------------- Original Header Lines
(From NOTE) ----------------------- X-Sender: dstaudt@note1.nsf.gov Mime-
Version: 1.0 Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
ABSTRACT NCR-9307548 PI: Shaoul Ezekiel Massachusetts Institute of Technology
"Research in Networked Multimedia Information Services" This award supports a
two-year project to conduct research on the development of infrastructure,
programs, standards and policies relating to networked multimedia information
services using the Internet. The participants are MIT, Dartmouth College and
Medical School, and Carnegie Mellon. A network services operations center using
existing broadcast-quality production and editing facilities is being created at
MIT. Multimedia servers are located in this center for the storage and delivery
on demand of a wide variety of multimedia programming and services to the
desktops of engineers, scientists, health care professionals, managers and
students. Industry is providing the servers and related equipment. MIT is
developing the programs and leading the effort. Dartmouth is providing medical
and health care services. MIT and Carnegie Mellon are researching standards and
policy issues. Turner Broadcasting is making available the CNN daily Newsroom
program for use on the network. Additional contributions