* 9307634
* Symposium on Acoustic Communication in Anurans and Insects, to be held in Los Angeles, CA  December 27-30, 1993
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* John Doherty, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 01/31/1995
* USD 6,000.00

9307634 Doherty A one-day symposium entitled "Acoustic Communication in Anurans
and Insects: Common Mechanisms in Behavior, Neurophysiology and Evolution" will
be held as part of the national meeting of the American Society of Zoologists,
December 27-30, 1993. Frogs and insects can be quite similar in their modes of
sound communication. In both taxa, males produce sounds that elicit a response
in other males or in potential female mates. These responses may be sounds or
movements towards or away from the sound source. There is clear convergence in
the research methods used by scientists studying the physiological and
evolutionary mechanisms of acoustic communication in frogs and insects. This
symposium will bring together researchers in anuran and insect sound
communication to identify similarities and differences in the behavioral,
neurophysiological and evolutionary mechanisms of acoustic communication in
anurans and insects. Topics will include chorusing and signal interaction,
signalling energetics, behavioral and neural mechanisms of sound recognition and
localization, heritability and sexual selection. This symposium should build
several new bridges between researchers studying these separate zoological taxa
and lead to future research efforts that synthesize and build upon the work of
all investigators of animal sound communication.