* 9307182
* Extremely High Nonlinear Organic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 09/30/1997
* USD 268,000.00

9307182 Zhang A study of optical nonlinearities of an unusual class of nonlinear
organic crystals is proposed. The principal investigator proposes to use this
crystal for optoelectronic characterization of high- speed integrated circuits.
This nonlinear organic crystal, which is synthesized at GE and recrystallized at
Rensselaer, shows extremely high nonlinearity. These organic crystals emit the
most intense optically induced terahertz radiated field among all of the natural
non-externally biased materials we know. A plan to measure the second order
nonlinear susceptibility of these organic crystals by using a newly developed
ultrafast optoelectronic technique is proposed. The ratio of independent
nonvanishing susceptibility tensor elements by analyzing the phase and the
amplitude of subpicosecond optical rectification radiation from these crystals
will be identified. The physics origin of THz persistent oscillation in their
optical rectification after femtosecond optical excitation will be explored.
This organic crystal will be integrated into an electro-optic sampling system
for noncontact ejection and detection of terahertz bandwidth electromagnetic
signals in ultrahigh speed integrated circuits. The proposed work is expected to
have a substantial impact on the physical understanding of these nonlinear
organic crystals and is also expected to provide important applications which
will ensue for the optoelectronic characterization of these crystals. ***