* 9307000
* Comparing Nuclear and Chloroplast Phylogenies in            Saxifragaceae and Related Rosids
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,12/31/1997
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 12/31/1997
* USD 215,468.00

9307000 Soltis Phylogenetic analysis of variation in the chloroplast genome
(cpDNA) has dominated the past decade of systematic research in plants. Although
there are numerous advantages of cpDNA variation in retrieving phylogeny,
several factors can potentially, contribute to discordance between the actual
organismal and cpDNA- based phylogenies, including taxon density, heterogeneity
of evolutionary rates, lineage sorting, and chloroplast capture. Systematists
therefore concur that comparison of nuclear and cpDNA- based phylogenies is
critical. This project will therefore address an important need in plant
systematics: the comparison of existing cpDNA-based phylogenies with those
derived from nuclear gene sequences. The approach taken will be hierarchical
beginning at the species level, moving to closely related groups of genera, all
30 genera of Saxifragaceae sensu stricto, and ultimately to associated rosid
families. Sequences will be obtained from the entire internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) or 18S regions of nuclear ribosomal DNA (rDNA), depending on the taxonomic
level of inquiry. Preliminary data indicate that these regions are evolving at
appropriate rates for each of these taxonomic levels. Comparison of cpDNA-and
nuclear DNA-based phylogenies is particularly important in groups, such as
Saxifragaceae s.s., that are noted for hybridization and chloroplast capture and
for which the cpDNA-based phylogenies may consequently be suspect. The
hierarchical approach proposed may also provide new insights into the patterns
and phylogenetic impact of past hybridization.