* 9307646
* Second International Workshop on the Interrelationship      Between Plasma Experiments in the Laboratory and in Space;  Banff, Alberta, Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Nathan Rynn, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Timothy E. Eastman
* 07/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

9307646 Rynn The study of plasma physics is common to both laboratory
experimentalists and space experimentalists; yet the interchange between these
two groups is infrequent. We are orgainizing a second workshop for these two
communities to discuss experiment, simulations, and theory of common interest.
The subjects chosen will emphasize areas where progress is being made both in
the laboratory and space. These include topics such as: Critical Velocity,
Reconnection, Ion Cyclotron Waves, Beam Drive Instabilities, Anomalous
Resistivity, Double Layers, Collisionless Shocks, Non-linear and Kinetic alfven
Waves, Active Space Experiments, Turbulence and Transport. The need for these
two communities to interact more closely has already been recognized by the AGU
which held a 1 day special session at the December 1990 AGU Meeting. We also
held a successful meeting in Alpbach, Austria July 1-6, 1991. Our meeting will
occupy 5 days in a setting where all participants will eat together and be
housed nearby. In this manner we can expect both a more extended and more
intense synergistic interaction between the participants than the AGU meeting
will offer. There will be two sessions each day. Each session will begin with
invited speakers and will continue with contributed papers. Poster papers will
also be included if the response warrants this approach. We expect that the
attendees will be primairly specialist from2 the laboratory and space
communities. Some advanced graduate students will also attend. ***