* 9307074
* Mathematical Sciences: New Resonance Phenomena and          Adiabatic Chaos
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Tasso Kaper, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Recent advances in geometric singular perturbation theory have established a
powerful set of tools for analyzing resonance phenomena and homoclinic orbits in
systems of ordinary differential equations with two time or length scales. Among
these new tools is the Exponentially Small Exchange Lemma (called EXSEL), which
was developed by the author with C. Jones and N. Kopell, and which has been used
successfully to prove the existence of multiple fast-pulse homoclinic orbits in
perturbed multi-degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian systems, as well as in traveling
wave problems for coupled reaction diffusion equations. It is proposed here to
analyze four fundamental aspects of resonance phenomena in singularly-perturbed
systems: (1) the existence of resonant sub- and super-harmonic orbits, (2) the
geometry of islands of stability, which are obstructions to mixing in adiabatic
chaos, (3) the resonant response of homoclinic structures in the forced, damped
sine-Gordon equation which are conjectured to be sources of chaos, (4) the
existence of periodic orbits in problems of passage throughresonance. Physical
problems with multiple time scales arise in many branches of science and
technology, including fluid mechanics, accelerator dynamics, plasma physics,
neurophysiology, and biology. These problems are modeled mathematically as
singularly-perturbed or adiabatic systems. Despite the long history of progress
and the considerable continuing interest in this area, a wealth of open problems
exists. This proposal concerns a group of four fundamental mathematical
questions concerning resonance phenomena and homoclinic behavior that are of
direct significance in the applications. Several new mathematical techniques,
some developed by the author, have recently become available which offer
substantial promise of solving these problems. While the main goal of the work
proposed here is to use and extend the scope of these new tools, it is also
endeavored to answer the above questions with an eye toward the technological
applications. Toward this end, the proposer points to his successful development
of enhanced fluid-mixing technology as an application of his earlier work on the
geometry of homoclinic tangles in singularly-perturbed systems.