* 9307150
* Investigations of Ectomycorrhizal Guild Structure in Coastal Bishop Pine Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Thomas Bruns, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 08/31/1997
* USD 347,976.00

Ectomycorrhizal fungi are symbiotic associates of most temperature forest
trees. Their association with the roots of trees such as pines and oaks is
necessary for normal growth and reproduction of the trees. These fungi exhibit a
high level of species diversity even at a single sit. Yet little is currently
known about the functional significance of this diversity. %%% In this study
researchers will use molecular identification methods in combination with soil
core sampling, mushroom mapping, and experimental manipulations to dissect the
community structure of these fungi in coastal pine forests. The sampling schemes
used are designed to reveal the variation of fungal species composition in space
and time at several scales, and will ultimately yield the first picture of
ectomycorrhizal fungal communities in any single forest type on a regional
scale. Methods for molecular identification of mycorrhizae will be further
refined to facilitate widespread use and they will be adapted for the
identification of fungal individuals. The latter level of identification will
enable us to investigate clonal size and dissect the genetic strategies employed
by selected fungal species. This work will result in a better understanding of
the basic ecology of these fungi and will provide a basis for future management
of pinc ecosystems.