* 9307418
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research on Atomic Structure of        Asymmetrical Grain Boundaries and Nucleation of Phase       Transformation at Grain Boundaries
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Vaclav Vitek, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 33,695.00

9307418 Vitek This U.S.- Czech research project is between Dr. Vaclav Vitek of
the University of Pennsylvania and Dr. Vaclav Paidar of the Czech Academy of
Sciences' Institute of Physics. The researchers seek to establish a link between
the structure and properties of more general, asymmetrical boundaries, and the
relationships between structures of different boundaries. Establishing a link
between the structure and properties of rather special, short period boundaries
and boundaries of general nature is of principal importance for extension of the
present atomistic studies of boundary properties. The researchers will also
study the nucleation of new three-dimensional phases at grain boundaries and
dynamic processes taking place at grain boundaries. In the process, they will
assess the stability of the corresponding structures using the concept of atomic
level elastic moduli, advanced earlier in Prof. Vitek's research supported by
NSF. Results are expected to contribute to our knowledge of non-symmetric grain
boundary structures, which can effect the structure and properties of metallic
and ceramic materials. This project in materials research fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the
United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.