* 9307632
* Function-Space Neural Networks for Spatio-Temporal          Transformation and Pattern Recognition
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/1994,01/31/1998
* Joydeep Ghosh, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/1998
* USD 164,338.00

9307632 Sandberg Nonlinear transformation and recognition of continuous-time
signals or signal sequences is fundamental to a wide range of cognitive
processes. This work aims to build a comprehensive understanding of the
processing of spatio-temporal signals. It is founded on recent results obtained
by the proposer showing that very large classes of continuous functionals and
shift-invariant functional maps can be uniformly approximated by certain
conceptually simple neural-like structures. These structures are the Function
Space Neural Networks (FSNNs) that involve a preprocessing linear operation
stage such as convolution with suitable kernel functions, followed by a network
of nonlinear cells. The project shall address key issues pertaining to the
design and use of FSNNs. These include determination of suitable kernel
functions, network size, connectivity patterns and form of nonlinearity for
different problems classes, effectiveness of alternate learning algorithms and
their convergence rates, and techniques for constructive/destructive network
growth. Anew call of FSNNs based on higher order networks that have proved very
effective for static classification, will also propose be evaluated. Theoretical
studies shall be supplemented by extensive simulations using several suites of
spatio-temporal signals ranging form low-dimensional artificial patterns to a
set of over 1000 short duration signals representing actual passive sonar
returns form underwater biologics. This work shall try to raise the
understanding of the capabilities and usability of artificial neural network
structures for the processing of spatio-temporal signals to a level comparable
to that achieved at present for (static) multilayered feedforward networks. ***