* 9307791
* Electron-Transfer Across Artificial Beta-Sheets
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Michael Ogawa, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 06/30/1997
* USD 210,000.00

9307791 Ogawa Professor Ogawa of Bowling Green State University will investigate
electron transfer across artificial beta-pleated sheets with support from the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program. He will
synthesize compounds based on oligopeptides; these will be joined in pairs at
the ends so as to induce the beta-pleated sheet conformation. Electron transfer
donor and acceptor sites will be attached to these capped oligopeptides so that
the role of beta pleated sheets in mediating electron transfer can be assessed.
The molecules will be characterized by circular dichroism and multinuclear nmr
spectroscopy, and where possible by x-ray diffraction. Electron transfer will be
initiated by flash photolysis and monitored by fluorescence and absorption
spectroscopy. The primary goal will be to determine if beta-pleated sheets are
unusually effective in mediating electron transfer, as has been predicted
theoretically. %%% The transfer of an electron through proteins is an essential
component of many life processes. Often this must occur through distances that
are long on the atomic scale. It has been suggested that certain structural
motifs within proteins are especially effective in fostering such long range
electron transfer events. In particular, structures known as "beta-pleated
sheets" have been implicated. Experiments to test this hypothesis will be
conducted by designing and synthesizing artificial beta-pleated sheets; these
molecules will be constructed with sites that are able to participate in
electron transfer reactions. The rates of electron transfer will then be
measured and compared with those of similar molecules that lack the beta-pleated
sheets. The information to be obtained will refine our understanding of the ways
that proteins perform their functions. ***