* 9307746
* Development of Methods to Analyze Intraorganelle Calcium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Donald Gill, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1997
* USD 225,000.00

9307746 Gill The objectives of this research are to develop imaging methods to
characterize the calcium pools within cultured cells and ascertain the
biological significance of calcium within calcium-signaling organelles. The
project aims to address an area of weakness in our understanding of cellular
signalling events, that is, the nature, distribution, and function of the pools
of calcium inside cells which contribute to generation of intracellular calcium
signals. High resolution imaging techniques will be applied to study the
location, control, and biological significance of calcium regulatory organelles
functioning within established smooth muscle cell lines. The project will
develop and utilize novel single cell and subcellular imaging technologies to
spatially resolve those organelles that function as calcium signaling pools in
cells. The specific goals are to answer the following questions: (1) What are
the levels of calcium within calcium pools? The objectives are to visualize
calcium pools directly, measure intraluminal calcium levels, and correlate
distribution of calcium pools with known calcium regulatory proteins and
specific organelle markers. (2) How is calcium inside calcium pools controlled?
The question will be addressed by investigating the function and
interrelationship of the mechanisms that pump calcium into pools, release
calcium from pools in response to intracellular mediators, and transfer calcium
between distinct intracellular pools activated by GTP-binding proteins. By
developing and applying high resolution z-axis controlled fluorescence imaging
to the analysis of calcium pools, the studies provide a novel approach to
understanding the distribution of calcium signalling pools, and address the
hypothesis that calcium levels within organelles are of fundamental biological
importance to cellular function. %%% An early, measurable event in many cellular
responses to external signals is an increase in internal calcium. A variet y of
cellular functions are regulated by calcium, so it is critical that cells be
able to regulate the internal levels and subcellular distribution of this ion.
An active area of research in recent years has been development of techniques to
measure the levels of free calcium in the cytoplasm of cells. The goals of this
research will complement the available techniques for measurement of cytoplasmic
calcium by developing and using novel techniques to study the location, control,
and biological function of calcium sequestered within regulatory organelles
(calcium pools). High-resolution, single cell and subcellular imaging will be
used to study calcium- containing organelles in cultured smooth muscle cell
lines. Experiments will be designed to answer the questions: What are the levels
of calcium within particular calcium pools, and how is calcium inside these
pools controlled? The results of this research will provide new techniques and
information to fill an important gap in our understanding of cellular signalling
events. ***