* 9307589
* Ozette Curation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Gary Wessen, Makah Cultural and Research Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1995
* USD 71,618.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Makah tribe will upgrade the
storage and accessibility of archaeological materials and data from the Ozette
archaeological site. Ozette village results from approximately 2000 years of
habitation by Northwest Coast Native Americans. Occupation was finally
terminated by a mud slide which buried entire houses intact therefore preserving
an astonishing range of material culture. Because the sediments remained
waterlogged the state of these materials is excellent and many fragile organic
items are well preserved. They provide a unique insight into a disappeared way
of life. The specific goals of the project are to: complete a physical inventory
of the collection; develop location inventories for stored materials; organize
portions of the collection in terms of archaeologically visible social units;
acquire and install storage equipment; and finally develop documentation for
accessing and using the collection. This work is important for several reasons.
It represents an important step in collaboration with Native American groups to
permit both tribal control of culturally significant materials and scientific
access to them. The Makah tribe has invested over 1.3 million dollars in the
curatorial facility and NSF funds provide a modest and needed supplement to this
amount. Because of their present condition the materials are not adequately
available for scientific study and this grant will remedy this situation.
Finally, these funds will help to preserve the artifacts from disintegration.