* 9307033
* Trade-offs and Community Structure Along Environmental      Gradients:  An Experimental and Comparative Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Mark McPeek, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 11/30/1997
* USD 161,664.00

WPC0 2 B V T W #| x 10 pitch z N x x x , x @ ; HP Laserjet (25-in-one, Network)
HPLASEII.PRS X t 4 P RN h 0 IS 2 4 < V N W #| x Courier 10 pitch z N x x x , x @
; HP Laserjet (25-in-one, Network) HPLASEII.PRS X t 4 P RN h 0 IS 2 - J .
9307033 McPeek This research addresses why species differ in their responses to
dramatic environmental changes by studying a group of aquatic insects, the
Coenagrionidae damselflies (Odonata: Zygoptera) in two genera. Some Enallagma
species are found as larvae only in ponds and lakes containing fish, while the
remaining Enallagma species are found as larvae only in fishless ponds and
lakes. In contrast, Ischnura species are abundant in both lake types. The
objectives of this research are to quantify the mechanisms and relative
strengths of direct and indirect interactions among damselflies, their
predators, and their prey in each lake type and to compare these results for the
two communities. many current theories explore the consequences of dramatic
ecological changes to community structure by assuming that all species at a
given trophic level respond similarly. However, comparisons of natural
communities show while some species are extirpated and replaced as community
structure is changed, other species can persist over wide ranges of ecological
conditions. %%% The study will have important ramifications for conserving
biodiversity, by identifying key properties of species indication their
sensitivity to dramatic ecological changes (e.g, comparable to those
accompanying habitat alterations and climate change).