* 9307588
* The Impact of Economic Development on the Extraction of Non-Timber Forest Products by the Sumu Indians of Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Ricardo Godoy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 342,554.00

Economic development in the tropics has led to wide-spread destruction of rain
forests largely through commercial logging and clear cutting for ranching and
agriculture. Less dramatically but just as importantly, non-timber forest
products (NTFP) such as medicinal plants, fish and game animals, and certain
vegetable resources (e.g., Brazil nuts) are strongly effected by economic
development. Therefore, it is important to understand the local and global
forces advance or retard the destruction of biodiversity in tropical forests.
The goal of this project is to measure, for the first time, the impact of
economic development on the extraction of non-timber forest products by the Sumu
Indians of Nicaragua. The researchers hypothesize that economic development
through increases in income: (1) encourages foraging specialization (i.e.,
harvesting of wild resources), resulting in the extraction of fewer NTFP; (2)
increases the share of household income from non-foraging occupations; (3)
produces a yearly value from NTFP extraction of about US$ 50/hectare; and (4)
produces depletion of NTFP entering commercial channels and sustainable
extraction of NTFP facing cheaper industrial substitutes. To test these
hypotheses a multidisciplinary team of researchers (a botanist, zoologist, and
anthropologist) will conduct field research over the course of 2.5 years in a
poor and in a rich Sumu village to collect data on resource collection,
ecological sustainability of foraging activities, household economics, and the
value of NTFP. These villages were specially selected based on pilot research
conducted in 1992. This research should provide us fundamental information on
the human, ecological, and economic impact of development in the rain forest.
The researchers hope to provide an explanation of why and how people's use of
both forest plants and animals changes as an economy modernizes. They will
provide the first rigorous, quantitative estimate of the yearly value of the
forest from foraging. Finally, they will provide one of the first direct
measures of the short-run sustainability of human foraging in the tropical rain
forest. ts meeting ! ! ! F v v ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial ? " h i
abstract for ashton godoy abstract godoy ashton godoy abstract Raymond Hames
Raymond Hames