* 9307112
* Polyribosome Targeting to Microtubules
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Kathy Suprenant, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1994
* USD 45,000.00

One of the hallmarks of a eukaryotic lifestyle is that RNA is distributed
unequally among cellular compartments. Highly regulated mechanisms exist for the
temporal and spatial assignment of specific RNA molecules to particular nuclear
and cytoplasmic domains. Intricate cellular machinery accurately sorts,
distributes, targets, and anchors the RNA to its final destination. This
asymmetric sorting of RNA and protein underlies the classical embryological
concept of cytoplasmic localization, whereby cell fate is specified by the
region of egg cytoplasm inherited. Recent studies indicate that the nonrandom
distribution of messenger RNA and protein may be intrinsically generated by the
egg cytoskeleton. Similarly, in differentiated cells, the cytoskeleton may
provide an asymmetric framework for the regional distribution of mRNA and
perhaps the functional specification of cellular processes such as dendrites,
axons, or lamellipodia. Each of the major cytoskeletal structures ---
microtubules, intermediate filaments, and microfilaments --- have been
implicated in the general process of mRNA localization. One approach to
understanding how and why the translational machinery interacts with the
cytoskeleton is to biochemically purify and reconstitute ribosomes and other
translational factors with mRNA and a single cytoskeletal element. Progress
towards realizing this goal has been made with the in vitro assembly and
isolation of a polyribosome -poly(A)+RNA- microtubule complex from sea urchin
eggs and embryos. The goal of this pilot study is to test the hypotheses that
the mRNAs in these complexes code for microtubule-associated proteins and that
the polysomes are targeted to microtubules via nascent polypeptides with
microtubule-binding domains at their amino termini. %%% There is a long and
controversial history of observations of messenger RNA association with
cytoskeletal elements in various cell types (including mammalian cells, higher
plant cells, and invertebrate cells). These observations have been difficult to
interpret due to problems of potential artifacts arising from the methods
employed to study the phenomena. The approach to be used in this pilot study,
using in vitro techniques and highly purified components, will allow the stated
hypothesis to be tested while avoiding some of the artifacts that plagued
earlier approaches to the problem. Because of the controversy surrounding the
general field of study, and the degree of risk in this pilot project, a Small
Grant for Exploratory Research is an appropriate funding mechanism for the
project.