* 9307013
* Synthesis, Bonding and Properties of Conjugated Transition- Metal Complexes and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Michael Hopkins, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 06/30/1997
* USD 341,000.00

Professor Hopkins, of the University of Pittsburgh, will synthesize transition-
metal compounds having conjugated bonding systems with support from the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program. These compounds
will incorporate an array of bonds to achieve this objective, including metal-
metal delta bonds, metal-ligand pi bonds, and ligand pi bonds. In most of the
compounds the metal centers will be molybdenum and tungsten, and the ligands
will include phosphines, alkylidenes, alkylidynes, and bridging dienes. The
compounds to be synthesized will include both monomeric species as well as
polymers. Assessments of the effects of conjugation will be made by low-
temperature electronic spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and
resonance Raman spectroscopy. A number of the compounds will be investigated for
their nonlinear optical properties. The research will generate an extensive
comparison of the effects of conjugation in inorganic and their classic organic
analogues. %%% A fundamental concept in organic chemistry is conjugation, i.e.,
the effects of alternating single and multiple bonds. Conjugation has major
effects on the properties of organic molecules. The present study will determine
the degree to which this concept can be applied to inorganic chemistry, and in
particular to compounds where metal atoms are essential participants in the
conjugation. Metal atoms have more diverse modes of bonding than carbon atoms
(including "delta" bonding), which raises the potential for conjugation in such
systems to have even more profound effects than are found in organic systems.
The present research will entail the synthesis of compounds designed to engage
in conjugation, the elucidation of their structures, and measurements of their
physical properties.