* 9307068
* Phylogenetic Study of Homosporous Ferns Based on Chloroplast and Nuclear Gene Sequences and Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1998
* Gerald Gastony, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

9307068 Gastony Difficulties in identifying natural evolutionary lineages in
homosporous ferns and in circumscribing these lineages as genera and families
are often attributed to the effects of convergent and parallel evolution on the
morphological characters traditionally used in fern taxonomy. The cheilanthoid
ferns, largely adapted to semi desert conditions or to other seasonally dry
habitats, are the foremost examples of this. Molecular data from the chloroplast
genome are unaffected by habitat related selective forces acting on morphology
and are beginning to yield fundamental insights into fern evolution and
phylogeny. However, recent studies on flowering plants have found some instances
in which hybridization, introgression, or lineage sorting may lead to
significant error in phylogenetic reconstructions based solely on the
cytoplasmically inherited chloroplast genome. This raises concern for ferns
because the high incidence of allopolyploid hybrids and high basic chromosome
numbers in ferns suggest that modern ferns may be paleopolyploids in whose
ancestry reticulate evolution has been important. Dr. Gastony's project will
serve as a model study for homosporous ferns by using cladistically analyzed
molecular data from chloroplast DNA (nucleotide sequences of the rbc L gene) to
provide fundamental new insights into cheilanthoid fern relationships and
phylogeny. Importantly also, the project will use molecular data f rom the
nuclear genome (nucleotide sequences of ribosomal DNA) to compare with
chloroplast DNA results and with traditional morphological characters. %%% The
combined morphological and molecular data will form the basis of a revised
classification of cheilanthoid ferns and of a robust reconstruction of their
phylogenetic relationships, on a worldwide basis.