* 9307601
* Mathematical Sciences:  Analysis of Two-Scale Dilation      Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Yang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 01/31/1997
* USD 52,748.00

9307601 Wang This research concerns two-scale dilation equations, which describe
the two-scale behavior characteristic of scaling functions. These equations
arise in a wide variety of applications, including wavelets, sub-division
schemes for computer generation of curves and surfaces, and fractal geometry
(iterated function systems - IFS). The principal investigator will develop
techniques based on representations of the scaling function in terms of an
infinite matrix product expansion, which can be used to establish an algorithm
for constructing scaling functions, and to analyze their regularity,
integrability, and dimensionality. Thus far, in order to ensure convergence of
the infinite matrix product,a Contractivity Assumption has been imposed. This
Assumption is stronger than necessary, and the PI is investigating weaker
assumptions involving bounded semi-groups of matrices, and an average
contractivity factor as determined by the Lyapunov exponent. This also leads to
questions regarding the structure of bounded semi-groups of matrices. The PI has
also developed techniques to study self-similar lattice tilings, which arises
from multi-dimensional orthonormal wavelets. The PI intends to study the
following: (1) surface generation: sliding window method; (2) existence of
integrable solutions; (3) dilation equations with non-negative coefficients; (4)
self-similar lattice tilings; (5) the Finiteness Conjecture of Daubechies and
Lagarias. This activity had substantial potential for application in many areas,
including compression algorithms. ***