* 9307126
* Active Observer
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 02/28/1998
* USD 252,327.00

9307126 Bajcsy This is the first year of a three year continuing award. The
research involves investigation of modeling, analysis and synthesis of visual
behaviors of Active Observers. An Active Observer is a mobile agent whose task
is to observe, and report/communicate information about the activity of another
agent(s) whose task may be manipulation and/or navigation. Active Observers are
part of a small team of agents who work together in a cooperative fashion. All
agents in the team are equipped with visual navigation capabilities, but the
tasks they are engaged in differ, depending on their role in the team and their
goal. The agents could navigate independently or in a cooperative fashion (i.e.
in the case of two manipulator agents carrying an object together). For
manipulatory-agents navigating in a cooperative fashion, the issue of
communication arises; hence, the problem of representing visual information for
communication. The visual tasks of the observers-agents will differ depending on
whether their observations serve for the navigation or manipulation purposes of
the other agents. The main emphasis in this research is on the control structure
that the observer must have in order to deliver the proper observations for the
task at hand. For the purpose of modeling behaviors a formalism from the
Discrete Events Systems (DES) theory has been adopted, suitable for
investigating control-theoretic issues of a system. It is anticipated that the
contribution of this research will be in: 1) modeling visually guided behaviors
which tightly couple visual processing with control architecture; and 2) the
identification of elementary behaviors needed for navigation and communication
and their composition leading to more complex behaviors. Two kinds of elementary
behaviors are distinguished, one where observations are directly connected with
physical actions, and the other where observations and actions are either
received or transmitted. The use of DES formalism allows the synthesis of
complex behaviors in a systematic fashion and guarantees their controllability
and observability