* 9307131
* Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the                 Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Edward Grant, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 05/31/1997
* USD 399,160.00

In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
Prof. E.R. Grant of Purdue University will pursue a program of research on the
state-to-state-dynamics of intramolecular relaxation and electron ejection in
highly excited small molecules. Specific systems to be investigated are
hydrocarbon and metal-centered free radical molecules. Multiple-resonance laser
methods will be used to isolate individual transitions that bring the molecules
close to their ionization thresholds. Experiments will also be performed to
obtain high-resolution information on ionization potentials, photoionization
cross sections of free radicals and the rotational-vibrational structure of the
corresponding cation, as well as on the vibrational structure of excited
electronic states that lie below the adiabatic ionization thresholds. %%% The
conventional view of the properties of a polyatomic molecule is based on the
Born-Oppenheimer (B-O) approximation according to which its total energy is the
sum of independent energies associated with the translational, rotational,
vibrational, and electronic degrees of freedom, the actual non-vanishing
couplings between these being assumed to be small and negligible in the first
approximation. Chemical reactions, however, often involve highly excited
electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom and the B-O approximation may be
of questionable validity. Processes that involve energies near or above the
first ionization threshold, where the dynamics of intramolecular energy
relaxation leads in particular to electron ejection, are not amenable to be
treated in the B-O approximation. This research concerns fundamental questions
about the processes that occur in excited molecular states near the ionization
threshold and will provide information suitable for the development of
theoretical models of chemical reactivity.