* 9307163
* Collaborative Research:  The Population Genetics of Plant-  Fungal Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Christopher Mundt, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 78,515.00

9222148 Scott Reproductive cooperation and conflict lie at the heart of the
evolution of sociality. Communal breeding in which adults share a nest or mate
and may provide care for unrelated young, has been identified as one path
leading to complex social systems in both insects and vertebrates. But even in
social insects and birds, facultative reproductive cooperation among non-
relatives is rare. To understand the origins of alternative reproductive
strategies, where individuals can breed either independently or communally, it
is essential to identify the options open to each individual and assess the
relative success of each alternative. %%% Both male and female Nicrophorus
tomentosus (Coleoptera: Silphidae) demonstrate facultative communal brood care.
More than one male and/or female may help to rear young that may not be related.
The aims of this research are to examine the frequency of communal breeding in a
natural population and to identify the parentage of these offspring using a DNA
fingerprinting technique. %%% This study will examine why the reproductively
dominant individuals allow communal breeding and how this might be achieved.
Several hypotheses for the evolution of sociality and of communal breeding in
particular, have been constructed with considerable general application. These
have been tested in communally-breeding vertebrates and in social insects with
joint nest foundation. They can and should be tested in other groups. %%% The
study is of practical value because the survival of the many species committed
to a Social way of life is dependent on survival of individuals and the well-
being of their social organizations.***