* 9307804
* Causes of Diet Change in an Herbivorous Insect
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Michael Singer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 199,349.00

9307804 Singer This project investigates the processes that cause herbivorous
insects to feed on particular plants or to change those associations. One of the
processes that influences insect diet is human manipulation of the landscape.
This project investigates changes in diet of the butterfly Euphydryas editha,
that have been brought about by two types of human activity: cattle ranching and
clear-cutting of coniferous forest. In each case, human intervention has caused
insects to change their preferences for egg-laying sites and incorporate new
plant species into their diets. These populations are undergoing rapid diet
shifts mediated by genetic changes of host preference. Diet expansion may be
aided by correlations between maternal oviposition preference and offspring
performance. This project will determine whether such correlations are present
at the first arrival of the novel host. The project also continues long-term
assessment of the extensive geographical variation in host specificity of E.
editha. Comparisons between populations that differ in diet breadth will show
whether this variation is mechanistically caused by variation among plants,
among insects, or both. %%% Understanding patterns of plant use by herbivorous
insects has been a central concern of plant-animal interactions. The PI has
documented extensive temporal and spatial variation in this association of a
widespread butterfly and has shown that changes in diet may be due to human
influences. These diet shifts have implications for the conservation of
threatened insects that live on managed land. Understanding the processes that
cause herbiv ores to expand their diets will also help to elucidate the
mechanisms by which non-pest insects become converted to pest status when their
diets change to incorporate crop plants. s t One major focus of this proposal
seems to be the PI's laboratory hybridization attempts and field work to assess
ecological and sexual isolation. There is a problem, especially with sexual
isolation, in that the PI has done preliminary testing with a species pair
currently considered to be in different major clades and the 0 . 3 ! ! ! ! F # #
&lt; Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial Dutch (scalable) " h &lt; % e e - Laurel
R. Fox Gayle Edmonds