* 9307852
* Atomic Level Control of Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Philip Cohen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/1997
* USD 350,000.00

9307852 Cohen The aim of this research is to understand epitaxial crystal growth
of thin films at the atomic level, and to develop new and more perfect thin film
materials and structures. The effort will focus on understanding the fundamental
processes of epitaxial growth and on developing new, controlled approaches to
epitaxy. Several complementary growth monitors will be utilized in the studies;
reflection high energy electron diffraction and reflection mass spectroscopy
will be applied during growth to monitor the structural and chemical evolution
of surfaces during molecular beam epitaxy. Scanning tunneling microscopy will be
applied during growth interruptions to eliminate ambiguity in the interpretation
of diffraction measurements. Initial work will focus on the role of impurities
in the pinning and disordering of steps, on the structure of III- V
semiconductor surfaces, and on mechanisms for strain relaxation. The research
will also be extended to the growth of iron nitride, a new magnetic material.
%%% The fundamental research conducted on epitaxial crystal growth is expected
to improve the technology of the primary materials that are used in
microelectronics and micromagnetics. Techniques to monitor the fabrication of a
thin film that are sensitive enough to monitor each atomic layer as it is added
to the film will be developed and used to control the fabrication process so
that new and more perfect structures can be created. ***