* 9307382
* Synthetic, Structural and Reactivity Studies on Early       Transition Metal Chalcogenide Complexes and Supramolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Dimitri Coucouvanis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 01/31/1997
* USD 329,000.00

9307382 Coucouvanis Professor Coucouvanis, of the University of Michigan, will
explore synthetic inorganic chemistry with support from the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program. His efforts will concentrate
on five topics, all related by the presence of metal-sulfur bonds. 1) He will
explore the synthesis of thio and oxo-thio complexes of Nb and Ta with
inspiration largely from analogy with the chemistry of Mo and W. A major goal
will be to generate hydrido-hydrosulfido complexes by addition of H2 across M=S
bonds. 2) He will develop the catalytic degradation of SO2 by use of
thiomolybdate complexes. 3) He will investigate the synthesis of catecholato
sulfido complexes; this will entail introduction of the catecholato group
through condensations with catechol, as well as reductive couplings of
catecholato complexes. 4) He will synthesize complexes having sulfate and
related tetrahedral anions as bridging ligands. In this class of compounds the
anions bind simultaneously to four metal centers, and are assisted by hydrogen
bonding from dimethylammonium cations. 5) He will design amphiphilic
supramolecules that are based on semiquinones, transition metal centers, and
heterometalic M4S4 cubanes. The objective here will be to obtain "molecular
reactors" for the activation of N2, O2, and CO2. %%% An important component in
the advance of basic chemistry is the ever-broadening scope of molecular
architecture. This is best achieved through the efforts of synthetic chemists. A
particularly fertile area of synthesis is in compounds that have both metal ions
and sulfur atoms. Much has been learned of the simple compounds with iron,
molybdenum, and tungsten. The present research will develop the basis for the
chemistry of niobium and tantalum, and it will explore the synthesis of
compounds that are larger and more complex. An important objective will be to
synthesize compounds that combine the properties of divergent subgroups, so as
to produce "molecular reactors". This work will incorporate ideas gleaned from
the study of biological enzymes. ***