* 9307171
* Aqueous-Phase Photochemical Formation of Hydrogen Peroxide  and Hydroxyl Radical in Clouds and Fogs
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Bruce Faust, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 299,915.00

9307171 Faust Aqueous-phase reactions of hydrogen peroxide (HOOH) and hydroxyl
radical (OH) in atmospheric water drops play crucial roles in the chemistry of
the troposphere, yet knowledge of the sources of these oxidants to the water
drops is incomplete. While gas-to- drop partitioning of HOOH and OH has received
much study, comparatively little attention has been focussed on aqueous-phase
photochemical reactions as sources of these oxidants to atmospheric water drops.
The objectives of this research are: (a) determination of quantum yields and
sunlight rates of HOOH and OH photo-formation in authentic cloud and fog waters
collected over several years from several locations, (b) determination of the
seasonal dependence of HOOH and OH photo-formation, (c) comparisons of the
relative importance of aqueous-phase photochemistry versus gas-to-drop
partitioning as sources of HOOH and OH to atmospheric water drops, (d) to
evaluate chemical and Physical parameters of authentic atmospheric waters as
predictors (based on mechanistic considerations) of the HOOH and OH photo-
formation rates and of the OH lifetime, (e) to determine rates and quantum
yields of HOOH photo-formation from compounds of relevance to cloud and fog
chemistry, and (f) to increase the understanding of mechanisms responsible for
photochemical formation of the oxidants in authentic atmospheric waters and form
the individual compounds. The project will characterize the photo-formation of
HOOH and OH in authentic cloud and fog waters obtained form several high
elevation sites. Additionally, survey studies will be carried out on the HOOH
photo-formation form well-defined aqueous solutions of individual organic
compounds. Overall, the results form this proposal will allow for a more
accurate understanding to the sources of HOOH and OH to cloud and fog drops.
This will improve our understanding of the atmospheric chemical cycles of
peroxides, sulfur, carbon, iron, and other elements. This new knowledge will
enhance our predictions of sulfuric acid and sulfate aerosol formation that
affect acid deposition and the global cooling effect exerted by sulfate
aerosols.