* 9307211
* RUI:  Tree Fern Phylogeny and Evolution:  Molecular EvidenceFrom Two Genomes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Diana Stein, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 133,045.00

9307211 Stein and Conant The tree ferns of the world, placed in the family
Cyatheaceae, are a large group of ferns, ca. 500 species, with little variation
in chromosome number. In this they are unusual for ferns, where polyploidy
(chromosome complement doubling) and dysploidy (increase or decrease of
individual chromosome pairs) mark many lineages. Possibly novel mechanisms of
species divergence may operate in the tree ferns, such as diploid level
speciation after hybridization. To explore such mechanisms, however, a
phylogenetic framework for the tree ferns is required, in order to rationalize
the choice of target or representative species for analysis. Drs. Stein and
Conant are continuing their phylogenetic analyses of tree ferns, concentrating
now on Old World species from the australasian regions. They are analyzing DNA
mutations in chloroplast and nuclear genes to acquire new molecular data for
phylogenetic reconstruction and to integrate with traditional morphological
characters from fern taxonomy. %%% New molecular data from gene sequencing are
revolutionizing our understanding of the evolutionary relationships of
organisms. Work on Old World tree ferns will add data from both chloroplast and
nuclear genes to traditional morphological features, to augment work on New
World tree ferns. A robust phylogeny for this large group of plants will allow
focused study on novel mechanisms of speciation and further analysis of t he
direction of change in anatomical and ecological features of these ferns.