* 9307843
* High Performance FRC Energy Absorbing Joints for Precast    Concrete Frames (PRESSS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* James Wight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1997
* USD 254,152.00

9307843 Naaman This proposal aims at pursuing the development of a high energy
absorbing joint for precast concrete structures in seismic zones. The joint is
made from high performance fiber reinforced cement based composites (HPFRC) such
as high fiber content fiber reinforced concrete and SIFCON (Slurry Infiltrated
Fiber Concrete). The joint is designed to act as an energy dissipating connector
between the beam and the column elements. The use of high fiber content in the
matrix of the joint is meant to insure high ductility, increased energy
absorption, reduced spalling, and superior shear resistance during load
reversals. The immediate objective of the research is to understand the
fundamental mechanisms that control the properties of the joint and its response
under monotonic and cyclic loads. An experimental and an analytical programs are
planned. In the experimental program, two types of tests are proposed. The first
is designed to identify the bond shear stress versus slip characteristics of
reinforcing bars embedded in HPFRC; the other is to clarify the response of
these composites, under monotonic and cyclic shear loading, with and without
dowel reinforcement. The analytical program aims at developing a model to
predict the hysteretic moment rotation response of the joint using the
constitutive properties of the two main component materials and their interface.
This study should eventually lead to designing joints with optimized ductility
and energy absorbing properties. ***