* 9307220
* Molecular Analysis of Naturally Occurring Copia Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1993,04/30/1998
* John McDonald, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/1998
* USD 323,750.00

9307220 McDonald Molecular Analysis of Naturally Occurring copia Variations
(John F. McDonald, P.I.)%%% There is an ever growing body of evidence that
retroviruses and retroviral-like transposable elements are a major source of
mutation in higher eukaryotes including humans. The ramifications of this fact
extend to a broad range of biological disciplines ranging from medicine to
evolutionary genetics. Although we now know a great deal on the mechanisms of
how retroviral-like elements alter the expression of chromosomal genes, little
or nothing is known concerning how retroviral elements are maintained and spread
within and between species. In addition, it remains a mystery as to how
retroviral elements insertion mutations which are usually non-adaptive can
nevertheless increase in frequency and eventually become "fixed" (i.e., attain a
frequency of 1.00) in some species over time. One possibility is that host
chromosomal genes capable of suppressing the mutant phenotype associated with
retroviral insertion variants are present in natural populations and serve to
harbor insertion variants by shielding them from natural selection. Dr. McDonald
hypothesizes that insertion variants may periodically increase in frequency due
to "founder events" or other such forced inbreeding effects.%%% Over the next
three years Dr. McDonald will study the mechanisms by which the copia
retroviral-like element is maintained and spread through natural populations of
Drosophila. Drosophila is an ideal system for these studies because retroviral
elements are well understood in this organism and element frequency and
mutational effects can be easily monitored. Dr. McDonald will be concentrating
on identifying host genes capable of trans-regulating retroviral elements and
studying their frequency and mode of action in a number of Drosophila species.
The DNA sequence of copia elements isolated from a number of Drosophila
populations and species will be analyzed t o determine if structural differences
which might affect element activity are variable in natural populations. Dr.
McDonald will search for transregulatory effects by introducing the same copia
LTR-reporter gene construct into several strains and species and monitoring the
effect of LTR mediated expression. Results will shed light on the factors
determining the maintenance and spread of retroviral elements in natural
populations and species of all higher eukaryotes. ***