* 9307238
* Interfacial Shapes in the Design of Composite Polymeric     Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Yuriko Renardy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1997
* USD 200,839.00

Renardy 9307238 This chemical research thermal project concerns the shape of the
interface separating two immiscible liquids in chemical and thermals systems.
Two-fluid exhibit phenomena which are totally unexpected from a knowledge of
one-fluid flows and form a subject rich in interdisciplinary science. Industrial
applications include the formation of bicomponent fibers such as nylons and the
production of photographic films. Theoretically, there are often many
possibilities for the shape of the boundary separating the two fluids. In
addition, experiments show that some shapes are preferred over others, so that
the selection mechanisms should be investigated with the goal of lessening the
gap between theoretical prediction and experimental results. The effect of
dissolved additives and temperature gradients, and the consideration of heat and
mass transfer at an interface are important in many chemical processes. Physical
modeling, analytical and computational techniques will be used by the proposer
to study the stability of various interface shapes, and the appearance of new
arrangements from unstable ones. The mechanical properties of composite
materials are strongly dependent on interface shapes. Thus, an understanding of
the effects of the component properties on interface shape is of practical
importance. ***