* 9307296
* Dissertation Research:  Women's Worlds Among the Kalasha of Northwestern Pakistan:  Subordination, Empowerment, and     the Menstrual House
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Bruce Knauft, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 07/31/1995
* USD 10,500.00

Knauft/Maggi 9307296 The Kalasha of northwestern Pakistan consider the menstrual
house to be the most impure place in the valley. Yet this very institution seems
to empower Kalasha women, offering them an opportunity to define themselves in
ways which seem to directly oppose dominant ideologies. The proposed research
explores this tension by examining the way in which gender is constructed and
used in three distinct arenas: community ritual practice, the everyday world of
house and family, and the bashali, or menstrual house. Through carefully tracing
individual women as they move through these social contexts, the investigator
will evaluate the thesis that gendered meanings and practices vary
systematically across social arenas. I hypothesize that male insistence on
female impurity and its entailments in female subordinate practice will be most
emphasized in community ritual practice, less evident in village and household
relations, and strongly countered with female-centric ideology and expressions
of women's power and autonomy in the menstrual house. This contextual variation
calls into question monolithic attributions of "female status" or "identity" and
provides for a more complex and penetrating understanding of how women's
experiences are constituted. The proposed project will contribute significantly
to a more balanced ethnographic understanding of the Hindu Kush cultural region,
will apply and refine sociocultural theories of gender, and will provide
detailed ethnographic information on the menstrual house, and institution which
has been much fantasized about but not carefully studied. *** Q QcS S S S T
TzUsW ~ Ã• ! ! ! F l l S Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Pres Elite 5
Courier New &amp; Casablanca l " h % % d e knauft maggi abstract abstract award
abstract knauft maggi Raymond Hames Raymond Hames