* 9307819
* Interfacial Driven Convection - The Effect of Side Walls on Pattern Development
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1994,06/30/2000
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Stefan T. Thynell
* 06/30/2000
* USD 237,995.00

ABSTRACT -- CTS-9307819 Narayanan The proposed research focuses on interfacial
driven convection in stacked fluid layers. A specific goal is the study of the
effect of sidewalls on the flow pattern or structure in superposed fluids. The
PI expects to find the following: a) the conditions for the onset of convection
in a bounded two layer system and compare our results to calculations, b) the
flow pattern development in the post onset region for a bi-layer system, c) the
onset conditions in a tri-layer where the physics are considerably different
than a two layer system. An experiment will be conducted in circular and
rectangular cylindrical containers and the multi-layer will be bounded in the
vertical direction by two horizontal thermally conducting plates, one of which
is transparent. The critical conditions for onset will be determined by the
enhancement of heat transfer and flow visualization. A Schmidt-Milverton type of
plot will be made. A detailed model of the convective flow will be compared with
the experimental results. This problem is rich in physics on account of multi-
layer interaction in interfacial driven or Marangoni-B nard convection. This
interaction is connected to the heat and momentum transfer at the interface.
Even geometric changes affect the relative importance that the interface plays.
This problem is also an important prototype of liquid encapsulated crystal
growth and this is explained in the proposal. The PI expects that this study
will answer some important questions on convective instability as related to
multi-layer interaction, geometric variables, properties and heating direction.
Such issues include the role of gravitational effects and a possible counter
mechanism between buoyancy and interfacial tension gradient induced convection.
The interesting aspect of generation of oscillations and the enhancement of heat
transfer in this region will affect application to the problem of encapsulated
crystal growth.