* 9307931
* XII International Symposium on Glycoconjugates in Krakow,   Poland, August 15-20, 1993.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1993
* Rosalind Kornfeld, Society for Complex Carbohydrates
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 5,000.00

Glycoconjugates are widely distributed in nature as glycoproteins, glycolipids
and proteoglycans. The past decade has produced an extraordinary burst of
activity in this field. Crucial roles for glycoconjugates have been defined for
hormone binding, growth factors and toxins. Furthermore, roles have been defined
in fertilization, differentiation, immune response and the social behavior of
cells. These phenomena have contributed to stimulating investigators to clone
the enzymes involved in glycoconjugates metabolism. The growth of glycoconjugate
research into Molecular Biology is complemented by technical improvements to
determine structure, such as NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography and
computer modelling. The recent advances in this field will be presented at the
XIIth International Symposium in Poland in August, by the most active and well-
known scientists in their respective areas. %%% Young scientists from the USA
will be given the opportunity to attend the XIIth International Symposium on
Glycoconjugates. The purpose of this meeting is to present and discuss the major
advances in the structure and function of glycoproteins, glycolipids and
proteoglycans. Application of the recent findings to biology, medicine,
agriculture and biotechnology will represent the major thrust of the meeting.
This symposium provides an important opportunity and forum for exchange of
research information on an international level.