* 9307872
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and the Laplace    Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1996
* Thomas Wolff, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/1996
* USD 180,000.00

Work to be supported by this award will focus on Mathematical questions
centering on elliptic partial differential equations. The theme is that of
unique continuation of solutions and related issues. By unique continuation one
understands the problem of showing that there are no (non-zero) solutions
vanishing in an open set. A second question, whereby one asks whether a solution
can vanish to infinite order at a point is called the strong continuation
property. Both are variations on the question of whether two solutions which
agree on an open set (of infinite order at a point) must agree forever. A number
of positive results are known, depending both on the smoothness of the equation
and the underlying dimension. Recent examples show that in the case of certain
classical equations, Schrodinger with Kato class potentials, unique continuation
fails. One of the specific goals of this project is to extend the basic tool
underlying the best results, known as the Carleman inequalities. These
inequalities only apply to constant-coefficient equations. Further analysis of
more general inequalities suggest that progress can be made in establishing good
estimates which can be applied to general elliptic equations. Related work will
be carried out on the Bers problem which asks whether solutions whose gradient
vanish to a certain degree at the boundary must reduce to constants. Abstract as
these problems appear in there generic form, they are easily seen to be
important from the point of view of users of mathematics, especially in those
cases where approximation of solutions can lead to spurious ones. Knowledge of
uniqueness of continuation can provide a level of confidence that reasonable
approximations lead to the correct answer.