* 9307995
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Passivating Film Forma-  tion on Aluminum and on Tungsten Studied by Beam Deflection and Abrading Electrode Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1996
* Richard Oriani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1996
* USD 12,510.00

9307995 Oriani This award provides funds to permit Dr. Richard A. Oriani,
Corrosion Research Center, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, to pursue with
Dr. Su-Il Pyun, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for 24 months, a program of
cooperative research on the properties and mechanism of formation of passivating
oxidic films on aluminum and on tungsten. Two important measurements, namely,
(1) the kinetics of passivation and (2) the mechanical stress generated during
film formation will be made in various electrolyte compositions and with various
potential-time conditions. Oxidic films produced upon metal surfaces during
corrosion of metals strongly reduce the rate of subsequent corrosion. This
corrosion resistance in the case of aluminum and tungsten results from the
formation of a thin passivating oxidic film. It is known that the formation
kinetics and film characteristics vary with the electrolyte solution chemistry
and the electrical potential at which the film is generated. Results of this
research may produce a better understanding of corrosion and passivation
processes that prevent further corrosion. The collaborators are highly respected
researchers in the field of the proposal. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in
the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
(KOSEF). This project adds an international cooperative dimension to the PI's
research under NSF Grant No. DMR-9111673. ***