* 9307206
* The Regulation of Prostaglandin Synthesis at the Molecular Level of Cyclooxygenase
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Bruce Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 05/31/1997
* USD 221,883.00

Jackson 9307206 The isolation of prostaglandin(PG) was achieved by von Euler in
1932. In these experiments the first of many biological effects of the compound
was discovered; the contraction of uterine smooth muscle. Since these early
studies, PG has become recognized as a specific, highly active, short-lived
local hormone synthesized in all mammalian cell systems. The local hormone is
involved in lipid metabolism, insulin release, the regulation of cardiac
function, body temperature and nervous system control, and the tissue
inflammatory response. The overall objective of this research program is to
determine the molecular mechanisms which operate in the regulation of
cyclooxygenase (COX). The COX enzymes play central roles in PG biosynthesis by
catalyzing the conversion of arachidonic acid and certain other 20 carbon
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Additionally the role of factors IL-1 and TGF-Beta
will be examined for their special effect on COX enzyme levels and turnover
relative to PG synthesis. IL-1 and TGF-Beta are cytokines which appear to
regulate transcriptional regulation of the COX genes. The present study will use
human embryo lung fibroblasts and bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells.
Results will provide important information about regulatory mechanisms which
govern PG synthesis. %%% This is a research project to study the complex
mechanism which operates in mammalian systems to control prostaglandin
formation. Prostaglandins are so called local hormones that are produced quickly
in local tissue cells as a result of corporal stress, such as temperature
changes, fatigue, or wounding. To begin to understand how the body produces the
hormone and controls its level, we need to learn about the action of key enzymes
that operate in its production. This control systems seems to be very
complicated and involves the action of special components that operate to
control reading messenger RNA(mRNA). mRNA contains the information the cells
need t o form the enzyme for prostaglandin production. This research will help
in our understanding about how the mammalian body controls its temperature and
combats fatigue, how fat is formed and used, and how tissue becomes inflamed and
irritated. ***