* 9307290
* CAA: Characterization of the Molting Cycle of a Freshwater  Crustacean
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Michele Wheatly, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 11/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

This is a career advancement award to enable the PI to acquire, through a
sabbatical leave, modern techniques required to examine the molecular biology of
the crayfish calcium ion ATPase and factors that regulate expression of the gene
during the molting cycle. Preliminary work has employed a heterologous mammalian
cDNA probe to identify mRNA for the crayfish calcium ion ATPase. The objective
of the present study is to generate tissue specific authentic cDNA clones of the
crayfish calcium ion ATPase using strategies based on the polymerase chain
reaction and on screening a cDNA library. The full length clone will be
sequenced and compared to published mammalian sequences. Partial clones will be
used to study expression of calcium ion ATPase in tissues of interest during the
molting cycle using quantitative Northern blotting and Western analysis, and to
examine possible regulation of gene expression in vitro by the steroid ecdysone.
Findings will further our understanding of the evolution of ion motive ATPases
and perhaps assist in understanding their form and function. Finally the
steroidal regulation of calcium ion transfer is of significance for all animals
that form mineralized tissues. In living organisms the mineral calcium plays
many important biological roles. In animals it is crucial for the formation of
the skeleton. This process is easily studied in crustaceans (crabs, lobsters,
crayfish). First their skeleton is external and therefore far more accessible
than that of vertebrates. More importantly, in order to grow, they undergo the
molting cycle. In preparation for molting, calcium is reabsorbed from the old
skeleton and effectively recycled; at the same time a new soft skeleton is laid
down underneath. After "busting out" of the old skeleton, the new skeleton is
rapidly mineralized to provide protection. Therefore at different stages in the
molting cycle scientists can study the movement of calcium either into or out of
the skeleton. This movement is effected by protein "pumps" on the surface of
specialized cells. Manufacture of protein is under the control of genetic
material in the nucleus of the cell. In this grant appropriate genetic
information that codes for the calcium pump will be extracted to assess what
regulates the abundance and activity of the calcium pumps at different stages in
the molting cycle.