* 9307895
* Testing and Exploiting Clustering for Data Compression
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Abraham Bookstein, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 12/31/1996
* USD 122,929.00

9307895 Bookstein Testing and Exploiting Clustering for Data Compression This
is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. This project
develops techniques for compressing concordances of large, full-text databases.
The practical significance is obvious, since concordances are huge, consuming as
much resources as the data themselves; yet they are necessary to access the
database efficiently. But the theoretical implications are also important, since
the highly structured organization of concordances makes them suitable for
modeling. In this project clustering in concordances is modeled. Sequential
clustering is important in Information Retrieval generally: substantive terms
tend to occur together in a document, and documents containing a given term
often cluster in a typical database. This project develops and evaluates
statistical tests that indicate when clustering is important; identifies
measures of sequential clustering strength; and creates models of concordance
generation recognizing clustering, improving compression effectiveness. The
models studied include Markov models and Bayesian learning models. Sequential
clustering is widespread and the results of this research should have
implications well beyond data compression, for example analyzing term occurrence
to identify content bearing terms for retrieval purposes. Thus this project
promises direct benefits in improving our ability to store very large textual
databases and, indirectly, in developing methodology of wider interest. ***