* 9307462
* RIA:  Efficient Algorithms for Computational Graph Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Samir Khuller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1997
* USD 77,419.00

Computational graph theory has emerged as a powerful medium for the development
of algorithmic techniques (e.g., for dynamic algorithms, on-line algorithms,
parallel algorithms, approximation algorithms, data structure design, etc.).
Graph theory provides an excellent way to model problems related to
transportation, network design, optimization, VLSI and many other fields. This
allows one to both develop and illustrate the power of different algorithmic
tools. This project studies two aspects of efficient algorithm design. The first
aspect is the study of intractable problems (many optimization problems fall
under this category), and the design of efficient algorithms to obtain
approximate solutions. The second aspect is the study of problems that are known
to be solvable exactly in polynomial time, but there is a wide gap between the
known upper and lower bounds. The specific problems studied are problems that
are becoming important in the design of efficient and reliable communication
networks. They address issues that are relevant for higher reliability of
communication at low cost, and are of interest in network design and in the
implementation of broadcast protocols. Some of the tools and ideas that are used
in the solutions for these problems will have applications to solving other
problems as well.