* 9307317
* CAA: Comparative Studies of Spatial and Nonspatial Memory inMammals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Lucia Jacobs, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

The size of the hippocampus, a brain structure known to mediate spatial
learning, is correlated with spatial behavior in wild rodents. In this career
advancement award, a comparison will be made of the spatial learning ability of
different species on abstract learning tasks. Using operant methods, pairs of
species, known to differ in hippocampal size, will be compared on two operant
tasks known to involve the hippocampus (spatial delayed- nonmatch-to-sample,
simultaneous odor discrimination) and two tasks that do not require an intact
hippocampus (auditory discrimination, successive olfactory discrimination). Two
species of kangaroo rats (Dipodomys) and two species of voles (Microtus) will be
compared. It is predicted that, within each genus, the species with a larger
hippocampus will show superior learning ability on hippocampal tasks,
particularly the spatial task, but that there should be no species differences
on nonhippocampal tasks. The proposed study will be significant for several
reasons. It will be the first comparative study of different types of memory in
wild rodents. Because our understanding of the physiology of memory in mammals
is largely based on the laboratory rat, it is important to know if laboratory
rats show typical rodent behavior. More importantly, comparative studies of
closely related rodent species can identify what features of a species's habitat
can lead to increases in learning and memory capacity. Not only can this study
help us to understand the evolution of animal memory, but it can also help us to
understand the hippocampus, a structure critical in both animal and human
memory. For example, no other animal study has attempted to compare performance
of different tasks involving the hippocampus (maze learning, odor
discrimination). Thus, this study will shed light not only on the evolution of
memory, but on the function of the hippocampus, a structure of clinical
importance.