* 9308615
* Relative Price Movements and Capital Mobility in            International Macroeconomies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* David Backus, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1997
* USD 109,085.00

9308615 Backus Two of the outstanding issues in international macroeconomics
concern the variability of relative prices (why are real exchange rats so
volatile?) and the absence of international capital mobility (why is there so
little international borrowing and lending?). Neither of these features of
international economies is predicted by standard dynamic general equilibrium
theory. The purpose of this project is to look more closely at the evidence and
assess four extensions of the theory designed to explain these two features of
the world economy, with particular emphasis on price variability. The extensions
of the theory are especially valuable because they improve measures of the
welfare consequences of government policies that influence relative price
flexibility and international capital mobility. The extensions incorporate,
respectively, incomplete markets, limited enforceability of foreign loans, fixed
costs of changing export capacity, and wage/price inertia into a general
equilibrium setting, where prices and quantities are both explained. The theory
is developed in a form that makes comparison with data relatively
straightforward. Each theoretical extension will be evaluated with regard to its
ability to mimic observed fluctuations in relative prices and international
capital flows. ***