* 9308517
* RIA:  Semantic Concurrency Control for Real-Time Object-    Oriented Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Victor Fay-Wolfe, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 01/31/1997
* USD 98,962.00

RIA: Semantic Concurrency Control for Real-Time Object-Oriented Databases This
research addresses the design of concurrency control techniques for real-time
object-oriented databases. There are two components to the research: (1)
development of a formal schema model of a real-time object-oriented database
system; and (2) development of real-time concurrency control techniques that
employ application semantics and imprecision to support enforcement of all of
the forms of constraints in a real-time object-oriented database. These forms of
constraints are: data object logical consistency constraints, data object
temporal consistency constraints, transaction logical consistency constraints,
and transaction timing constraints. The concurrency control technique uses a
concurrency control component encapsulated within each object that expresses
conditional compatibility and semantic locking of object methods. This project
implements the semantic real-time concurrency control techniques using a
prototype real-time object-oriented database system. The research is useful in
real-time control applications with large amounts of time-constrained data, such
as: medical intensive care patient monitoring, vehicle control, manufacturing,
and programmed stock trading; as well as for introducing a better general
paradigm for management of real- time data in complex applications.