* 9308546
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative:        Factory Teaching Software
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Wallace Hopp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,865.00

9308546 Hopp In prior research and teaching in the Master's of Management in
Manufacturing Program at Northwestern, these researchers have evolved a system
of relationships or "laws" governing factory behavior. They term this system,
Factory Physics, and have found it to be a useful framework for comparing
competing production control policies. In particular, it is a valuable tool for
communicating the subtle tradeoffs involved in the design and control of a
manufacturing system to students, both in academic programs and in industrial
short courses. Some of the key Factory Physics concepts are based on results
from queueing theory. Unfortunately, the vast majority of students for whom
Factory Physics id designed have little familiarity with this topic. For this
reason, they make extensive use of animated computer simulations to illustrate
queueing concepts. While such simulations have been very effective in classroom
presentations, they make use of commercial packages that are expensive and time-
consuming to learn. As a result, have not been able to provide students with a
hands-on learning experience. In this project, the researcher will develop a
self-contained, interactive software package that will allow students to easily
examine the key types of queueing behavior in a manufacturing system. Since it
will not require a commercial package, recipients will be free to duplicate it,
use it in their own teaching, and carry it to industry as a tool for convincing
managers in their companies of the efficacy of policies that are often
overlooked in industry, such as variance reduction.