* 9308081
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The American Nonvoter: The  Two Faces of Electoral Nonparticipation
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1995
* Helmut Norpoth, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 04/30/1995
* USD 6,200.00

9308081 Norpoth This doctoral dissertation research project examines the two
stages of voting decisions in presidential elections. Electoral participation is
of critical importance in both democratic theory and policy reform proposals,
and has been extensively studied. While much of the past electoral research has
acknowledged the two steps of participation in the United States, registration
and then actually going to the polls, few have modeled these two stages
explicitly. Considering nonvoters as a unitary group in a single model may have
serious implications for model specification and the conclusions which have been
drawn, because as Merriam and Gosnell demonstrated, "entirely different reasons
(for not voting) were emphasized by those who were registered than by those who
were registered but did not vote." This research first examines the three
distinct groups of the electorate (non-registrants, registered nonvoters, and
registered voters), for comparisons across a number of demographic and
attitudinal variables. The next phase of research translates the two stage
conceptualization into an appropriate selection bias model of turnout. Finally,
the conclusions of past research about the effects of easing registration
requirements will be re-examined in the properly constructed two stage model.
This research agenda presents a different analytic approach to the accepted
conceptualization of turnout which will aid in understanding electoral
frameworks, policy impact analysis and the interpretation of recent history. ***