* 9308303
* Informational Lobbying, Legislative Instructions and        Campaign Contributions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* David Austen-Smith, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1994
* USD 32,968.00

There currently exists a huge literature on campaign contributions and spending
in legislative elections; and there likewise exists a substantial literature on
lobbying activities given an elected legislature. Most of this work is empirical
and descriptive, but there is a growing theoretical literature that attempts to
provide more general explanations for the empirical findings. For the most part,
this theoretical work has treated the giving of campaign contributions and
lobbying as the same activity, yet a main theme in the descriptive accounts is
that contributions are made to secure access to the recipient in order to lobby,
conditional on the recipient being electorally successful. The current
investigation develops a theory that explicitly integrates both campaign
contributions and lobbying, considered in informational terms. The essential
idea is that lobbying is predominantly an informational activity. Legislators
have to make decisions on issues about which they often know relatively little.
Interest groups, however, are frequently well-informed about the consequences of
particular legislation for their particular interests; consequently, legislators
would like to become informed by listening to lobbyists. Unfortunately, interest
groups have little incentive to say anything about an issue that might hurt
their cause, and so there is a non trivial problem for the legislator in
disentangling useful information from the case any lobbyist might present. In
view of this, some lobbyists are likely to be more informative than others for a
given legislator. This could be because some lobbyists' interests are more
closely allied with those of the legislator and so can be expected to offer
information on which lobbyists are likely to be more valuable to the legislator;
in general, one expects that interest groups that have most to gain from being
able to talk to a legislator and make their case on an issue will be those that
are willing to give the most in contributions. Thus higher contributions might
signal to a legislator which groups are likely to prove most important for that
legislator during the legislative session. Important issues for the research
are: (1) identification of the circumstances in which we can expect the
informational role of contributions to be more important than the purely
reelection role; (2) description of the extent to which the access role of
contributions leads to "bias" in legislative decision making as a whole; and,
(3) exploration of how details of the legislative decision making process affect
the incentives for donors and recipients.