* 9308380
* Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management    Science:  Judgement Based on Limited Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* David Sanbonmatsu, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 02/28/1995
* USD 36,776.00

9308380 Sanbonmatsu In decision making and everyday judgment, people must
frequently draw conclusions and make decisions on the basis of limited or
incomplete information. Rarely is complete information available about all
relevant dimensions or aspects of a target object or issue. Consequently, it is
important to understand how people respond to limited information. This
collaborative research is designed to investigate the psychological processes
involved in decision making based on limited or incomplete evidence. It is
guided by the omission detection model, which prior research has shown to be
useful for integrating many seemingly unrelated findings and for generating many
new hypotheses concerning the judgmental effects of previously neglected
decision relevant variables. The research investigates several different
judgmental processes (i.e., sensitivity to missing information, attributional
processes, and inference processes), several different dimensions of judgment
(i.e., judgmental extremity, confidence, and uncertainty), and several different
types of judgments (i.e., attitudinal judgments, preference judgments,
likelihood judgments, and judgments of category membership). The goal of this
research is to extend prior theory and research on the omission detection model,
and to develop debiasing applications based on this model. The research will
assess the utility of these procedures for improving judgment and decision
making based on limited evidence. ***