* 9308179
* Dissertation Research:  Mediating Cultures:  Shadow Puppet  Theater in Cirebon, West Java
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* J. Joseph Errington, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 08/31/1996
* USD 2,980.00

Errington/Cohen 9308179 This project is a detailed study of shadow puppet
theaters in Cirebon, West Java, Indonesia which combines ethnographic,
historical, and ethnohistorical research. These theaters are attended one to
several times a week by village dwelling Javanese. Theatrical performances
incorporate themes from local, national, and international events and juxtapose
them to Javanese ideas about social relations, morality, and concepts of
personhood. To the Javanese, puppet theater is not a trivial form of
entertainment but rather a way in which local, national, and world events are
translated to local people in a cultural idiom that is easily understood. As a
result, puppet theater can be viewed as a lens or filter that serves to
interpret events that occur outside the rural villages where most Javanese live.
Aside from the interpretation of world events, puppet theater is an arena for
the active constitution or reconstitution of Javanese ideas of self and
personhood. This project will investigate what axioms and assumptions of
Javanese social structure are represented in shadow puppet theater, how
performances analyze, probe, and play with normative ideas, and what
ramifications (if any) theatrical performances have for everyday sociocultural
life and the domain of ordinary reality. Data will be gained by interviewing
theatrical performers and puppet theater audience members as well as correlating
current performances with national events and correlating descriptions of old
performances with the historical events that inspired them. This project should
help us understand how the Javanese perceive world events, how they make sense
of them, and relate them to their own cultural values. In a more general sense
it will enhance our comparative understanding of the forms and forums that non-
Western peoples employ to interpret the world. *** erwal@nsf.gov (Internet);
tbaerwal@nsf (Bitnet); T.BAERWALD (Omnet) Enclosures: Proposal SBR 9319015
Review form "Alternated formats" sheet - PAGE 1 - v ` l SOCIAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND
ECONOMIC RESEARCH GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE PROGRAM 1800 Õ Õ ! ! ! F e e Õ
Õ ( Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial * * * " h D R E ^ r errington cohen
abstract abstract%thesis award abstract errington cohen Raymond Hames Raymond
Hames