* 9308924
* Research Initiation Award: Intelligent Control of           Electromagnetic Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1993,02/28/1997
* William Smith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 02/28/1997
* USD 66,101.00

9308924 Smith There exists a vast potential for applying unconventional
computing methods to many electromagnetics (EM) problems to reduce the amount of
intuitive analysis and to relax the computational intensity of many problems.
Choice of a particular method depends on the application and the data being
analyzed. Initially this study focuses on improving the radiation properties of
large distorted satellite reflector antennas. Preliminary investigations
indicate the neural network computing algorithms could be used for
electromagnetic compensation for surface errors. The advantages of using this
intelligent approach versus one of the exiting methods are speed (allowing real-
time radiation control) and data reduction. The first part of this study
involves bringing this new technology to a mature state. The ultimate goal of
this effort is application of these intelligent electromagnetic compensation
methods to active control of electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) problems
associated with electronic devices. Passive control methods using shielding,
ground wires, etc. have long been used. With higher clock frequencies and the
use of nonmetallic materials in auto bodies and aircraft fuselages, unwanted
radiation is an ever increasing problem. This investigation proposes to
investigate active control of radiated emissions. ***