* 9308344
* Research Initiation Award:  Cleopatra: A Programming        Environment for Embedded Time-Critical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce H. Barnes
* 12/31/1996
* USD 99,807.00

Predictability - the ability to foretell that an implementation will not violate
a set of specified requirements - is a crucial, highly desirable property of
embedded systems. This research aims at developing a programming environment
(language, libraries, and tools) for building predictable time-critical systems.
The backbone of the environment is CLEOPATRA, a programming language that is
demonstrably well-suited for the requirements of embedded systems. CLEOPATRA
features a C- like imperative syntax for the description of computation, which
makes it easier to incorporate in applications already using C. It is event-
driven, and thus appropriate for embedded process control applications. It is
object-oriented and compositional, thus advocating modularity and reusability.
CLEOPATRA is semantically sound; its objects can be transformed, mechanically
and unambiguously, into formal TRA automata for verification purposes, which can
be pursued using model-checking or theorem providing techniques. Since 1989, an
ancestor of CLEOPATRA has been in use as a specification and simulation language
for embedded time-critical robotic processes. The goal of this research goes one
step further. It aims at building an integrated CLEOPATRA-based support
environment that would be useful for real-time system developers, both in
academia and in industry.