* 9308024
* Endomembrane Calcium Control and the Regulation of Cell Division
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Robert Silver, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

9308024 Silver Cell division is a central feature in the life of every living
cell. It is known from the work of this and other laboratories that
intracellular free calcium is an essential regulator of specific biochemical and
physiological aspects of mitosis. This laboratory is identifying patterns of
calcium transients during the cell cycle in normal sand dollar blastomeres,
using calcium- dependent aequorin luminescence, multi-spectral video microscopy
and high performance computational analysis of discrete calcium signals in
intracellular microdomains. Prior results show that calcium is released into the
cytoplasm in discrete, short-lived, and highly localized pulses within local
regions, or microdomains. Computational analyses, including three-dimensional
Fourier analysis, show that spatial and temporal patterns of calcium release
vary in characteristic fashions throughout the cell cycle. The goal is to
decipher the spatial and temporal patterns of calcium release associated with
specific steps in mitosis known to be dependent upon calcium-sensitive
biochemical pathways (e.g. nuclear envelope breakdown, anaphase onset, and
cytokinesis). In this way a library of descriptors of calcium release patterns
associated with specific mitotic events will be assembled. In addition,
biochemical studies of how the cell mediates the localized release of calcium
within microdomains of the cytoplasm are underway. The present focus of the
biochemical studies is the role of phospholipid metabolism in regulating calcium
release, particularly phospholipases and other enzymes associated with the
arachidonate pathway whose lipid-derived products (e.g. inositol trisphosphate,
leukotrienes, arachidonic acid) are known to mobilize calcium from intracellular
stores. Monoclonal antibodies to phospholipases A2, C and D, and antibodies to
thromboxane synthase and cyclooxygenase label endomembranes associated with the
cytoskeleton and mitotic apparatus. Which of these enzyme s are associated with
which endomembrane system, which lipid-derived products can serve to release
calcium from endomembranes in vitro, and which may be acting in vivo to mediate
calcium release associated with mitotic events will be determined. %%% It is
known from the work of this and other laboratories that intracellular free
calcium is an essential regulator of biochemical and physiological aspects of
mitosis, the process by which one cell divides to become two. The long-term goal
of this technically demanding research is to understand the regulation of
intracellular calcium on a physiological time scale and in three dimensions
within an egg cell undergoing division. In vitro experiments on the biochemical
role of lipid-derived mediators of calcium release will complement in vivo
experiments using sophisticated video imagery to develop a three-dimensional
picture of when and where within the cell calcium is released. The results of
this research will be a major contribution to our understanding of the
regulation of mitosis. ***