* 9308002
* CAA:  Crystal Size and Fluid Flow in Dolostone Aquifers     and Reserviors
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1994
* Helene M.C. Danielli, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/1994
* USD 51,172.00

Study of fluid flow through porous rocks is vital to studies of groundwater
hydrology and contaminant protection. Previous work has shown that fluid flow is
controlled by factors such as porosity, sedimentary grain size, interparticle
cement and interstitial mud. Such factors can be measured easily and are widely
used in modelling porous media. This project aims to assess the impact of
another parameter, CRYSTAL SIZE, on fluid flow in dolostone aquifers. An
emerging application of computer-technology, image analysis will be developed
and the results shall expand its utility within engineering and geosciences. In
addition, the project deals with fundamental questions of the controls of fluid
flow in natural materials and the effects that these controls have upon
paleohydrology and diagenesis. The results will help satisfy the nation's needs
for water and petroleum. In siliclastic rocks, fluids flow between sedimentary
particles that are packed together, commonly leaving large, well-connected,
interparticle pore spaces. Cements may be precipitated into these pore spaces,
but the basic control of the fabric is depositional. In dolostones, fluids flow
between crystals that are fitted together in a mosaic; the pore network consists
of narrow, sheetlike spaces. Fluid flow in dolostones thus depends on the
tortuosity and pore width of the intercrystalline pore system, which are
themselves closely related to crystal size. Crystal size is commonly controlled
by diagenetic rather than depositional processes. Dolomite aquifers are commonly
very finely crystalline, difficult to analyze with a standard dissecting
microscope. Image analysis, using core material and a dissecting microscope with
slightly enhanced magnification, makes it possible to carry out statistical
analyses of crystal size ranges and size distributions. These can be correlated
with other textural parameters, and with core analysis data. The project will
use around 30 lower San Andres cores in a detailed study of crystal size versus
permeability and transmissibility.