* 9308492
* Engineering Research Deployment Teaching Initiative:        Technology Transfer in Using Simulation Models for          Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Russell Barton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 02/28/1995
* USD 25,000.00

9308492 Barton Computer simulation models are the laboratory for many today's
design engineers. Circuits are simulated before they are prototyped, exhaust
systems are represented as finite element simulations before they are built, and
factories are modeled with discrete event simulation before the ground is broken
for a new plant. "Laboratory" tools for: (1) modeling random manufacturing
variations, (2) for identifying key design parameters, (3) for developing and
displaying simulation metamodels and (4) for aiding in robust design
optimization exist in engineering research. Yet they have not been transferred
to engineering practice. A new graduate course, "Using Simulation Models for
Engineering Design," presents recent research results in simulation sensitivity
analysis, metamodeling, and optimization for use in engineering design case
studies. The case studies are based on computer aided design models that have
been developed and used in industry. The department advisory group assessed the
initial offering as a significant contribution to a revised engineering
curriculum, but cited these key shortcomings: (1) the students spend unnecessary
time programming because software tools to exercise the case study software are
lacking, and (2) refinements and additions to the lecture notes would make it
easier to understand and implement these tools. This research to overcome these
shortcomings.