* 9308105
* Organoiron Complexes in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Anthony Pearson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1997
* USD 353,965.00

9308105 Pearson The focus of this research is the development of new methods for
carbon-carbon bond formation using a variety of organoiron complexes. There are
four specific aspects of organoiron chemistry that will be studied. The first
aspect investigates new protocols for the generation of free radicals from
dienyliron complexes and their intramolecular coupling with pendant olefinic
groups to form carbocyclic ring systems. This represents the first application
of organometallic free radicals in synthetically useful processes. The second
aspect studies extensions and applications of iron-promoted carbonylative
annulation of diynes and enynes for formation of cyclopentadienoneiron complexes
and cyclopentenones. The third area explores intramolecular carbon nucleophile
additions to cyclohexadienyliron cations to provide important new methods for
the construction of densely functionalized molecules. The final aspect exploits
the ability of an organoiron moiety to control stereochemistry during multiple
functionalization of eight-membered rings, which are traditionally difficult to
handle; the use of organometallic chemistry provides solutions to problems of
conformational and stereochemical control. %%% With this award, the Synthetic
Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Anthony J. Pearson of the
Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University. Professor Pearson
will focus his work in the area of synthetic methodology developing new methods
for carbon-carbon bond formation using a variety of organoiron complexes. ***