* 9308631
* Research Initiation Award:  Highly Optimizing Compilation   for Constraint Logic Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Spiro Michaylov, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1996
* USD 92,502.00

9308631 Michaylov The Constraint Logic Programming (CLP) languages are a class
declarative programming languages based on the paradigm of rule based constraint
programming. This project concerns the development of practical techniques for
highly-optimizing compilation of CLP languages. To obtain good performance, it
is necessary for a compiler to perform optimizations based on global properties
of programs, because of the high-level nature of these languages. This study
will concentrate on compiling the language CLP(R), although many of the
techniques will be applicable to other CLP languages. Program analysis for CLP
languages has been studied extensively, and the investigator has developed an
abstract machine for executing CLP(R) efficiently, given a suitable optimizing
compiler. This project will address the questions of which information provided
by analyzers is actually useful for obtaining efficient code for realistic
programs, what compilation techniques are needed for obtaining the code given
this information, and how such compilation can be made scalable and reliable.
The study will build on the investigator's work on CLP implementation issues. It
will lead to a greatly increased understanding of the use of global program
analysis as the basis for a highly optimizing CLP(R) compiler, and demonstrate
its feasibility for the first time through the implementation of such a
compiler. It will provide a much needed tool that can easily be used by
researchers in program analysis to evaluate their work empirically, and will
help to identify outstanding research issues in high-performance compilation of
CLP languages. ***