* 9308886
* Research Initiation Award:  An Integrated Framework for     Fault-Tolerant Applications in Real-Time and Non-Real-Time  Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Daniel Mosse', University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 114,739.00

This research studies a new model of computation, which extends the object-
oriented model with timing constraints and resource requirements specifications.
A set of scenarios (a set of applications executing at a time) and a scenario
change mechanism that allows for different sets of applications to be executed
according to the situation are defined. These scenario changes are triggered by
an error handler, by an operator or by a user. Scenario changes also allow
uniformity in multiple types of fault-tolerant behavior such as graceful
degradation, load-shedding, etc.. The latency of these scenario changes and
quantify their applicability to real-time and non-real-time systems are studied.
Methods are developed for the detection of situations in which these scenario
changes can be applied, and develop a theory for the adaptation of these
scenario changes to non-time-constrained applications and systems. More accurate
models are developed based on real-life workloads and situations, to model
realistic fault models, encompassing transient as well as permanent faults.
These are of temporal or physical nature (e.g., transient overloads, site
crashes or link failures). The implementation of a prototype of a fault-tolerant
real-time system that supports this model of computation follows.