* 9308349
* Research and Development, Training, and Productivity:  A    Firm-Level Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Bee Yan Roberts, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 17,805.00

This research examines the micro-foundations of the determinants of the level
and growth of productivity in developing countries by focussing on the roles of
firm level research and development (R&amp;D) and job training expenditures. The
objectives of the project are to (1) describe the incidence and patterns of firm
level training and R&amp;D expenditures; (2) study the economic factors that
influence firm decisions to invest in R&amp;D and training; and (3) the impact
of R&amp;D and job training on the level and change in productivity at the firm
level. At the heart of productivity growth is technological change. In rapidly
developing countries, the encouragement of high technology development is
closely linked to a growth strategy which is export- oriented. Furthermore, at
the microlevel, success at the exporting game is often linked to large
enterprises. Here we link the three forces of technology, export-orientation and
productivity in determining firm investment decisions and their outcome. This
research is based on a unique and rich micro-database of the Taiwan Census of
Manufactures for the period from 1976 to 1991 that covers all plants in the
country's manufacturing sector. Data on firm-level R&amp;D, training and export
sales, virtually non-existent for most countries, are reported in this database.
This data is combined with recently developed microdata empirical techniques to
gain insights into the determinants and effects of key factors in the industrial
development process in rapidly developing economies.