* 9308717
* Collaborative Research on American Agriculture in an        Industrialized World:  Completing a Panel Database
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Jeremy Atack, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1998
* USD 234,060.00

9308717 Atack The purpose of this collaborative project is to collect the
remaining farm and household data from the federal censuses of agriculture and
population for a sample of 140 rural townships across the northern half of the
United States, and to assemble from them a panel database covering a vital
sector of the American economy at a crucial juncture in time. The data will form
a critical link between a cross-sectional sample from these same communities
that was drawn over twenty years ago and a similar cross-sectional sample that
is now being completed. These cross-sections cover a thirty-year period for tens
of thousands of farms and hundreds of thousands of individuals. They provide one
of the most detailed and comprehensive views of economic and social interactions
in rural America and the outcomes of the decisions made by individual farmers.
Among the questions that will be addressed using these panel data are
agricultural's adaptation to change in competition, the scale and scope of
markets resulting from reductions in transportation costs, and changes in
international trade policies; the changing structure of farms and farm
ownership; and the consequences of rural to urban migration upon rural areas.
This research is important because it will offer new insights into the
development of the American economy at a critical period of its history, and it
will produce a valuable database for economists, demographers, rural
sociologist, and other scholars interested in economic growth and development
and rural to urban migration. ***