* 9308345
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Trigonometric Series     and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Jean Bourgain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 56,000.00

9308345 Bourgain Work on this project will focus on classical problems of
harmonic analysis in one and several variables. It continues earlier studies of
trigonometric series and their applications to the harmonic analysis of higher
dimensional oscillatory integrals, and to exponential sums. In the latter work,
special emphasis on periodic partial differential equations and estimates of
Dirichlet sums will be carried out. Oscillatory integrals enter into
mathematical analysis in many ways. They are recognized as transforms identical
in form to the Fourier transform except that the phase, which is linear, is
replaced by a function of two variables, space and phase. Work will also be done
on the so-called lambda-p sets which relate the norms of functions constructed
by subsets of orthogonal families with the norms of the coefficients. In the
Hilbert space setting the questions are trivial, but once one goes over to other
norms, even using simple trigonometric functions, the problems become very
difficult. A new thrust involves studies of the Cauchy problem in partial
differential equations involving nonsmooth boundary conditions. Of concern is
whether or not certain of the fundamental partial differential equations of
current interest (nonlinear Schrodinger, for example) are well-posed in the
presence of rough boundaries. The questions under investigation have direct
bearing on some of the fundamental issues facing researchers in harmonic
analysis and partial differential equations. Not so obvious are applications to
such diverse areas as analytic number theory and geometry measure theory. ***