* 9308636
* I/UCRC for The Emission Reduction Research Center
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1998
* Daniel Watts, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 10/31/1998
* USD 432,263.00

This award is for the establishment of an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Emission Reduction Research Center (ERRC) at New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT). The focus of the ERRC research is on reducing
pollution in "batch processing" on manufacturing typically used by
pharmaceutical and the specialty chemicals industry. Some of the planned
research projects at the Center include: novel amphiphillic star polymers as
solvents for emission control in the pharmaceutical industry; novel ceramic
membranes for VOC Separation and AI system for process design and performance
monitoring etc. A comprehensive solvent database will also be built to assist
optimum solvent selection and experiment with solvent replacement opportunities
where organic solvent systems potentially can be replaced with aqueous or neat
systems. Besides NJIT, the Ohio State University, Penn State and MIT will also
participate in the research program of the I/UCRC. The Program Manager
recommends New Jersey Institute of Technology be award $50,000 for the first
year of a five-year continuing award. Near the end of each 12-month period the
Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
university/industry interaction is developing; 2) extent to which the support
base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a collaborative, robust research
program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will
recommend support for the next period of this continuing award.