* 9308667
* Research Initiation Award: Virtual Memory for Data-Parallel Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Thomas Cormen, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1996
* USD 99,945.00

The project implements a virtual-memory system for data-parallel computing by
taking advantage of the technical advances in algorithms for parallel disk
systems. Such a system will benefit parallel computing in many scientific and
other application areas by making it simpler and faster to run code on objects
that are several gigabytes or even larger. Typically, when the memory
requirements of an application exceed the available random-access memory on
parallel machines, programmers keep their data on a parallel disk system and
perform disk accesses in their source code. The resulting codes are difficult to
develop and often run slowly. The proposed system will help avoid the additional
software development time and complexity associated with such large problems.
Moreover, because the system employs recent advances in algorithms for planning
parallel disk accesses, it runs more efficiently. The project entails the design
and implementation of an appropriate set of primitive data-parallel operations
in a virtual-memory context. The implementation may include further development
of efficient algorithms for parallel disk systems. In addition, the project
includes the development of one or more compilers that compile languages such as
Fortran and C into these primitives.