* 9308773
* Regularities in Large Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Naftaly Minsky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 01/31/1997
* USD 271,579.00

9308773 Minsky Regularities, or the conformity to unifying principles, are
essential to the comprehensibility, manageability and reliability of large
software systems. Unfortunately, regularities are difficult to implement, unless
they are imposed on a system by some kind of "higher authority," such as the
programming language. The problem with implementing regularities stems from
their intrinsic globality. Unlike an algorithm or a data structure that can be
built into specific modules, a regularity is a principle that must be observed
everywhere in the system, and cannot be localized. One can, of course, implement
a desired regularity by painstakingly building all components of the system in
accordance with it. But such a "manual" implementation of regularities is
laborious, unreliable, and unstable and difficult to verify and to change. The
goal of this work is to develop and explore an approach to regularities which
greatly simplifies their implementation, making them more easily employable for
taming of the complexities of large systems. This approach, which is based on
the concept of law-governed architecture (LGA), provides system designers and
builders with the means for establishing regularities simply by declaring them
formally and explicitly as the law of the system. Once such a law-governed
regularity is declared, it is enforced by the environment in which the system is
developed. The efficient enforcement of such regularities is a central objective
of this research. Although not all desirable regularities can be established
this way, the approach should be able to support a wide range of "law-governed
regularities"--which can be formally defined, and efficiently enforced--
including module- interconnection frameworks, access-control schemes, variety of
object-oriented regularities, various protocols for distributed systems,
regularities that help in unifying heterogeneous systems, and others. ***