* 9308783
* U.S.-Czech Joint Fund Research on Catalytic NOx Abatement
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,05/01/1996
* Blanka Wichterlova, Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry & Electrochemistry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/01/1996
* USD 0.00

This US-Czech Joint Fund research project between Dr. Blanka Wichterlova,
Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Czech Academy of
Sciences, and Dr. Kamil Klier, Lehigh University, is in the field of structure
and activity of heterogeneous catalysts. The researchers propose to study
catalytic NOx abatement, primarily in non-reducing atmosphere exhaust gases and
emissions of stationary sources such as power stations. The goal of decomposing
NO in a neutral or oxidizing atmosphere presents a well-recognized scientific
challenge with practical impact for the world environment. The researchers will
examine the relations between the structure and activity of metal oxide -
zeolite based catalysts. Both theoretical and experimental studies of
sophisticated models and real catalyst structures will be carried out. Results
may be helpful in designing a catalyst with the optimum activation of the NO
molecule and exhibiting sufficiently fast oxygen desorption. This research in
chemistry and catalysis fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Czech Republic to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Funds for the project are awarded through the US-Czech
Joint Fund, Prague, in accordance with established guidelines.