* 9308768
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,06/30/1998
* John Baldwin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 23,400.00

9308768 Baldwin Baldwin intends to investigate stable structures derived as the
homogeneous universal model for classes of finite structures with dimension
functions. These structures have significantly broadened the class of stable
structures in recent years. In particular, he asks whether structures of this
sort can possibly satisfy the Vaught or Lachlan conjectures, i.e. whether the
theory of such a structure can have finitely many or aleph-one countable models.
He will also study the relation between `generic' models for classes of finite
structures and recent advances in the study of `random' models by Spencer.
During the last twenty years stability theory has developed a technical
apparatus for detailed investigation of a large class of mathematical
structures. Zil'ber suggested that in fact all the structures involved were tied
very closely to classical structures. Hrushovski provided a counterexample to
this conjecture. Baldwin refined his construction to find a new non-Desarguesian
projective plane. Baldwin also discovered a close connection between these
structures and the theory of random graphs. Baldwin intends to study this new
class of structures: to see whether they provide counterexamples to some other
long standing conjectures and to explore further the connection with random
graphs. ***