* 9308290
* Research Initiation Award:  Analysis and Control of         Assembly Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Izak Duenyas, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1997
* USD 101,272.00

9308290 Duenyas In the past decade, there has been a growing research interest
in queueing network models of manufacturing systems. This interest is due to the
ability of queueing network models to capture and evaluate the effects of
variability and congestion. The recent interest in pull manufacturing systems
such as kanban has increased the use of queueing network models. However, an
important feature of many manufacturing systems that has not yet been
satisfactorily incorporated in queueing network models is assembly operations.
Assembly operations are operations that require as input the output of several
different production lines. The aim of this project is to develop analytical
models for the analysis and control of assembly systems. Bounds and
approximations will be developed for such performance measures as the
throughput, variance of the number produced in a given period, mean and variance
of cycle time and mean and variance of queue lengths. Our preliminary results
indicate that approximating assembly systems by equivalent tandem systems
provides a promising appraoch. The analytical models will be used in algorithms
for the optimal design of assembly systems. We will answer design questions such
as how work should be allocated between different lines ad work centers, how to
set production quotas, and Work In Process Inventory levels in these systems and
how variability affects the optimal design and performance of assembly systems.
The researchers will work with industry to test and implement our results. The
result of the research will aid manufacturers signficantly in designing more
efficient assembly systems.