* 9308377
* The Modulation of Inhibitory Synapses During Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Dan Sanes, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 190,801.00

9308377 Sanes As the brain matures, the connection between nerve cells are
gradually modified in response to the environment, similar to the mechanisms
underlying learning and memory. Some of the connections between nerve cells
become stronger, while others are eliminated altogether. The mechanisms by which
these changes occur are beginning to be unraveled at one set of connections in
the central nervous system, called excitatory connections. This set of
connections is the sort found between a motor neuron and muscle cell, where one
cell activates a second. However, nearly half of the neuronal connections in the
brain are inhibitory, and we do not yet know whether these connection are
modified during the development of the central nervous system. Since virtually
every task that the brain performs utilizes both excitatory and inhibitory
connections, it is essential to understand how the latter develop. The proposed
study will investigate whether the strength of inhibitory connections is
dependent upon experience during the course of brain maturation. In the central
auditory system, it is possible to monitor the strength of identified inhibitory
connections by examining the size of the electrical response when they are
stimulated. This project will determine what happens to the electrical activity
at these inhibitory connections when they are used or not used during the course
of development. At a molecular level, it will be possible to determine whether
the receptor molecules that mediate inhibitory activity are produced in
appropriate number when these connections remain silent. A second experiment
will determine whether the strength of inhibitory connections can be enhanced
over the course of minutes by directly stimulating them at very high levels.
Together, these experiments will demonstrate how the modification of inhibitory
connections may lead to mature central nervous system function. *** CI Sound
midimap.drv=MIDI Mapper timer.drv=Timer rv=Timer v=Timer timer.drv=Timer
imer.dr9308377 Sanes As the brain matures, the connection between nerve cells
are gradually modified in response to the environment ! ! ! F ( Times New Roman
Symbol & Arial " h $ EÃ• E 1 # @ sanes William Proctor, IBN William Proctor, IBN