* 9308970
* RIA:  Specialized, Fully Declarative Logic Programming      Languages for Expert Systems and Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Stephen Murrell, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1997
* USD 99,978.00

Specialized, Fully Declarative Logic Programming Languages for Expert Systems
and Databases A family of logic programming languages is proposed -- one general
purpose programming language, and the others specialized and aimed at major
application areas of AI. The languages are fully declarative and based on solid
mathematical foundations. The language for general purpose programming admits
(unlike PROLOG and its currently existing generalizations) extended syntax:
general quantifiers and a functional form of classical negation. This language
is used as a basis from which the others are developed. The second language for
expert systems has an intrinsic support for non-numerical measures of confidence
and formal mechanisms for handling hierarchies of contradictions. The third
language for deductive databases supports multiple open and closed domains and
efficient query evaluation. The fourth language combines features of the
previous two, and is suitable for distributed multi- component intelligent
systems. The languages have a potential for parallelization. This research is
based on a theory recently developed by the investigator and extended to support
the features above. In this research, experimental implementations are also
produced to allow validation of the theory and comparisons of efficiency with
corresponding implementations of other languages. No languages with proposed
features currently exist; their introduction will have a desirable impact on the
construction of future intelligent systems.