* 9308307
* Novel Photoreactive Amphiphilic Polymers:  Synthesis,       Photophysics, and Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Stephen Webber, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/1996
* USD 280,600.00

The proposed research project involves the synthesis of linear and dendrimeric
polymers that contain covalently-bound chromophores will serve a dual purpose as
fluorescent probes to characterize the polymer system itself or to elucidate the
effect of the polymer environment on photochemical processes. The polymers to be
studied are amphiphilic, with a hydrophobic block or end and a hydrophilic block
or surface. Because of the strong differences in the solubility of these blocks
the materials can self-assemble into micelle structures or adsorb onto
hydrophobic surfaces, including liquid-liquid interfaces. The nature of the
self-assembly depends on the molecular architecture and solvent/temperature
conditions. A combination of fluorescence methods such as energy transfer, time-
dependent fluorescence depolarization, and fluorescence quenching will be used
to characterize the environment and spatial arrangement of polymer segments in
the following systems: 1) polymer micelles from diblock polymers; 2) surface
adsorbed diblock or hydrophobically end-tagged polymers; 3) polymers covalently
end- grafted to surfaces; 4) dendrimeric polymers either in homogeneous solution
or covalently bonded to a surface. In addition to these synthetic and
photophysical experiments, we have undertaken the application of computational
methods to simulate polymers at interfaces. These are expected to help in the
design and interpretation of our experiments and provide a useful additions to
the numerical methods available to test predictions or analytical theory of
polymers at interfaces. This photophysical research aims to clarify how polymers
can modify or effect reactions at interfaces. Potential applications include
photoreactive films, gels, micelles, and surfactants.