* 9308687
* Search, Bargaining, Money, and Prices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Randall Wright, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1997
* USD 193,694.00

9308687 Wright Under his previous NSF grant, the investigator used search
theory to formalize the transactions role of money. This was an important
contribution because it allowed analysts to rigorously study the way
preferences, production possibilities, technology and market frictions shape the
pattern of trade. Work using a search-theoretic approach to money demand is
providing many new insights into money's function and the relationships between
money and real variables. This project will develop a new line of bargaining
monetary models of search and price formation, introduce credit into search
models of money. The project will continue research on the microfoundations of
"who meets who and how" that are behind the entire search framework, on an
evolutionary approach to search models of money, and on money with private
information. The research on price formation addresses an important criticism of
existing models of money demand. These models are incomplete, in the sense that
while they analyze the exchange process, they neglect the determination of
prices. Either these models assume that prices are fixed, or they assume that
objects are indivisible and therefore must trade one-for-one, or they impose
some other ad hoc assumption on prices. The framework developed under this
project has explicit bilateral bargaining over prices, so that monetary exchange
rates are not assumed but derived from the model. The development of these
models will permit the systematic study of the way the underlying strategic
environment affects money and price formation. ***