* 9308279
* The Cellular Cholesterol Efflux Potential of Human Serum
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Magarita de la Llera-Moya, Allegheny University of Health Science, Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 06/30/1995
* USD 18,000.00

The maintenance of proper intracellular levels of cholesterol is dependent on a
dynamic equilibrium between cholesterol efflux and uptake of the lipid component
after having bound to an extracellular acceptor in serum. To study this
phenomenon, a method was developed to assay the combination of "released"
cholesterol with serum acceptor molecules. The objective of the present research
is to extend the current assay in order to obtain more information on other
parameters that can influence cholesterol efflux. These factors include
intracellular cholesterol content and the relative activities of serum
components, other than those lipoproteins already known to regulate cholesterol
homeostasis such as lecithin cholesterol ester hydrolase (LCAT) and cholesterol
ester transfer protein (CETP). To begin to monitor the movement of cholesterol
after entry into the extracellular acceptor pool, methods will be developed to
assay intracellular acyl cholesterol ester transferase (ACAT). Changes in ACAT
activity have been shown to correlate with cell cholesterol in numerous cell
systems. With the ACAT enzyme assay in place, cholesterol efflux values will be
correlated with changes in serum components such as high density lipoprotein
(HDL) subclasses, other lipoproteins, and standard parameters of LCAT and CETP.
Finally, the new assay method will be scaled down for screening small volume
serum samples from genetically engineered mice, that have extra, or missing
copies, of genes for serum proteins that play a crucial role in cholesterol
metabolism. %%% A better method will be developed to measure changes in the
circulating total concentration of cholesterol in serum. This is difficult to do
because cholesterol exists in combination with a variety of different
circulating serum components, and in this combined state, it is not detected by
ordinary procedures now in use. Development of such an assay system and the
identification of more of the different extracellular cholesterol-absorbing
components in serum will provide a better understanding of cholesterol
metabolism in vertebrate animals.