* 9308301
* The Federal Funds Rate and the Monetary Transmission        Mechanism
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* James Hamilton, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1996
* USD 127,789.00

9308301 Hamilton There is currently no consensus whatever among macroeconomists
on the effect of monetary policy on the economy. Keynesian models suggest that
faster monetary growth would lower the nominal interest rate by expanding the
supply of credit, whereas classical models would predict that faster monetary
growth could well raise the nominal interest rate as a result of inflationary
expectations. The confusion and disagreements among academic economists
notwithstanding, the people who work for the Federal Reserve's trading desk have
the daily responsibility for using open market operations to keep the Federal
funds rate trading within a narrow range. This project is designed to develop a
convincing scientific measure of the effects that anticipated and unanticipated
open market operations by the Federal Reserve have on nominal interest rates and
real economy activity at horizons from one day to two years. This project has
five components, each of which would comprise a separate and major research
effort. The first step is to develop a statistical description of daily
fluctuations in the Fed funds rate that is consistent with profit maximization
by banks. The second step uses this description of the daily Fed funds market
along with an analysis of banks' incentives for borrowing at the discount window
to arrive at a prediction of the dynamic effects of open market operations on
the Fed funds rate. The third step weeks independent verification of the
predicted multipliers based on a biweekly vector autoregression (VAR); if the
VAR proves to be inconsistent with the theoretical analysis, the framework will
need to be modified accordingly. The fourth step uses term structure relations
to predict the effects of open market operations on interest rates other than
the Fed funds rate. Again it is possible to corroborate these predictions
independently with vector autoregressions. The fifth step will use these results
to assess the dynamic conseque nces of open market operations for unemployment,
output, and inflation. ***