* 9308633
* A Conference on Institutional Dimensions of Cooperation and Discord: Local and Global Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1995
* USD 16,087.00

9308633 Ostrom This is a follow-up conference to one that was held at Harvard in
April of 1992. The conference will bring together scholars from many diverse
disciplines working on problems related to both global and local environmental
issues who rarely have an opportunity to confront one another's work. Even so,
there has been a remarkable convergence between two independent streams of
literature in political science, economics, international relations,
anthropology, ecology, and related disciplines. The convergence points to
important similarities between the cooperation achieved in some international
regimes and in some local common-pool resources (CPRs). The major activity of
this conference is to further theoretical and empirical work on six unresolved,
theoretical issues at the core of research on international regimes as well as
on CPRs. These issues are well defined but not yet effectively addressed and are
thus ripe for further work in the immediate future. These issues are crucially
important to the understanding of cooperation in situations of collective action
without hierarchical governance. The set of activities contributes to the
scientific investigation of a theory of cooperation related to environmental
issues at both the global and local level. In the current era of global change,
the research leads to important policy recommendations emphasizing the
importance of multiple scales of organization.