* 9308183
* Crossed Supersonic Molecular Beam Studies of the Reaction   Dynamics of Fullerness
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* William Jackson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/1997
* USD 323,000.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. W.M. Jackson of the University of California at Davis will perform a
series of investigations on the reaction dynamics of two fullerene compounds
composed of 60 and 70 carbon atoms each, reacting with molecules belonging to
families known as free radicals, and those characterized by weak bonds, large
electron affinities, and low ionization potentials. The experiments are to be
done with a newly constructed molecular beam machine built expressly for the
purpose of these studies. %%% Fullerenes comprise a recently discovered class of
chemical compounds of carbon atoms in which the locations of these atoms
originally defined a nearly spherically shaped geodesic surface. The appellation
"fullerene" is used in recognition of Buckminster Fuller whose architectural
researches on geodesic domes popularized such structures. A fullerene composed
of 60 carbon atoms has the atoms located at the corners of pentagons and
hexagons, these regular polygons forming a closed surface just like that of a
soccer ball. Such a cluster of atoms is therefore also popularly referred to as
a "Buckyball". The generic term fullerene is now commonly applied to refer to
such atomic clusters irrespective of their actual numbers of composing atoms,
and its use has now been extended to also include tubular structures. Fullerenes
are found to be unusually stable and, even though originally thought to be rare
in nature, can actually be easily made and are found in a variety of substances
as a result of chemical processes. Due to the potential of technological
applications, fullerenes are the subject of intense investigations of their
physical, chemical, and material properties. Their chemical reactivities are not
well understood and the purpose of this fundamental research project is to
contribute to the knowledge base of these systems and thereby help in their
eventual exploitation for technological applications.