* 9308108
* Research Initiation Award:  Parallel Program Portability    with Coarse-Grained Dataflow Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Balkrishna Ramkumar, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce H. Barnes
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

A coarse-grained data flow (CGD) virtual machine model of computing for the
development of a programming environment for parallel programs on MIMD
architectures will be investigated. This paradigm will be evaluated using three
criteria: (a) portability across a wide range of parallel architectures, and (b)
effective support for performance monitoring and debugging, and (c) ease of use.
To study the portability of this paradigm, Charm, a run time system for portable
parallel programming on MIMD architectures has been developed. To date, numerous
reallife applications have been implemented using Charm, thus making it an
effective testbed. To study the effectiveness of CGD as a portable programming
paradigm, Intrepid - an integrated environment for performance monitoring,
instrumentation and debugging, will be developed on a network of Unix
workstations. Programs developed using Intrepid will be capable of running
efficiently on a wide range of MIMD architectures without change. In a single
environment, Intrepid will enable the comparison of the performance of parallel
programs on different MIMD computers. This will permit the identification of
architectural and operating system level support that is required for the
efficient, portable implementation of the CGD paradigm.