* 9308425
* RIA:  Controlling Synthesis of Domain-Specific Object-      Oriented Programs
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Rattikorn Hewett, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 06/30/1997
* USD 90,985.00

This research will address the problem of automatically synthesizing object-
oriented programs, focusing on control of the synthesis process. The primary
objective is to reduce user interaction in transformation-based automated
synthesis systems by means of significant advances in control mechanisms.
Secondary objectives include application of synthesis to object-oriented program
development, identification of practical specification languages for object-
oriented synthesis systems, and techniques for specification acquisition,
software modeling, and knowledge representation that support software reuse and
maintenance. Automated program synthesis is one of the central methods used in
knowledge-based software engineering to enhance the quality and efficiency of
software development. Although many transformational synthesis systems have been
successfully designed and implemented, automatic control of the synthesis
process remains a difficult problem. This research proposes a domain-specific
knowledge-based system that includes intelligent control for synthesizing
object- oriented programs. The proposed research will develop transformation
rules and schemas used for synthesis by implementing as experimental system for
a specific domain. The architecture integrates a black-board-based control
mechanism with an existing transformational system to achieve greater efficiency
in program synthesis. By employing a blackboard-based architecture, the system
explicitly represents control knowledge used in guiding the selection of
transformations.//