* 9308342
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric, Numerical, and Nonlinear  Dynamical Systems Studies in Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

Statistical analysis is an essential component of scientific and technical
research and development. These analyses have broad mathematical links in
common, although many problems also require specific techniques adapted to the
particular application. This research proposal involves investigations into
aspects of this common mathematical structure. One focus of the research is
nonparametric function estimation, which encompasses varied applications in
image processing and in electronic signal processing and analysis. The current
research will establish desirable general properties for such procedures. It
will then examine to what extent the procedures in common use have these
properties and, where they do not, how they should be modified. Another goal of
the research is a general theory which explains how to construct the smallest
possible confidence sets of given confidence. The implications for specific
cases will also be investigated. A third focus is on general methods for
evaluating probabilistic forecasts, such as the predicted chance of rain.
Considerable theory has been developed for the case of a single forecaster
predicting a binomial (="yes" or "no") event. Extensions will be proposed for
the case of multinomial events and for forecasts produced by group consensus
rather than by one individual.