* 9308560
* Dynamic Sequencing Methods for Studying Turning Points in   the Criminal Career
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Robert Sampson, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/29/1996
* USD 120,000.00

9308560 ABBOTT This project will develop and employ a new methodolgy for
analyzing criminal careers across individual lives. The project will result in a
sequential picture of life events from childhood to adulthood in four dimensions
-- crime, criminal justice sanctions (e.g., arrest, incarceration), employment
and marriage. Based on an age- graded theory of social control, the focus is on
how the sequencing of sanctioning, employment and marital events are related to
changes and turning points in the criminal career. A major hypothesis is that
sequences of incarceration followed by job instability produce distinct turning
points toward crime. By developing and extending new optimal-matching methods
for detecting resemblance in sequence data, the project seeks to establish
whether or not there are critical stages of the life course that turn criminal
careers in particular directions. The data for this project stem from a classic
longitudinal study (by Sheldon and Eleanor Glueck) of 500 delinquents and 500
nondelinquents followed from adolescence to age 32. These data will be
reconstructed by the research team for the purpose of this new kind of analysis.
Life records of the sequencing of job and marital histories will be coded and
analyzed in conjunction with more recent data on criminal careers up to age 45.
The proposed methodology of "optimal matching" aims to detect distinct patterns
of crime associated with salient events over the course of life. ***