* 9308353
* RIA: Non-Interpenetrating Rigid Body Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* David Baraff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1996
* USD 74,833.00

The ability to realistically simulate physical objects' motion behaviors has
become an area of great importance in science, engineering, training and
planning. Realistic simulation requires accurately modeling the behavior and
interactions of contacting objects. In particular, it is necessary to be able to
simulate the same non-interpenetrating motion that real- world objects undergo.
An important subset of physical simulation is simulations where all objects are
modeled as being perfectly rigid. The abstraction of a perfectly rigid body,
though physically unobtainable, is an excellent and reasonable approximation for
many real-world applications in robotics and computer graphics. Even with the
rigid-body assumption, simulation is made difficult by the need to deal with
complex surface geometries and contact phenomena such as friction. This project
aims at extending the capabilities of current physical simulation systems that
model contact and collision between systems of rigid bodies and explore
practical uses for simulation systems. Specifically, the investigation centers
on the development of new geometrical algorithms that allow for simulations with
greater levels of geometric complexity, and the extension of computational
complexity bounds and algorithms for the problem of contact with friction. This
project will also explore using non-interpenetration constraints to aid in
interactive computer-aided design and modeling applications.