* 9308282
* Research Initiation Award:  Photoinduced Redox Reactions on Semiconductor Particles; Photoelectrochemistry for Organic  Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Yuzhuo Li, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 01/31/1997
* USD 115,000.00

Yuzhuo Li 9308282 The objective of this work is to use heterogenous
semiconductor systems for photocatalytic organic synthesis. Emphasis is on
intermediates useful in the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, polymer, and dye
industries. Reactor configurations that are energy efficient and cost effective
are designed and new semiconductor systems are tested. Specific tasks include
applications of photocatalytic reduction (using titania photocatalyst) to
aldehydes, azides, nitrites, and nitro compounds; photocatalytic fixation of
carbon dioxide into aromatic compounds on semiconductor surfaces; preparation of
monodispersed particles with a core of tungsten trioxide coated with ferric
oxide and evaluation of their photocatalytic potential in redox reactions;
preparation of monodispersed titania coated with conducting polymers and
evaluation of their utility in the reduction of nitro compounds; and design of a
flow photochemical reactor for high product output and low solvent consumption.
In this study, photoinduced (light inititiated) transformations of organic
compounds using particulate semiconductors as catalysts are explored. Emphasis
is on reduction of organic compounds containing oxygen or nitrogen. This
approach requires no expendable reducing agents, which are a major source of
toxic-metal waste. In addition to its potential for avoidance of toxic
byproducts, this approach may also be useful for destruction of existing toxic
wastes.