* 9308011
* Theory of Solids/Electronic Structure and Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Walter Kohn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

9305092 Little Treatment of E. coli by agents that damage DNA or inhibit
replication triggers the SOS response to the damage that promotes cell survival
by a variety of means. This response involves the action of two regulatory
proteins: LexA, which represses about 20 SOS genes during normal growth, and
RecA, which is activated by inducing treatments to a form that catalyzes the
specific cleavage of LexA repressor, inactivating it and leading to induction of
the SOS genes. Hence, specific cleavage plays a crucial role in the SOS
response. In addition to this central regulatory role of LexA cleavage, this
reaction is of considerable biochemical interest. Its mechanism is unusual, in
that LedA cleaves itself in an intramolecular reaction termed autodigestion, and
activated RecA acts to stimulate LexA self-cleavage under physiological
conditions. In these conditions, LexA cleavage is designed to proceed slowly,
but at the same time to be capable of large rate increases. This view raises two
related questions: What is the mechanism of LexA autodigestion, and how can RecA
protein facilitate this reaction? Three complementary approaches are proposed to
address these questions. The first is to continue to isolate and characterize
mutations that influence the rate of LexA cleavage. The second approach is to
continue to develop the bimolecular LexA cleavage reaction, in which one
molecule of LexA or lambda repressor acts as an enzyme to cleave other molecules
of LexA. The third approach is to look for physical evidence that LexA can exist
in two different conformational states. %%% An increasingly large number of
biologically important reactions are being discovered that are intramolecular.
These include self- splicing RNA introns, autophosphorylation and
autophosphatase activity of chemotaxis proteins, and autophosphorylation of
oncogeny proteins, growth factor receptors, and other important proteins. The
proposed work is of general significance for the ins ights it is expected to
yield regarding the properties of intramolecular self-processing reactions, and
the means by which the rated of these reactions can be regulated by interactions
with other effector molecules. ***