* 9308498
* Research Initiation Award:  In-situ Impregnation of         Polymers and Ceramics in Composites Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 01/31/1997
* USD 120,000.00

9308498 Ramani Thermoplastic matrix fiber components are predominantly
manufactured using intermediate material forms such as prepregs, tapes or
towpregs, which reduces manufacturing and design flexibility, and increases the
product costs. Even resins that are synthesized in powder form are converted to
pellets and melt impregnated on glass fibers to manufacture short fiber
composites. Several processing steps for the manufacture of the final component
are wasteful from both manufacturing time, processing and design flexibility,
and energy considerations. The primary objective of this research is to develop
a single continuous process for impregnating and consolidating polymeric powders
in continuous fibers to manufacture components to net shape. This process is
extended to encapsulate ceramic powder with polymeric powder on continuous
fibers. The impregnation is accomplished by electrostatic spray deposition and
adhesion to the fiber tow, rapid heating, and consolidation in a filament
winding or pultrusion process. Process models are developed for each sub-process
and integrated during the process development cycle. Development and
demonstration of this process will directly lead to minimizing the processing
steps and reducing the associated costs. This process can be used for direct
manufacture of filament wound, pultruded components and resin encapsulated glass
fibers for injection molding and extrusion processes. Ceramic powder
encapsulated tows can be used for the manufacture of continuous fiber ceramic
composites and composites with ceramic particles as a filler in tribological
situations.