* 9308251
* Research Initiation Award: Smart Spatial Light Modulators   based on Amorphous Semiconductor Multilayer Structures.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Mark Neifeld, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 02/28/1997
* USD 100,000.00

WPC 2 $ B P Z $ Courier 10cpi #| x Õm x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP LaserJet Series II
HPLASEII.PRS x @ , t 0 OpX @Courier 10cpi Line Printer 16.67cpi 2 X V F ` ? x x
x , Õm x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ k + H H H , H H @ ; @ D : 5 F &lt; 7 D @ F B 3 . 0 j &lt;
: &lt; F D B @ &gt;: . ^ 4 : &lt; : D F @ B &gt;&lt; . 3 0 ^ 9308251 Neifeld
Smart SLMs are extremely important to the next generation of optical computing
and processing. This class of device represents the enabling technology for the
realization of interconnects, neural networks, image processing and other forms
of parallel optical computing. This proposal discusses the use of a ? Si:H/a Si
x C 1 x :H multilayers as optical modulators which are compatible with Si VLSI
and can therefore be integrated with sophisticated processing electronics to
yield smart SLMs offering visible wavelength operation, high speed, broad
functionality and simple, inexpensive fabrication requirements. Initial efforts
have produced evidence that bound state quantization will occur in amorphous
semiconductor material system will be investigated. High quality constituent
materials and interfaces will be produced. Through sample deposition and
characterization fabrication parameters will be optimized. Second, multilayer
structures will be fabricated to optimize modulator characteristics. This
component involves characterization of MQW samples so that quantization effects
and in particular the effects of band tail states, may be analyzed. Third,
techniques will be developed to integrate these modulators with CMOS VLSI. This
last component will focus on experim ental techniques necessary to fabricate
amorphous semiconductor modulators on existing CMOS electronic circuits and will
make use of the MOSIS facility to provide VLSI addressing circuits.