* 9308346
* RIA:  Simultaneous Modeling of Features and Design          Interdependencies to Support Computer-Integrated Engineeringvia Object-Oriented Software Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Thomas Peters, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1997
* USD 119,890.00

This project demonstrates that the simultaneous modeling of features and design
interdependencies is essential for the critical software communications
necessary to support computer-integrated engineering (CIE). Consistency between
interdependent features must be preserved, so that a change to one feature is
reflected in all appropriate dependent features. For example, a design feature
and a manufacturing feature may be interdependent, where a design change may
necessitate change in the associated numerical control (NC) program. Hence, an a
fortiori requirement is the development of a representative library of
interdependent features. Unfortunately, current computer aided design (CAD)
systems emphasize the input of detailed design-interdependencies within the
original design intent can not be easily expressed, even though they are often
well understood by the designer. Modern concurrent engineering envisions design,
manufacturing, assembly, maintenance, and evolution as co-operative activities;
implying that the representation of interdependencies should be permissible
within any stage of CIE activity. The use of object-oriented software design
tools, undergoing parallel development by an internal software engineering
research team, provide opportunities to capture these interdependencies and
efficiently propagate product and process changes. The effectiveness of this
approach is demonstrated over and object- oriented database within a complex CIE
domain, using emerging industrial jet engine casing designs as test cases.