* 9308779
* US-Czech Joint Fund Research on Mathematical                Logic and Complexity Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1993,05/15/1996
* Jan Krajicek, Mathematical Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/15/1996
* USD 0.00

This US-Czech Joint Fund mathematics research project between Dr. Jan Krajiek,
Mathematical Institute, Czech Academy of Sciences and Dr. Samuel Buss,
University of California-San Diego, concerns the following topics: bounded
arithmetic, complexity theory and complexity of propositional and first order
proof systems. The researchers see these topics as closely related in aims and
techniques and believe the major problems in all three areas have the same
character as the famous "P versus NP" problem (whether there is a propositional
proof system in which every tautology has a proof whose length is polynomial in
the length of the tautology.) In their investigation of elicit connections, the
researchers will study the following problems: finite axiomatizability of
bounded arithmetic, lower bounds to the depth and to the size of Boolean
circuits, bounds on the length of Frege, extended Frege and first-order proofs.
Results are expected to help determine whether some methods developed purely for
logic can be applied to problems in complexity theory. This research in
mathematics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Czech Republic to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence. Funds for the project are awarded through the US-Czech Joint Fund,
Prague, in accordance with established guidelines.