* 9308332
* Development of Spectroscopic Ellipsometry as a Non-         Destructive Characterization Tool for Ceramic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9308332 Trolier-McKinstry This is a Research Planning Grant (RPG) proposal
submitted to the Research Opportunity for Women (ROW) Program. The proposed work
uses the spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) as a nondestructive characterization
tool for thin film and graded refractive index transparent materials. The limits
of sensitivity of the measuring techniques will be investigated. The absolute
accuracy of the measured film refractive index will be calculated as a function
of the measured film thickness and the refractive index contrast between the
coating and the substrate. Quantitative correlations between film deposition
conditions and the film qualities will be made. It can have the effect of
facilitating the production of homogeneous and high-quality films. %%% This
proposed work uses the spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) as a nondestructive
characterization tool for thin film and graded refractive index transparent
materials. It plans to examine the limits of sensitivity of the measurements,
and it seeks to separate the effect of microstructural inhomogeneities in the
films from the actual optical properties of the material. Transparent films are
important in this age of optical communications. This study provides
quantitative measures in how to improve the qualities of the films. Its'
potentials to improve the optical communication application are very great. ***