* 9308168
* Cluster Assembled Nanophase Metals Using NMR
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Bryan Suits, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

9308168 Suits This work addresses fundamental issues of atomic and electronic
structure and the deformation mechanism in cluster-assembled nanophase metals.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) techniques will be applied to metallic samples
prepared by consolidation of small clusters. These nanophase samples will have a
grain size of a few nanometers and can be up to five times stronger than the
same material with a larger grain size. The atomic scale effect on the nmr
response and the site-selective nature of the nmr measurements will provide a
new and unique view of the structure of these materials. The NMR work is
performed in conjunction with sample preparation performed at Argonne National
Laboratory. %%% Nuclear Magnetic resonance (NMR) provides information on the
structural and electronic properties of materials as seen by individual atoms.
Metals produced by consolidation of very small crystalline particles (10 to 30
atoms across), referred to as nanophase metals, have significantly enhanced
mechanical properties compared to the naturally occuring material. This work
will apply techniques of NMR to help understand the enhanced mechanical
properties from an atomic viewpoint. This will aid in the development of new
materials and new uses for these materials. The NMR work is performed in
conjunction with sample preparation performed at Argonne National Laboratory.
***