* 9308857
* Attitudes Toward Controversial Human Services among         Minority Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Lois Takahashi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 01/31/1995
* USD 13,935.00

9308857 TAKAHASHI Considerable research has been devoted by scholars to analysis
of individual and collective reactions to the siting of controversial
facilities, which are recognized as necessary but are seen as undesirable when
situated nearby. Although many studies have focused on the dynamics of "NIMBY"
(not in my back yard) responses to "LULUs" (locally undesirable land uses) that
have negative physical environmental externalities, much less attention has been
given to the analysis of reactions to human- service facilities like homeless
shelters and facilities for treatment of people infected with AIDS. Initial
studies of community reactions to such facilities disclosed that gender, income,
and other socio-economic characteristics are highly correlated with individual
and collective acceptance of these activities. National attitudinal studies
indicated that interregional, intraregional, and other locational factors may
also influence community acceptance of human-service facilities. This Research
Planning Grant will enable a capable and productive young geographer to begin
examination of attitudinal variations among different ethnic and racial minority
groups. Questions in a national survey first administered in the late 1980s will
be adapted to take into account cultural and linguistic differences among
several minority populations, with pilot tests of modified instruments conducted
on a set of minority groups in Orange County, California. Results from these
pretests will be used to refine national survey instruments so that they elicit
better information regarding socio-demographic variations in attitudes toward
human-service facilities and other LULUs. This award will move a promising line
of research on an important topic through a critical phase in the development
and testing of instruments designed to elicit critical information about
variations in attitudes among different groups of people. By improving data-
collection procedures, this line of research will better contribute to general
understandings about the human geography of individual and community attitudes
regarding siting of contentious land uses. The award also will provide a
valuable boost to the independent research career of a highly qualified woman
who has not previous received federal research support. ***