* 9308915
* Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management    Science:  Utility Theories with Joint Receipts and          Reference Levels
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Detlof von Winterfeldt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/1996
* USD 140,993.00

9308915 Von Winterfeldt Almost forty years of experience with theories about
rational decision making on the part of individuals confronting risk and
uncertainty -- technically, subjective expected utility theories (SEU) -- has
led to two firm conclusions. One, stressed primarily by psychologists, is that
this class of models, while overall fairly descriptive, fails to describe
certain crucial aspects of actual behavior in many experimental and real world
situations. The other, stressed primarily by economists and decision analysts,
is that the axioms of the SEU model are normatively very compelling and the
model has proved useful in numerous applied situations. Recognizing both the
descriptive failure and normative usefulness of the classical model, the PIs
have explored the common ground held by both the experimentalists and the
applied decision analysts, attempted to discover exactly where the two part
company, and sought a prescriptive theory that satisfies both experimental
concerns and applied expectations. Like SEU this new theory -- technically rank-
and sign-dependent utility (RSDU) theory -- is based (axiomatically) on fairly
simple, quite compelling, underlying behavioral principles, and also like SEU,
it results in a numerical representation as a weighted average, but unlike SEU
the weights are not probabilities and their values depend not only on the
underlying chance event but on whether the associated outcome is a gain or a
loss. Fundamental to the theory is the differential treatment of an event
depending on whether it is associated to a gain or a loss relative to a status
quo and the incorporation of the concept of joint receipt -- of getting two or
more things at the same time -- that allows an explicit, simple characterization
of the fundamental non-rationality of the theory. This project examines several
theoretical, experimental, and applied issues that remain unresolved: On the
theoretical side, while RSDU is a fairly good descript ive theory of choice
behavior, it needs modification to accommodate the violations of its axioms
which occur when judged certainty equivalents are used rather than choice
procedures. On the empirical side, the project examines, among other things,
Thaler's rule for the utility of the joint receipt of two or more things; the
descriptive validity of the quasi-rational assumptions underlying RSDU; the
construction of a reference level (local status quo) in terms of the choice set;
and alternative combination rules for the aggregation of gains and losses around
the status quo. Regarding applied issues, we are convinced that the status quo
plays an important role in decision making and so it is highly desirable to
develop prescriptive theories that depend explicitly on it. In addition, the
project will investigate the limitations and potential pitfalls of sign
dependent utility as a prescriptive theory. ***