* 9308671
* Cognitive Control of Movement Sequences
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1994,06/30/1995
* David Rosenbaum, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1995
* USD 76,612.00

9308671 ROSENBAUM Understanding how limb movements are controlled can have great
theoretical and practical importance. Theoretically, it can integrate findings
about motor performance from such fields as experimental psychology, human
factors, and neurophysiology. Practically, it can benefit robotics, medicine,
and the training of perceptual-motor skills. Despite the need for an
understanding of limb-movement control, little is currently known about how such
movements are chosen and performed by normal adult humans. This research project
will help fill this void by extending and evaluating Rosenbaum's recent model of
motor control. The aim of the model is to describe the computations underlying
the selection of coordinated motion patterns among the limb segments, especially
in reaching tasks. The central idea in the model is that there are stored
posture representations in human memory. When a spatial target is selected as an
object to be reached, each stored posture is evaluated for the contribution it
can make to the task. Weights are assigned to the stored postures based on the
evaluations they receive, and a single target posture is found by taking a
weighted sum of the stored postures (using their weights and treating the
postures as vectors in joint space). Movement occurs from the starting posture
to the target posture by reducing the distance between the starting angle and
target angle of each joint. The model allows for the selection of movements when
infinitely many movements permit an object to be reached, it explains how joints
can compensate automatically for reduced mobility of other joints, and it
accounts for a large number of facts concerning practice, speed-accuracy
tradeoffs, performance errors, and movement kinematics. The research will
evaluate and extend the model through further computational work and behavioral
experiments. The computational work will examine such issues as the use of more
joints and joints other than tho se that have been modelled so far, the
hierarchical versus nonhierarchical nature of posture space, the necessity for
evaluating all stored postures, and obstacle avoidance. The behavioral
experiments will test predictions of the model and provide data about human
reaching that can inform the model's future development. ***