* 9308595
* Support for Control of Particulate Processes Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1994
* James Rawlings, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 02/28/1994
* USD 10,000.00

It was proposed to provide partial support for an interdisciplinary,
international workshop on "Control and particle processes Conference" in Santa
Barbara, at the end of January 1993. The meeting will bring together researchers
from universities, industry and government, with the focus on the in- process
measurements and control systems for manufacturing processes involving
particles. This topic is relevant in chemical, mining and mineral processing.
For instance, about 80% of the products manufactured in chemical plant at DuPont
use particle technology. The margins of improvement by process control, in both
product quality and reliability in operation, are significant. The proposed
meeting will extend the research interests on particle process control of the
group with areas of interest including chemical processes. The participants is
truly international. NSF funds will partially support only professors and
graduate students from the U. S. (20 participants with $500 support per person),
while the funds for the industrial and overseas participants will come from
industry and Engineering Foundation. The workshop covers four research areas:
reactor control systems, particle processing, instrumentation, and modeling and
control strategies. The research focus of this proposal is at the intersection
of two division in engineering, "Chemical and Thermal Systems" and "Design and
Manufacturing Systems", which will co-shear the workshop expenses.