* 9308089
* LTREB:  Collaborative Research:  Hydrologic-nutrient Cycle  Interaction in Small, Undisturbed and Human-manipulated     Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1993,03/31/2000
* Gene Likens, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/2000
* USD 535,000.00

In this collaborative project scientists at the Institute of Ecosystem Studies
and Syracuse University will continue long-term biogeochemical studies at the
Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest (HBEF) in New Hampshire to evaluate trends in
atmospheric deposition, streamwater chemistry and cycling of critical nutrient
elements. During the past three decades, dramatic changes in atmospheric
deposition, streamwater chemistry, vegetation biomass and soil chemistry were
observed at the HBEF. These changes have important ecological implications for
the management of base-poor forest ecosystems, which are widespread throughout
the northeastern U.S. In particular, a decline in atmospheric inputs of base
cations has increased the sensitivity of forest and aquatic ecosystems to
continuing high inputs of acidic deposition, as well as to forest management
practices, such as harvest by clearcutting. Neither the decline in atmospheric
inputs nor declines in forest floor concentrations of base cations observed
during this period were predicted from existing knowledge or from models of
nutrient cycling for forest ecosystems. Significantly, the pattern of recovery
following anthropogenic acidification suggests that acidification may not be a
fully reversible process. %%% Long-term efforts at synthesis and integration of
biogeochemical information at Hubbard Brook will be continued. Results from this
research will improve the understanding of biogeochemical flux and cycling in
forest ecosystems of the northeastern U.S. In addition, the continuation of the
long-term record of precipitation, streamwater and soilwater chemistry at
Hubbard Brook will provide a basis for interpreting the effects of changing
atmospheric deposition on biogeochemical processes in terrestrial and associated
aquatic ecosystems.