* 9308589
* Economics of Financial Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* William Zame, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Monique C. Williams
* 08/31/1995
* USD 100,185.00

9308589 Zame There is substantial empirical evidence to suggest that individual
consumption is poorly correlated with aggregate consumption. Such data is
difficult to reconcile with the picture suggested by the standard Arrow-Debreu
complete markets model. One explanation might be that markets are in fact
incomplete - and incompleteness of markets seems to be an observational fact.
Unfortunately, this explanation begs several questions: Why should markets be
incomplete? If markets are incomplete, what markets are missing, and which are
present? Should incompleteness of markets be expected to matter? Four topics are
studied which address these questions: 1. Does Market Incompleteness Matter? Can
mutual insurance - through simple borrowing and lending - substitute for the
full range of contingent contracts? 2. Innovation of Futures Contracts. If
exchanges behave strategically in the innovation of financial securities, what
securities should we expect to see? In what circumstances will exchanges have
the proper incentives to offer a complete set of financial securities? 3.
Economic Implications of Collateral. What are the economic implications of the
fact that collateral is required for many loans? In particular, how do
collateral requirements affect the set of assets that are offered, the price and
price volatility of assets and commodities, and the efficiency of equilibrium
allocations? 4. A Non-standard Approach to Models of Continuous Trading. What
are the properties of markets in which assets are traded frequently, but
financial markets remain dynamically incomplete?