* 9308300
* Pacific Paleoclimate from Reef Corals in the Eastern and    Western Margins: Records from Galapagos, Cocos Island and   the Gulf of Papua
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1994,06/30/1998
* Glen Shen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 257,424.00

Abstract ATM-9308300 Shen, Glen T. Title: Pacific Paleoclimate from Reef Corals
in the Eastern and Western Margins: Records from Galapagos, Cocos Island and the
Gulf of Papua This award will support a study designed to characterize the
paleoclimate of the eastern Pacific over the last 400 years using the best
available coral samples and seeks to establish a new geochemical tracer in the
far western Pacific - a region for which few marine climatic indicators
presently exist. The foci of the eastern Pacific reconstructions will be the
Galapagos Islands (0.5oS, 91oW) and Cocos Island (5.3oN, 86.9oW). The ratio of
barium:calcium in coral argonite, a sensitive indicator of upwelling and fluvial
discharge, will be the key measurement using an Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometer (ICP-MS). Records spanning 270- (Cocos) and 400-years (Galapagos)
length will be produced at quarter-annual resolution. Additionally, annual
determinations of Cd/Ca and Mn/Ca will be made . Developmental effort for a
regional precipitation index over Australasia will involve determination of
Ba/Ca ratios in a 100- year coral core from the Gulf of Papua, an area markedly
influenced by Ba-enriched continental runoff. The goal of this work is the
development of climatically-relevant datasets which surpass the instrumental
record in length yet retain the quality of latter 20th century measurements.
Such records will allow a closer examination of recurrent periods (e.g annual,
biennial, and three-to-seven year ENSO timescales) which appear to characterize
the lower atmosphere and upper ocean, and may reveal the existence of longer
time scale variations.