* 9308013
* Speculative and Predicated Execution Support for            Instruction-Level Parallel Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Wen-mei Hwu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Foster
* 12/31/1995
* USD 163,670.00

Hwu Speculative execution and predicated execution are two important sources of
parallelism for VLIW and superscalar processors. Speculative execution
tentatively executes instructions before knowing that their execution is
required. Predicated execution merges multiple possible execution paths into a
single path so that the hardware can simultaneously process multiple paths. Both
methods allow the compiler to extract program parallelism in the presence of
conditional branches. With superscalar and VLIW designs becoming increasingly
popular in the microprocessor industry, these methods have become increasingly
important for future high performance microprocessors to achieve their
performance goals. This project addresses three critical issues involved in
incorporating speculative execution and predicated execution into future
superscalar and VLIW microprocessor systems. First, the design complexity of
increasing levels of architecture support for speculative execution and
predicated execution are being studied. Secondly, compiler optimizers and
schedulers that exploit each level of the architecture support are being
developed. Thirdly, an integrated approach is being defined to coordinate
speculative execution and predicated execution to best improve program execution
performance. The objective is to provide architecture expertise and compiler
prototypes required for the microprocessor industry to understand the cost and
effectiveness of each level of hardware support.