* 9308157
* Optical Studies of the Dynamics and Energetics of the       High Latitude Thermosphere and Upper Mesosphere from        Sondre Stromfjord and Thule Air Base, Greenland
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Timothy Killeen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 07/31/1997
* USD 489,703.00

9311196 Ryan This project will investigate why animals hatch when they hatch,
and how the timing of hatching affects their survival. An amphibian species,
Agalychnis callidryas lay its eggs on plants overhanging ponds, and the tadpoles
fall into the water when they hatch. Tadpoles are able to hatch as early as 5
days old and will do so to escape from egg-eating snakes, if they are attacked.
Undisturbed tadpoles, however, usually delay hatching for several days. They
continue growing, inside the egg, and then they hatch they are less vulnerable
to aquatic predators than are the smaller, early-hatching tadpoles. The proposed
research examines the effect on survival of developmental and behavioral
flexibility in hatching, in the context of risks facing embryos and tadpoles.
%%% Many animals live in different environments at different stages in their
lives, and most animals hatch. The problems facing animals making such changes
are general, but in many systems only one of the two stages is accessible to
study under natural conditions. This study of the effects of changes in hatching
time on both the eggs and larvae of the red-eyed treefrog will add to our
understanding of behavior and ecology. It will also provide detailed information
on the ecology of this high profile rainforest species, particularly its
interactions with its predators at a crucial life stage. *** Small Format Large
Format Large Capacity Cassette Env Manual Feed Letter Quality Near Letter
Quality Memo Draft 9311196 Ryan This project will investigate why animals hatch
when they hatch, and how the timing of hatchi ng affects their s 5 F | | ( Times
New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial z z z " h gz Egz E t N Abstracts Tree-frogs
Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens