* 9308640
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD:  Nonmasking Fault-tolerance in   Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Anish Arora, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1997
* USD 89,961.00

9398640 Arora This project addresses the design, implementation and application
of distributed systems whose input-output relation is violated only temporarily
when faults occur. Such "nonmasking" fault- tolerance is often desirable in
distributed systems for reasons of efficiency, computability, or application.
One goal of the research is to demonstrate that a certain nonmasking fault-
tolerant system, namely a stabilizing reset subsystem, can be implemented
efficiently and utilized effectively in a wide variety of distributed
environments. To this end, (i) software will be developed that augments any
given distributed system with a stabilizing reset subsystem, (ii) tools will be
implemented that measure the efficiency of nonmasking fault-tolerance, and (iii)
applications will be demonstrated where the software is useful. Another goal of
the research is to demonstrate that nonmasking fault-tolerant distributed
systems can be designed in a uniform and rigorous manner. To this end, methods
will be developed for (i) system design based on distributed constraint
satisfaction, (ii) systems design based on stepwise refinements that preserve
nonmasking fault-tolerance, and (iii) reasoning about nonmasking fault-tolerance
in the presence of real-time actions and constraints. The research will build
upon the investigator's prior work on a uniform and rigorous framework for
reasoning about fault- tolerance. ***