* 9308917
* RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: System Modeling with Closed Loop Performance Odjectives in a Robust Control Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Roy Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1996
* USD 94,450.00

9308917 Smith This work addresses the problem of modeling systems in a robust
control framework. Analysis and synthesis in this framework are relatively well
developed. However, the lack of a compatible modeling and identification theory
is slowing the practical application of robust control. The problem to be
addressed is the following: How accurately must a system, or component of a
system, be modeled in order to maintain stability and achieve a specified closed
loop performance objective? This problem is generalized to the case where other
system components themselves are uncertain (to within known bounds). This
immediately leads to the problem of connecting the required accuracy with the
taking of experimental data. An iterative identification/modeling approach is
proposed for both experimental and theoretical study. The models considered are
standard in the robust control framework: linear, time-invariant with Hoo norm
bounded perturbations. Closed loop performance is specified as a general
weighted Hoo criterion. Progress on these problems will provide a more direct
connection between the rich theoretical area of Hoo robust control and its
application to practical problems. This will also lead to a better understanding
of what types of physical uncertainties can be usefully modeled as linear
fractional perturbations. ***