* 9308078
* A Proposed Study of the Late Neolithic in the Egyptian      Sahara
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Fred Wendorf, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1997
* USD 133,909.00

9308078 Wendorf With National Science Foundation support Drs. Fred Wendorf and
Angela Close will continue their study of the prehistory of the Eastern Sahara
Desert of Egypt. They will focus their work on the Late Neolithic period, which
dates from approximately 6,500 to 5,000 years ago and investigate two areas. The
first is Nabta where a large megalithic complex of standing stones has been
located. These are associated with a very large and deeply stratified site which
will be excavated. Through the recovery of faunal and floral materials it will
be possible to reconstruct subsistence patterns and determine the extent of
reliance on domestic vs. wild plants and animals. The investigators will also
conduct a survey of the Nabta and adjacent basins and record all Late Neolithic
occurrences. A second area near Safsaf has yielded evidence of herding camps
which date to the same time range. By collecting and refitting artifacts between
sites, the investigators hope to trace herders' movements and determine how they
used this area. Egypt is extremely important to our understanding of human
prehistory because it marked the cradle of one of the world's great prehistoric
civilizations. While much is known about the Pharonic period, the roots of this
civilization are not well understood. In particular archaeologists wish to learn
whether this culture developed largely independently or whether, as many
believe, it is largely derivative from Southwest Asia. Drs. Wendorf and Close
believe that important cultural developments along the Nile were strongly
influenced by those in the desert to the West and this research will provide
relevant data. It will also increase our understanding of how people at a
relatively simple level of technology adapted to the harsh fluxuating conditions
in the Sahara. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also increase our understanding
of how complex society develo ped and how humans adapt to environmental stress.
***