* 9308854
* Growth and Characterization of Transition Metal             Phosphochalcogenide Compounds, Alloys, and Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Stephen Kevan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9308854 Kevan The goal of the proposed research is to apply a variant of
molecular beam epitaxy called van der Waals epitaxy to synthesize novel
compounds and superlattices based upon transition metal phosphochalcogenide
(MPX3) compounds. The primary motivation to pursue this area is a qualitative
similarity to the high temperature cuprate superconductors. Alternative high Tc
materials will thus be sought. The currently known transition metal MPX3
compounds are all correlated antiferromagnetic insulaators and have a quasi-two-
dimensional layered structure similar to MX2 compounds. The synthetic
flexibility allowed by vapor phase epitaxy will allow systematic variation of
effective one-electron band widths and effective on-site correlation energies to
induce an insulator-metal transition, thereby producing materials with novel and
potentially useful transport, optical, and magnetic properties. Specifically, i)
the number of known MPX3 compounds will be increased to include 4d and 5d
metals, ii) random alloys M'yM1-yPX3 will be grown to induce n- or p-type
doping, and iii) superlattices combining MPX3 compounds with a variety of
layered maaaaterials having divergent dielectric properties will be produced.
These new materials and structures will be characterized by a variety of
techniques. ***